oxford world’s classics

CRITIQUE OF JUDGEMENT
Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) was born in Königsberg, the capital
of Eastern Prussia, and spent his entire life as a writer, teacher, and
academic in his home city and its environs. He studied philosophy
and the natural sciences at the university between 1740 and 1746.
He spent the succeeding years as a house tutor and, subsequently, as
a private lecturer, publishing a number of substantial essays and
treatises on scientiﬁc and philosophical subjects throughout this
period. Kant ﬁnally became Professor of Logic and Metaphysics
at the University of Königsberg in 1770. Over the next ten years,
which Wilhelm Dilthey described as the ‘silent decade’, Kant radically
revised his earlier ideas and developed an entirely novel conception
of the proper method of philosophy, which culminated in his epochmaking Critique of Pure Reason in 1781. He extended his ‘transcendental’ approach in the Critique of Practical Reason of 1786 and the
Critique of Judgement in 1790, the work which Kant himself saw as
completing the entire ‘critical enterprise’. Throughout the 1790s Kant
also produced an abundance of dense contributions to eminently
topical questions of ethics, politics, and history, and religion. Kant
retired from lecturing in 1796 and died at the beginning of 1804.
The Critique of Judgement has proved particularly inﬂuential in the
continental philosophical tradition and also remains a central point
of reference for the contemporary renewal of interest in Kantian
thought as a whole.
Nicholas Walker has published articles and essays in the ﬁeld of
German philosophy and literature and has translated texts by Adorno,
Habermas, Heidegger, and Gadamer.

oxford world’s classics
For over 100 years Oxford World’s Classics have brought
readers closer to the world’s great literature. Now with over 700
titles—from the 4,000-year-old myths of Mesopotamia to the
twentieth century’s greatest novels—the series makes available
lesser-known as well as celebrated writing.
The pocket-sized hardbacks of the early years contained
introductions by Virginia Woolf, T. S. Eliot, Graham Greene,
and other literary ﬁgures which enriched the experience of reading.
Today the series is recognized for its ﬁne scholarship and
reliability in texts that span world literature, drama and poetry,
religion, philosophy and politics. Each edition includes perceptive
commentary and essential background information to meet the
changing needs of readers.

OXFORD WORLD’S CLASSICS

IMMANUEL KANT

Critique of Judgement
Translated by
JAMES CREED MEREDITH
Revised, edited, and introduced by
NICHOLAS WALKER

1

3

Great Clarendon Street, Oxford ox2 6dp
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With oﬃces in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
Translation of Critique of Judgement © Oxford University Press 1952, 2007
Editorial material and translation of ‘First Introduction’ © Nicholas Walker 2007
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published as an Oxford World’s Classics paperback 2007
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Kant, Immanuel, 1724-1804.
[Kritik der Urteilskraft. English]
Critique of judgement / Immanuel Kant ; translated by James Creed Meredith ; revised
and edited by Nicholas Walker.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-19-280617-8 (alk. paper)
1. Judgment (Logic) 2. Judgment (Aesthetics) 3. Teleology. I. Walker, Nicholas. II. Title.
B2783.E5M47 2007
121--dc22
2007001270
Typeset by Cepha Imaging Private Ltd., Bangalore, India
Printed in Great Britain
on acid-free paper by
Clays Ltd, St Ives plc
ISBN 978-0-19-280617-8
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2

CONTENTS
Introduction

vii

Note on the Text, Translation, and Revision

xxiv

Select Bibliography

xxviii

A Chronology of Immanuel Kant

xxxii

Analytical Table of Contents

xxxv

CRITIQUE OF JUDGEMENT
Preface to the First Edition, 1790
Introduction

3
7

part one. critique of aesthetic judgement
first section Analytic of Aesthetic Judgement
First Book. Analytic of the Beautiful
Second Book. Analytic of the Sublime

second section Dialectic of Aesthetic Judgement

35
35
75
165

part two. critique of teleological judgement
first division Analytic of Teleological Judgement

190

second division Dialectic of Teleological Judgement

213

appendix Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

245

Appendix: The ‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

315

Explanatory Notes

357

Bilingual Glossary

365

Analytical Index

375

This page intentionally left blank

INTRODUCTION
Hegel famously claimed, if the student transcripts of his lectures
on the history of philosophy are to be believed, that ‘Kant spoke the
ﬁrst rational word concerning the beautiful’ and had thus made a
fundamental, and indeed epochal, contribution to what it was now
customary to call ‘aesthetics’. But in fact the Critique of Judgement, to
which he was speciﬁcally alluding, is both more and less than what
we would commonly understand by the term aesthetics. And in certain
crucial respects the enormous inﬂuence which this work in particular
exercised upon the ﬁrst generation of German idealist thinkers who
succeeded Kant, and upon nearly all of the most important artistic
and literary ﬁgures of the period as well, lay almost as much in his
philosophical treatment of organic nature as in his interpretation of
the realm of aesthetic experience. In order to understand the eventual conjunction or coordination of these apparently rather distinct
areas of interest and concern in Kant’s mature thought, it is helpful
to recall in outline something of the development of his philosophy
before the publication of the ﬁrst edition of the Critique of Judgement
in 1790.
Although Kant had never been an uncritical or unqualiﬁed adherent of the rationalist metaphysical tradition associated with Leibniz,
and especially with the historically inﬂuential codiﬁcation of broadly
Leibnizian views on the part of philosophers like Christian Wolﬀ or
Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten, this tradition of thought furnished
the initial parameters for the development of his own views on the
central philosophical issues of the epoch: the precise relationship of
reason and the senses in the acquisition of our theoretical knowledge
of nature; the ultimate character of the good and the demonstrability
of practical, i.e. ethical, principles; the possibility of our knowledge of
God by recourse to natural reason and the defence of the essential
interests of humanity traditionally associated with such presumed
knowledge; the reality of human freedom, the nature of the soul and
the hope of immortality; the proper status of judgements concerning
matters of beauty and taste—in short: the ‘objectivity’ or otherwise
of the claims that had been raised concerning the central questions

viii

Introduction

once addressed by classical metaphysics under the threefold rubric of
the ‘true’, the ‘good’, and the ‘beautiful’.
In fact it is Baumgarten who is generally credited with expressly
introducing the term ‘aesthetics’ as the ‘science of the beautiful’ into
philosophical currency in the early eighteenth century through his
treatise on Metaphysics (1742). For Baumgarten the discipline implied
a study of the ‘sensitive’ or percipient activity of the mind in recognizing beauty as an intrinsic feature of certain objects, one which he
wished to vindicate as a distinctive and valuable aspect of human
experience but nonetheless continued to regard as a kind of ‘lower’
or rudimentary cognition in relation to conceptually transparent philosophical knowledge based upon perspicuous principles. This rationalist tradition was also broadly continued by thinkers like Moses
Mendelssohn who also emphasized the apparently ‘disinterested’ or
non-utilitarian character of our typically aesthetic judgements of
things. But Kant was also familiar with the alternative intellectual
tradition of British empiricist thought, not merely with regard to the
theory of knowledge as developed by John Locke and David Hume
in particular, but also with respect to the inﬂuential reﬂections on
‘moral sense’, taste, aesthetic pleasure, and the nature of the sublime
that were developed, amongst others, by Francis Hutcheson, the Earl
of Shaftesbury, Hume, and Edmund Burke. It is, however, somewhat
misleading to regard these respective rationalist-metaphysical and
the empiricist-naturalistic strands of thought as rigidly or entirely
divorced from one another since there were many thinkers who drew
on both traditions or tried to mediate between their respective insights
and emphases. Thus Mendelssohn was instrumental in spreading
knowledge of recent British philosophy in the German lands and the
ethical thought of Shaftesbury in particular was strongly indebted to
the tradition of classical philosophy.
Kant had already responded to some of the central themes explored
in the broadly empiricist tradition of aesthetic thought, with its characteristic emphasis upon the social, moral, and psychological aspects
of aesthetic experience, and attempted to integrate its insights in the
context of his own developing reﬂections in his Observations on the
Feeling of the Beautiful and the Sublime of 1764. It is perhaps already
worthy of note that in this early work, Kant’s only published contribution to aesthetic questions apart from the Critique of Judgement,

Introduction

ix

he is principally concerned with our aesthetic relation to nature in
general and human nature in particular, rather than with art in the
narrower sense of the word. And in his early lectures on philosophy
Kant had also repeatedly touched upon the status of the aesthetic
perception of ‘the beautiful’ as a fundamental question for the theory
or ‘critique’ of taste as he sometimes described it. In the general
culture of the time the German expression Critik (or Kritik as it is
written today)—a term taken over from French during the seventeenth
century—often signiﬁed what we would recently still understand by
the term ‘criticism’ in a literary and artistic context: a reﬂective assessment of the intrinsic merits or aesthetic value of a speciﬁc work of art
or corpus. It is true that it eventually became almost a motto of the
German Enlightenment in a variety of diﬀerent contexts, independently of Kant’s subsequent work, and was explicitly applied to social
practices and political and other institutions as well as texts and artistic
products. In its original and most general sense the word simply indicated the art of distinguishing appropriately between the true and the
false and furnishing a carefully considered judgement, based on justifying grounds, upon any contested subject matter whatsoever. Of
itself the word signiﬁes neither a positive nor a negative assessment
of the object in question. When Kant uses the expression ‘critique’ in
his own earlier (i.e. ‘pre-critical’) writings it denotes the systematic
philosophical attempt to determine whether, as leading metaphysical
thinkers of the time claimed, there are indeed rational principles
involved in our response to or our perception of the beautiful and, if
so, to explicate and clarify their distinctive character and status.
As his own dissatisfaction with rationalist metaphysics in all areas of
its alleged competence continued to gather pace, partly under the
explicit inﬂuence of Hume’s objections to the idea of demonstrable
but substantive a priori knowledge, Kant’s entire conception of the
task of philosophy and its appropriate methodology was also fundamentally transformed and this in turn eventually led Kant to a complete reformulation of all its central problems and questions in a new
conceptual framework. Kant laboriously developed his new approach
to the method of philosophy between 1770 and 1780, seeking to
mediate the insights of the rationalist and empiricist traditions on an
entirely new level that avoided the eclectic accommodations and

x

Introduction

problematic compromises of other contemporary thinkers.1 This new
approach—‘transcendental’ philosophy as a metaphysics of experience
rather than a ‘transcendent’ metaphysics as presumed a priori knowledge of supersensible objects and realities—establishes the idea of
‘critique’ in a new and rigorous sense of a meta-theoretical enquiry
into the very conditions of the possibility of objective knowledge and
principled action. In the Critique of Pure Reason (ﬁrst edition, 1780)
and the Critique of Practical Reason (ﬁrst edition, 1788) Kant undertakes to examine the range and competence of the human mind itself,
to clarify its distinctive faculties or powers, and thus to elucidate and
deﬁne our capacity for acquiring theoretical knowledge of the world
of appearances, the only world that is cognitively available to us as
ﬁnite rational beings, and for determining our wills in accordance
with an objective moral law on the basis of a freedom which that law
ﬁrst properly reveals. The critiques are thus primarily dedicated to
uncovering and exhibiting the a priori principles of the mind and the
rational structure of experience and moral practice in general. When
Kant came to elaborate the argument of the ﬁrst Critique he no longer
believed that it was possible to identify any rational principles governing the ‘aesthetic’ domain in the modern sense of the term. There
Kant oﬀers only a ‘transcendental aesthetic’ which lays out the
a priori structure that precedes any experience of particular objects,
namely the framework of space and time as the two ‘pure forms of
intuition’. These forms are ‘aesthetic’ in the literal and original sense
of the Greek word from which our expression ultimately derives:
they pertain to the sensibility or receptivity that is presupposed by
any experience through the senses and thus make no speciﬁc reference to particular forms of perception, like that of the beautiful in
nature or art, for example. Questions concerning the latter are naturally still of interest to Kant in an anthropological and psychological
sense in the context of the empirical study of human beings in general,
but they do not form a special part of the ‘science’ of philosophy understood in the strict sense as the systematic elucidation of the a priori
concepts and principles governing experience or human conduct
as such.
1 For a diﬀerentiated account of the evolution of Kant’s thought in relation to other
contemporary thinkers and schools of thought and of the eventual emergence of his own
distinctive project of transcendental philosophy, see Lewis White Beck, Early German
Philosophy. Kant and His Predecessors (Bristol: Thoemmes Press, 1996) ch. 17, esp. 438–69.

Introduction

xi

By the time he came to compose the Critique of Judgement, nearly
ten years after the publication of the ﬁrst, Kant’s thought had evolved
considerably in this and in other related respects and he was able to take
up once again, in a correspondingly transformed manner, some of his
own earlier concerns with taste, beauty, and the sublime, and indeed
with the ‘teleological’ perspective on nature as an apparent manifestation
of order and design in relation to our own cognitive and practical
purposes. Kant had come to believe that the activity of judging itself
requires further clariﬁcation as a process of rendering the detail of
our experience coherent and intelligible. In the ﬁrst Critique to make
a ‘judgement’ involved applying concepts to particular instances or
rules and principles to particular cases. But he had concentrated
there on the way in which we apply concepts or rules that we already
possess, rather than on the way we come to form or discover relevant
concepts. The application of concepts that subsume the objects that
fall under them is described by Kant as a matter of ‘determining’
judgement, but he now explicitly distinguishes from this the process
of ‘reﬂective’ judgement where only the ‘particular’ is given and the
appropriate ‘universal’ must still be discovered for the former. In place
of merely applying a law or principle to a range or group of empirical data, we may need to seek out and discern a previously unknown
or unrecognized law or principle that can organize the relevant givens
in an appropriate and systematic way. Here we must seek out the
concepts under which the particulars in question may fall. If his ﬁrst
Critique had established to Kant’s satisfaction that the general lawfulness and regularity of phenomena, their thorough causal interconnectedness, was a condition of the possibility of the kind of experience
we actually enjoy and is already presupposed by the practice of scientiﬁc
enquiry into nature, this general prerequisite is itself too general to
deﬁne the speciﬁc content or procedures of a special science. The particular laws of a speciﬁc science are not merely directly derived from
the lawfulness of nature in general. We also need in turn to comprehend the immense variety and complexity of the natural world within
the broader perspective of an ever more comprehensive theory or
system of all speciﬁc laws. The development of such a perspective
requires the active and creative contribution of thought on our part
but it could never proceed with any hope of success without the
presupposition that nature as a whole, considered as the sum of all
possible phenomena, will ultimately cohere with our own cognitive

xii

Introduction

needs in pursuing its order and intelligibility. It is in this sense that Kant
regards nature, the order of appearances, as conformable or appropriate to our own faculties, as ‘purposive’ for the latter, in investigating its character, and when this general accordance is veriﬁed in our
actual investigations Kant claims that we also feel a particular kind
of pleasure or satisfaction that reﬂects the universal constitution of
the human mind in general. We ‘rejoice’, he says, to ﬁnd that it is so
purposive—as if ‘by a lucky chance that favours us’. Kant insists that
this does not license us to regard nature in a dogmatic sense as deliberately contrived, teleologically fashioned by God, for example, for
our cognitive or other purposes, but it allows us to regard the world
we inhabit as hospitable in principle to such ends.
This is one side of the ‘concord’ between our faculties and the
world of experience we inhabit, and the one which Kant discusses
ﬁrst in the published ‘Introduction’ to the third Critique. The other
side to which he turns ﬁrst in the ﬁrst division of the work concerns
‘aesthetic’ judgements in the broadest sense, though this too will
involve, in a diﬀerent way, the distinction between the ‘determining’
power of judgement that is directly oriented to objective knowledge
of things and events and merely ‘reﬂective’ power of judgement that
does not simply subsume its objects under given concepts. In the
‘Introduction’ Kant distinguishes, here following the philosophical
tradition, between three basic faculties of the mind: the faculty of
cognition in general, the faculty of feeling (of pleasure or its opposite), and the faculty of desire (or will). Kant now wonders, as he had
not in the ﬁrst Critique, whether this intermediate faculty of ‘feeling’
might not perform some kind of mediating role between the other
two faculties and now asks whether there might not be a special
a priori principle that governs this faculty in its own right and is
common to all human beings as creatures that are simultaneously
rational and sensitive in character. This thought provides Kant with
the key to an analysis of aesthetic judgement that is not merely
psychological or empirical in character but can claim a certain distinctive kind of rational status or quasi-objectivity. It is above all to
this question that the ﬁrst, and substantially longer, part of his book
is devoted.
If at ﬁrst sight the general structure of the book is clear, the speciﬁc
order and internal organization of the topics discussed is frequently

Introduction

xiii

less than perspicuous. The skeletal table of contents which Kant
himself supplied (‘division of the entire work’) is signally unhelpful
in this respect and this edition is therefore prefaced by an analytical
table of contents indicating the various subdivisions and numbered
sections of the text. In general accordance with his systematic procedure in the other two critiques, Kant basically divides both parts of
the third Critique into an ‘Analytic’ and a ‘Dialectic’. The analytic of
Part One is further divided into two books discussing the ‘beautiful’
and the ‘sublime’ respectively, although in fact a substantial part of
Book Two is given over to a ‘deduction’ of aesthetic judgements and
a discussion of ‘genius’ and the speciﬁc character of ‘ﬁne art’. As the
name itself implies, the analytic undertakes to clarify the essential
internal structure of the kind of judgement in question and elucidate
its ultimate grounds. It might seem that Kant simply assumes from
the start that there are indeed ‘judgements’ of a speciﬁcally aesthetic
kind concerning the beautiful, but this impression results at least in
part from the systematic mode of presentation which he chooses to
deploy his basic arguments. He famously organizes his analysis in
terms of four ‘moments’ of the judgement of taste, each of which is
supposed to contribute something essential to the complete exposition of the problem, and this part of his text has probably received
more comment and interpretation than any other section of the work.
It may appear paradoxical that Kant should model his analysis on the
four types or groups of cognitive and theoretical judgements that he
presented in the ﬁrst Critique since his ﬁrst emphatic point is precisely
that the ‘aesthetic’ judgement of taste is not a cognitive judgement at
all. But it nonetheless resembles a judgement, and will reveal itself to
be both more and less than a standard propositional judgement concerning the truth of an object or state of aﬀairs, in so far as it raises a
universal claim and potentially addresses all of us. Kant uses his fourfold categorization of cognitive judgements as a clue or guide to clarifying the peculiar character of aesthetic judgements and here calls
them ‘moments’ to indicate that they present diﬀerent aspects or
dimensions of a single complex thematic and need to be gathered
together in order to unfold the full character of such judgements.
Each of the moments yields a partial ‘deﬁnition’ or ‘elucidation’
(Erklärung) that captures an essential feature of the latter. We work
through the analysis in each case towards the resulting ‘deﬁnitions’

xiv

Introduction

which have not inappropriately been described as the four ‘paradoxes’
of aesthetic judgement.2
The ﬁrst moment tells us that taste is the capacity for judging
something to be beautiful on the basis of an entirely ‘disinterested’
delight. This is one of the most celebrated claims of the third Critique,
although in one form or another it had almost become a commonplace of aesthetic reﬂection in the later eighteenth century. Kant’s
distinctive contribution lies in the way he clariﬁes this idea in relation to speciﬁc kinds of interest and relates it in complex ways to the
other essential features he attempts to disclose. Thus Kant distinguishes between the satisfaction or delight we take in the agreeable
(the sensuously pleasurable or gratifying), in the good (the morally
good as well as the instrumentally good or the useful) and in the
beautiful. The agreeable is what contingently pleases us individually
with respect to our own subjective feeling but raises no claim to general agreement on the part of others, the good claims universality on
the basis of objective concepts of things or through objective rational
principles springing from the moral law, while the beautiful enjoys a
curious intermediate position in so far as, like the former, it is directly
bound up with subjective feeling (the state of the percipient subject)
but nonetheless appears, like the latter, to make a universal claim.
Kant describes it as a ‘free’ delight because it is not enforced upon us
either by the demands of immediate sensuous need or by other moral
or pragmatic interests. The language of ‘disinterestedness’ is potentially
misleading in so far as it might suggest a purely detached objectivity,
but what Kant has in mind is a relation in which we are addressed by
something in a unique way. Cognitive judgements about objects in
general also have a sensuous dimension as objects of sensible perception, but the distinctively aesthetic character that belongs to the
judgement of taste refers to the way in which the subject is aﬀected
and enhanced in its own feeling of life. The relation involved is not a
neutral one, as in a standard cognitive judgement, but one that engages
our entire subjective being as rational and sensitive creatures in a way
that is both active and passive. Similarly Kant’s emphasis upon our
‘indiﬀerence’ to the ‘reality’ of the object is a rather obscure formulation of the thought that we are here principally concerned with the
‘showing’ or emphatic appearing of the object as such in relation to
2

Bernard Bosanquet, A History of Aesthetic (London: Allen & Unwin, 1904), 263.

Introduction

xv

ourselves, but without any direct instrumental or cognitive interest.
In an aesthetic respect we thus enjoy a special kind of disinterested
interest in the object in so far as it aﬀects us in a certain way, and thus
in dwelling upon it in its own right.
The following moments supplement and deepen this initial orientation, seeking out and exposing the hidden grounds, conditions, and
ramiﬁcations of aesthetic judgement. The second moment tells us
that the beautiful pleases ‘universally but without a concept’. The
judgement of beauty presumes but cannot demand, on grounds of
proof, universal agreement since it is not directly based on determinate concepts at all. Kant argues that the non-demonstrable but
nonetheless binding claim involved here can only be grounded in a
‘free play’ of our universally shared faculties of understanding and
imagination. This refers to our powers of cognition ‘in general’ which
are here suspended, as it were, and liberated from the need to terminate in a determinate judgement or subsumption of the individual
content of experience under concepts. The third moment introduces
the crucial notion of a ‘purposiveness that is perceived without any
representation of purpose’ where Kant emphasizes the perception of
the form, rather than the matter, of the object as giving rise to our
speciﬁc pleasure independently of any judgement of the ‘perfection’
or ﬁtness of the thing to any presumed end or applied concept,
although he here also distinguishes and acknowledges cases of ‘dependent beauty’ as well as the ‘free beauty’ which properly characterizes
pure judgements of taste. The fourth moment, ﬁnally, asserts the
‘necessity’ of aesthetic judgements and appeals to the idea of a ‘common
sense’ underlying our capacity to communicate aesthetic judgements.
But the necessity that others agree with our judgements remains an
exemplary one that can only be expected and never demanded of
others, unlike the universal acknowledgement required by theoretical
or practical principles.
It is characteristic of the modernity of Kant’s approach that he
should turn directly from the beautiful to a striking consideration of
the problem of the ‘sublime’ and assign the latter a distinctive and
complementary importance of its own alongside the more traditional
classical emphasis upon beautiful ‘form’. His approach is not traditionally ‘theological’ in so far as he essentially treats the sublime in
relation to the exercise of our own powers or faculties of mind, as
testifying to our own autonomy, rather than as a direct expression of

xvi

Introduction

divine power for example. There are certain objects, and Kant here
concentrates principally on objects of nature, which strongly engage
the imagination and thereby lead our reason to entertain and reﬂect
upon ‘ideas’ that actually surpass the capacities of imaginative visualization. Kant’s examples of the sublime are largely standard ones, like
the vastness of the heavens or the overwhelming violence of natural
phenomena, sights which excite thoughts of inﬁnite magnitude and
inﬁnite power (the mathematical and the dynamical sublime as Kant
describes them). Our response to such manifestations of nature suﬀers
a characteristic reversal, however, which ultimately throws us back
upon ourselves through the conspicuous contrast between our physical frailty and insigniﬁcance considered as merely natural beings in
the totality of the cosmos and our moral calling or vocation (a perspective which Kant expressed with exemplary pathos in the famous
peroration that concludes the second Critique). Although we immediately tend to ascribe the sublime to nature itself, it is ultimately the
pre-eminence of the power of reason, in its practical dimension,
which merits the predicate of sublimity. For in the last analysis it is
reason and the idea of humanity in us which surpasses the capacity
of imagination fully to capture or represent in sensible terms the full
signiﬁcance of our own ‘place’ in the world as the only being that can
lend it any ultimate sense. Thus in Kant it is the moral law, the ‘fact
of reason’, that is the principal instance of the sublime and which for
him characteristically attracts the religious rhetoric of ‘awful’ elevation and ultimate inscrutability (a metaphorics characteristic of the
critical philosophy in general but particularly evident in the third
Critique).
Although it has generally been observed that Kant’s concern with
aesthetic judgement is primarily directed towards natural beauty,
and his examples usually drawn from natural phenomena, it is by no
means the case that he simply neglects ‘art’ in the sense of expressly
fabricated products with aesthetic intent. In fact Kant assigns a distinctive role to art that cannot be discharged by the experience of
natural beauty (although it is ultimately bound up with the latter in
a complex and indirect manner) and includes an extensive discussion
of the character of ‘ﬁne art’, as distinct from craft, towards the end of
Book Two. One of the most remarkable aspects of Kant’s thought in
this regard is the degree to which he is capable of opening up such
fecund lines of enquiry and reﬂection for succeeding thinkers and

Introduction

xvii

artists despite the fact that his own ﬁrst-hand acquaintance with, and
aesthetic response to, signiﬁcant art of the recent or distant past, or
of his contemporary world, was notoriously limited.3 Some of Kant’s
most productive and inﬂuential observations are precisely to be
found in this section of the Critique where he broaches the question
of ‘genius’ and what he calls ‘aesthetic ideas’. With his own nonrationalistic insistence that there are no ‘rules’ for taste that could be
formulated as cognitive judgements, and that the beautiful cannot be
deﬁned in determinate conceptual terms, Kant is only drawing the
appropriate conclusion when he here goes on to claim that the individual who ‘makes’ signiﬁcant works of art through the power of
genius also ‘draws forth’ something in a hitherto unanticipated and
unparalleled way. Such exemplary creations give rise to a new measure or standard that cannot simply be reproduced or imitated by
others on the basis of acquired rules or skills, however diligently they
may study their predecessors, although they can furnish models that
encourage fresh creativity in turn.
In the ﬁrst Critique Kant had claimed that there are concepts of
reason which inevitably transcend empirical experience and to which
no object of the senses could ever be adequate. In the third Critique
he introduces the parallel case of sensuous representations produced
through the imagination in the form of images or symbols that evoke
the strictly unrepresentable without any determinate concept being
able to capture or exhaust their full signiﬁcance. He describes these
as ‘aesthetic ideas’ and they are a distinctive contribution of art as
such. Kant’s condensed and highly suggestive discussion has much
of interest to say about signs, symbolism, and the ‘rendering of ideas
in sensuous form’ and perhaps also reveals the degree to which he
was particularly responsive to certain baroque conceptions of allegorical and ﬁgurative expression that were already coming to appear
outmoded in his own time. In this connection Kant also provides a
tentative sketch of a ‘division’ of the several arts that was not without inﬂuence on the more ambitious and detailed ‘systems’ of the art
3 Adorno provocatively remarked that Hegel and Kant ‘were, to put it bluntly, the
last who were capable of writing a major aesthetics without understanding anything about
art’. Adorno, Ästhetische Theorie (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1970), 495. There is a speciﬁc
discussion of Kant’s knowledge of particular arts and works of art in the classical older
biography by Karl Vorländer, Immanuel Kant. Der Mann und das Werk (1924), 3rd edn.
(Wiesbaden: Marix Verlag, 2004), 370–405.

xviii

Introduction

forms that would subsequently be oﬀered by Hegel, Schelling, and
Schopenhauer.
In the shorter second part of the Critique Kant turns directly to the
problem of teleology, or ‘design’ as it had generally been described in
British philosophy, and the associated themes he had already adumbrated in the ‘Introduction’ to the text. This part of the work has
generally attracted far less interest and comment, at least since the
beginning of the nineteenth century, than the part devoted to aesthetic
judgement and related topics. If Kant had attempted to explain the
judgement of taste in terms of the perception of form, or ‘purposiveness without purpose’ or ‘subjective’ purpose oriented to the play of
our faculties independent of any theoretical cognitive interest, he now
addresses the problem of ‘objective’ purposiveness, of a purposiveness with a purpose, or that design that we may be tempted to ascribe
to certain objects of nature and perhaps to nature as a whole. It is
immediately evident that this entire question is fraught with fundamental implications for metaphysical philosophy in general and traditional theology and religious thought in particular. Kant starts by
discussing the case where we are most likely to entertain teleological
considerations concerning the intrinsic character and possibility of
certain kinds of natural things, namely the organism as the primary
datum of biology. He thinks that we do have to consider organism in
terms of ends if we examine the typical processes of formation,
growth, and reproduction that characterize such things: the apparent
self-organization of the object in maintaining its structure and preserving its own existence through time. Although the words ‘organism’
and ‘organization’ are ultimately related to an ancient Greek word
originally denoting a ‘tool’ or ‘implement’, the natural forms in question exhibit, like works of art in this respect, a diﬀerent and more
internal kind of purposiveness and appear to exist for their own sake,
and that of their species, whereas an instrument serves something
entirely beyond and independent of itself. An organism is a whole
which results from the functioning of the parts, while the parts in turn
depend on the functioning of the whole. Kant famously claims that we
cannot imagine ‘a Newton’ who will explain a simple blade of grass
on purely mechanical principles of cause and eﬀect like those governing the material and inorganic world. Yet he also insists that we can
only make use of such ideas in a regulative or heuristic fashion in
relation to our ongoing scientiﬁc investigation of nature. Kant argues

Introduction

xix

that although we must always seek to push causal explanation of things
as far as we possibly can, we cannot altogether forgo the idea of internal
self-organization on the part of living things. As in his other Critiques
and in the ﬁrst part of the present one, Kant attempts to negotiate the
apparent contradictions between these two perspectives through a
discussion of the relevant ‘dialectic’ and the ‘antinomies’ involved.
But this understandable propensity to interpret certain things of
nature in teleological terms may also be extrapolated to things as a
whole and combined with an appeal to God as the divine ground and
creator of the world. In this connection once again Kant returns to
the theological ‘argument from design’ that he had already criticized,
together with the other traditional arguments for the existence of God,
in the Critique of Pure Reason. Many of the considerations he marshals
here are reminiscent of Hume’s equally critical observations regarding the traditional claims of natural theology in so far as the latter
attempts to establish a relevant theistic conception of God on the
basis of the purposiveness of nature both in itself and in relation to
human needs and requirements. In short Kant argues that our ideas
of God in this respect are inevitably anthropomorphic in character
and are entirely insuﬃcient to establish the desired conclusion concerning an all-wise or all-powerful divine being anyway. Many things
eﬀectively serve human ends, although we cannot claim that they
were objectively created to do so, but it is equally obvious that many
features of the world frustrate our purposes as well. The only nondogmatic way that we can make sense of the concept of God as author
of the world, as a source of design, is as an ‘idea of reason’ which
orients our own search for system and coherence in the world of
experience. And Kant thinks that the concept of God as ﬁrst cause or
origin of things, as the alleged conclusion of a metaphysical argument,
is not necessary to the fundamentally ‘practical’ (moral) perspective
that should govern our reﬂection on ‘religious’ questions. The only
ﬁnite being that could be an absolute ‘end’ of creation is the human
being, considered not merely as a link in the chain of natural causality
but as a moral being capable of grasping itself as such. This is Kant’s
moral theology for which we already possess within our own selfconception the immanent source of the idea of God in a practical
respect and which thus requires no further external ‘evidences’ of
nature or any such additional support. The conclusions of the third
Critique return us to the basic convictions already expressed in Kant’s

xx

Introduction

practical and theoretical philosophy as articulated in the ﬁrst two
Critiques. We must content ourselves with the thought that nature
reveals itself as at least adapted to our theoretical desire to know it
and above all to the potential practical realization of what the moral
consciousness enjoins upon us.
Ever since its publication the third Critique has exercised a powerful
inﬂuence, in direct and often indirect and subterranean ways, upon
subsequent continental and Anglo-American thought, and indeed,
despite its technical diﬃculty, upon artistic practice and reﬂection
far beyond the conﬁnes of philosophy in the narrower professional
sense. It is understandable that the initial philosophical reception of
the work concentrated largely on its relation to the rest of Kant’s
mature thought and on the question whether, as its author believed,
it successfully brought the structure of the critical philosophy to systematic completion. For those like Hegel and Schelling, who attempted
to resolve what they saw as the persisting but avoidable aporias of
that philosophy and its apparently dualistic implications, the complex
argument of the third Critique seemed to open up especially fruitful
lines of enquiry. In diﬀerent ways they both strove to develop a
dynamic non-reductionistic account of nature on the basis of Kant’s
analysis of teleology and to articulate a comprehensive philosophy of
art in a richer and more historically sensitive manner than Kant himself, acknowledging but attempting to mitigate his sharp contrast
between the beautiful and the sublime. Schelling was particularly
inﬂuenced by Kant’s account of the relation between art and genius,
while Hegel characteristically emphasized the capacity of art to
symbolize and embody spiritual content in a distinctive manner.
At the same time, writers like Friedrich Schiller and Johann Wolfgang
von Goethe likewise saw the third Critique as a means of mediating
the felt opposition between freedom and nature within the experience
of the human subject itself. Schiller’s Letters on the Aesthetic Education
of Man of 1795 envisaged the aesthetic dimension as potentially healing
the rift between inner and outer nature and the fragmented character
of the human faculties accentuated under modern conditions of the
radical division of labour and the concomitant specialization of human
life. In his reﬂections on tragedy Schiller also explored Kantian ideas
concerning the relation between morality and the sublime. Although
Goethe had precious little time for the technicalities of the critical

Introduction

xxi

philosophy, and was wary of the traditional religious implications of
some of Kant’s later work as he saw it, he responded throughout his
literary and scientiﬁc work to the idea of an inexhaustible fullness of
experience that could never be rendered wholly transparent to human
understanding, thus retaining much of the characteristic pathos and
modesty of Kant’s attitude to nature and human existence.
Schopenhauer derided the systematic ambitions of his idealist
predecessors and contemporaries like Hegel and Schelling, and especially their tortuous eﬀorts to redeem the true content of Christianity
in philosophical form, and claimed to return in many ways to the
original Kantian perspective. But the older historians of philosophy
were not entirely unjustiﬁed in regarding Schopenhauer’s thought as
an important coda to the classical idealist tradition that had more in
common with the latter than he either realized or acknowledged. By
combining Platonic and Kantian strands of thought he developed the
idea of aesthetic disinterestedness in conjunction with a pessimistic
moral philosophy that emphasized freedom from the bondage to desire,
and ascribed an almost redemptive role to the aesthetic in overcoming
a purely calculative and instrumental attitude to the world in general.
It was originally through the work of Schopenhauer that a number of
transformed Kantian motifs found their way into the thought of the
early Nietzsche in particular.
But by the middle of the nineteenth century the continuing inﬂuence
of Kant’s work was more commonly registered in an expressly antimetaphysical mode of thought that interpreted his approach to aesthetic
questions in naturalistic terms by appeal to the data of psychology
and physiology. Thinkers such as Johann Friedrich Herbart, followed
by Hermann Helmholtz and Wilhelm Wundt, attempted to recover
Kant’s apparent emphasis upon the autonomy of aesthetic experience
and explored the subjective conditions and structures of perception
that made judgements of form possible in the ﬁrst place. These
approaches initially helped to encourage broadly ‘formalist’ interpretations of aesthetic experience that ignored or abstracted from the
social-historical conditions and speciﬁcity of the categories through
which we make sense of both nature and the cultural world. The story
of Kantian inﬂuence on aesthetics is subsequently deepened and
complicated later in the century with the emergence of explicitly
‘neo-Kantian’ schools, which opposed the complete naturalization of
human experience and sought to reassert Kant’s interest in discerning

xxii

Introduction

distinctive principles governing diﬀerent spheres of cognition, action,
and aesthetic feeling and perception. In this context Hermann Cohen
in particular developed an elaborate threefold system that sought to
recapture the authentic orientation of the critical philosophy. In fact
neo-Kantian philosophy of the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries also entered into a complex symbiosis with the hermeneutical approach of thinkers such as Wilhelm Dilthey and Georg Simmel,
who drew freely on Kant and German idealism in an attempt to transcend the ahistorical bias of positivistic philosophy pre-eminently
oriented to the explanatory method of the natural sciences. A historicized Kantian perspective had already inspired important early theorists of art history like Heinrich Wölfﬂin, who tried to explain how
speciﬁc and shared structures mediated our understanding of artistic
form and expression in diﬀerent epochs, but it was probably through
Ernst Cassirer that freely developed Kantian themes came to exercise
their most signiﬁcant inﬂuence on early modern art history and
theory in the work of Erwin Panofsky and the Warburg School.
Despite its emphatic repudiation of the pure aesthetic standpoint
of the individual feeling subject as the appropriate perspective for
understanding the phenomenon of art, the ontological hermeneutics pioneered by Martin Heidegger and developed by Hans-Georg
Gadamer can nonetheless, despite immediate appearances, be plausibly read as a creative ‘repetition’ of central themes of Kant’s third
Critique. Heidegger would liberate Kant’s insights from his narrow
interpretation of cognition in terms of judgement and open up the
conception of attuned faculties by reference to his own concept of
hermeneutic ‘understanding’ as a concrete orientation already given
along with the structure of our being-in-the-world as the shared ﬁeld
of our theoretical, instrumental, and practical involvements.
But the promising and problematic heritage of Kant’s reﬂections
on the aesthetic relations of both art and nature is probably most
explicitly addressed in the aesthetic theory which Theodor Adorno
developed in critical and productive counterpoint with Hegel and the
dialectical tradition in general. Adorno both returns the thematic of
natural beauty to a central place in relation to the claims of art and
refuses a purely formalist and non-cognitivist reading of Kant’s contribution without subordinating the aesthetic dimension in an intellectualist manner to the ‘higher’ truth of philosophical conceptualization.
In a highly diﬀerentiated way Adorno thus returns us to some of the

Introduction

xxiii

earliest questions of Kant’s immediate successors concerning the aesthetic as a possible intimation of an uncoerced reconciliation between
reason and nature in the human subject that freely acknowledges its
ineliminable dependence upon what it has not itself created or fully
constituted and must therefore thankfully receive.
As far as much of the twentieth century Anglophone reception of
Kant is concerned, the emphasis lay for a long time on his contributions to the theory of knowledge and, to a lesser extent, on his moral
philosophy. Within analytical aesthetics Kant’s treatment of pure
aesthetic judgements has naturally been much discussed, but until fairly
recent times the full wealth, range, and implications of Kant’s interest in the aesthetic dimension of experience were somewhat neglected
by comparison. In this regard there has been a veritable renaissance
in the English-language literature on Kant which has come increasingly to focus once again upon the place of the third Critique in the
economy of his thought as a whole. Much of the current discussion
addresses the emancipatory self-understanding of the critical system
with speciﬁc reference to Kant’s related reﬂections on history, politics,
and religion. The Critique of Judgement has perhaps never seemed a
more seminal text and indispensable point of reference than it does
today.

NOTE ON THE TEXT,
TRANSLATION, AND REVISION
James Creed Meredith’s translation of Kant’s Critique of
Judgement, the second complete English version of the text to appear,
was originally published in two volumes, in 1911 and 1928 respectively, with extensive introductory essays, accompanying notes, and
an analytical index for each volume. The translation was reissued in
a single volume, without the introductory matter and notes, in 1952.
Like all subsequent translators, Meredith based his edition on the
text presented in the standard German edition of Kant’s writings,
published under the aegis of the Prussian Academy of Sciences (the
‘Academy Edition’). The Critique of Judgement was edited by Wilhelm
Windelband and ﬁrst appeared in 1908 in volume V (text: pp. 165–485;
apparatus: pp. 512–44). Windelband took Kant’s second edition (1793)
as the basis for the Academy edition and indicated variants and disputed textual issues in his apparatus. The marginal pagination provided
in Meredith’s text refers to that of the Academy Edition, which is
also generally reproduced in other translations and editions of Kant’s
writings.
The present edition of Meredith’s translation has been supplemented by a new translation of Kant’s substantial ‘First Introduction’
which, it seems, Kant had originally intended for the third Critique,
but eventually decided to replace with the shorter and less complex
text that was actually published as the ‘Introduction’ to the work.
The marginal pagination in the translation of the ‘First Introduction’
refers to that of the text published in volume XX of the Academy
Edition (pp. 195–251) and edited by Gerhard Lehmann.
Meredith’s translation has been revised in a number of respects in
accordance with a more contemporary literary style and with certain
current terminological conventions in the ﬁeld of Kant studies in
English. The changes in question are of broadly two kinds. First,
certain words and expressions, turns of phrase, and orthographic features that were not particularly unusual at the beginning of the last
century but are now antiquated or obsolete have been adapted or
replaced in the light of contemporary usage and vocabulary (thus
terms like ‘metaphysic’, ‘fancy’, or ‘aﬀection’ have been replaced by

Note on the Text, Translation, and Revision

xxv

‘metaphysics’, ‘fantasy’, and ‘aﬀect’). Secondly, a number of speciﬁc
changes have been introduced with regard to certain important technical terms deployed throughout the text: (i) Meredith’s translation
of Kant’s beurteilen and Beurteilung as ‘estimate’ or ‘estimation’ has
been replaced by ‘judge’ and ‘judging’ respectively in order to retain
the connection with the terms denoting a speciﬁc ‘judgement’ of
whatever kind (Urteil) and the faculty or power of judgement in general (Urteilskraft). When the term ‘judgement’ is not qualiﬁed by the
deﬁnite or indeﬁnite article in the text it translates the latter sense of
the word. If there is any danger of ambiguity, the relevant meaning has
been spelt out as the ‘power of judgement’; (ii) Where ‘estimate’ or
‘estimation’ is retained in the text, as in the second book of Part One,
it translates Kant’s use of schätzen and Schätzung; (iii) Meredith’s old
term ‘determinant judgement’ for Kant’s bestimmende Urteilskraft
has been replaced by the more current ‘determining judgement’;
(iv) Meredith’s capitalization of ‘Object’ to translate Kant’s Objekt,
as distinct from ‘object’ to translate Gegenstand, has been dropped
since, in this text, Kant does not consistently deploy these two terms
in signiﬁcantly distinct senses; (v) Lastly, Meredith’s use of ‘ﬁnal’ and
‘ﬁnality’ to translate Kant’s terms zweckmäßig and Zweckmäßigkeit
has been replaced throughout with the now standard terms ‘purposive’ and ‘purposiveness’ respectively. There is nothing intrinsically
wrong with ‘ﬁnal’ and ‘ﬁnality’, terms commonly used in philosophical literature at the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the
twentieth centuries, especially with reference to Kant and German
Idealism, but they have largely fallen into desuetude in modern philosophy and may therefore easily mislead a contemporary reader. It is also
preferable, generally speaking, to render one semantic ﬁeld (in this case
Zweck and its cognate forms) with as few diﬀerent expressions in the
translation as possible. No readable version of Kant is able to manage
without deploying both ‘end’ and ‘purpose’, according to context, as
the most appropriate rendering of Zweck (and the same is true for
Erkenntnis, which must be rendered as ‘knowledge’ or ‘cognition’
according to context). When the adjective ‘ﬁnal’ is retained in the
text it serves to translate Kant’s Endursache or ‘ﬁnal cause’. It should
be noted that the term ‘ﬁnality’ will frequently be encountered in a
large body of the secondary literature on Kant and German Idealism
in English composed before fairly recent times. It is worth remembering that Meredith’s translation pre-dated Norman Kemp Smith’s

xxvi

Note on the Text, Translation, and Revision

classic translation of the Critique of Pure Reason of 1929, a version
which strongly inﬂuenced the rendering of Kant’s terminology that
subsequently became standard in English. A detailed bilingual glossary
of Kant’s most important terms and otherwise signiﬁcant and characteristic vocabulary has been provided in the present edition. The
German terms are given here in their modern forms, which sometimes
diverge slightly from the orthography of Kant’s time.
Apart from the aforementioned cases, intervention in Meredith’s
text has been kept to a minimum in order to preserve the general
ﬂuency and literary quality of his version. There is little point in
revising an old translation if the cumulative eﬀect of a host of alterations eﬀectively distorts its rhetorical tone and drastically alters its
stylistic physiognomy as a whole. If we really ﬁnd an earlier translation
not so much inevitably ‘dated’ in certain respects as intrinsically inadequate (through technical inaccuracy, stylistic infelicity, or syntactical
clumsiness), we should take Hamlet’s advice to the players and ‘reform
it altogether’ and therefore undertake an entirely new translation.
Although there is probably no such thing, for good hermeneutic reasons, as a ‘deﬁnitive’ translation of any literary or philosophical text
of note, any more than there are deﬁnitive and unchangeable performances of great works of art, there can certainly be ‘exemplary’ ones, to
borrow Kant’s expression, that set new standards and encourage further exploration of a challenging and productive text. Meredith’s
version is a remarkably readable and often eloquent version of a work
that even its ﬁrst English-language translator described as ‘repulsive’
in style.1 The translation can especially be recommended for those who
would like to read the work straight through with (arduous) enjoyment as a classic of philosophical literature in its own right in spite of
its forbidding technical complexity. Meredith admirably communicates the rhetorical pathos of the text and captures the vividness of
Kant’s metaphors in a way that can easily escape more allegedly ‘literal’
translations. On those occasions where Meredith did introduce an
image or metaphor that is not strictly represented in the original,
although such cases usually accord closely with the spirit and tone of
Kant’s writing, the text has been adapted to reﬂect the German more
closely. It should also be mentioned that Meredith, like Kemp Smith
1
See Immanuel Kant, Critique of Judgement, trans. J. H. Bernard (Mineola, NY: Dover,
2005) (reprint of the 1914 edition), p. x.

Note on the Text, Translation, and Revision

xxvii

after him, felt free to rearticulate and break up some of Kant’s more
tortuous and serpentine sentences in the interest of clarity, elegance, and
readability. This is advisable, and often necessary, for a grammatically
gendered language with a diﬀerent semantic structure from English
and serves to clarify the reference of potentially ambiguous pronouns
in complex periods.
A similar approach has been followed with regard to my translation
of the ‘First Introduction’ which is one of the densest and thorniest
of Kant’s texts. The terminology is consistent with that of the revised
Meredith text of the third Critique and a broadly similar style has also
been attempted throughout. The primary texts have been kept entirely
free of editorial insertions, brackets or footnotes to facilitate continuous reading and all numbered footnotes in the text are Kant’s own.
The explanatory notes that have been supplied serve principally to
clarify various references and allusions on Kant’s part and are indicated
with an asterisk at appropriate points in the main text. Kant employed
a variety of conventions for marking emphasis in his texts, especially
enlarged lettering and spaced print. The translation reﬂects such
emphasis in the original text by the use of capitalization or italics.

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
The following is an extensive bibliography of secondary literature in English
on the interpretation, context, and reception of Kant’s third Critique (excluding individual articles in books and journals, but including translations,
international collections, and special journal issues dedicated to the subject).
For detailed bibliographies of the literature, including foreign language
publications, the reader might consult the works listed by Henry Allison,
Paul Guyer, Angelica Nuzzo, and John Zammito.

General Discussions of Kant’s Life and Thought
Ameriks, Karl, Interpreting Kant’s Critiques (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2003).
Cassirer, Ernst, Kant’s Life and Work (New Haven and London: Yale
University Press, 1981).
Goldmann, Lucien, Immanuel Kant (London: NLB, 1971).
Guyer, Paul, Kant (London: Routledge, 2006).
Höﬀe, Otfried, Kant (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press,
1994).
Kuehn, Manfred, Kant: A Biography (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2001).
Lindsay, A. D., Kant (London: Ernest Benn, 1934).

Introductions to Part One of the Third Critique
Burnham, Douglas, An Introduction to Kant’s Critique of Judgement
(Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2000).
Kemal, Salim, Kant’s Aesthetic Theory: An Introduction (London: Macmillan,
1992).
Wetzel, Christian Helmut, An Introduction to Kant’s Aesthetics: Core Concepts
and Problems (Oxford: Blackwell, 2005).

Discussions of All or Part of the Third Critique
Allison, Henry, Kant’s Theory of Taste: A Reading of the ‘Critique of Aesthetic
Judgment’ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
Baldacchino, Lewis, A Study in Kant’s Metaphysics of Aesthetic Experience—
Reason and Feeling (Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press, 1992).
Cohen, Ted, and Guyer, Paul (eds.), Essays in Kant’s Aesthetics (Chicago:
Chicago University Press, 1982).
Coleman, Francis, The Harmony of Reason: A Study in Kant’s Aesthetics
(Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1974).

Select Bibliography

xxix

Crawford, D. W., Kant’s Aesthetic Theory (Albany, NY: State University
of New York Press, 1974).
Crowther, Paul, The Kantian Sublime (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989).
Funke, G. (ed.), Akten des Siebenten Internationalen Kant Kongresses 1990,
2 vols. (Bonn and Berlin: Bouvier, 1991).
Gibbons, Sarah, Kant’s Theory of Imagination: Bridging Gaps in Judgment
and Experience (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994).
Ginsborg, Hanna, The Role of Taste in Kant’s Theory of Cognition (New York:
Garland, 1990).
Guyer, Paul, Kant and the Experience of Freedom: Essays on Aesthetics and
Morality (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993).
—— Kant and the Claims of Taste (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1997).
—— (ed.), Kant’s Critique of the Power of Judgment. Critical Essays
(Lantham, Md.; Oxford: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2003).
Harper, Alfred, Essays on Kant’s Third Critique (London: Mekler & Deahl,
1989).
Henrich, Dieter, Aesthetic Judgment and the Moral Image of the World: Studies
in Kant (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1992).
Kemal, Salim, Kant and Fine Art: An Essay on Kant and Philosophy of Fine
Art and Culture (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986).
Kirwan, James, The Aesthetic in Kant: A Critique (London: Continuum,
2004).
Kukla, Rebecca (ed.), Aesthetics and Cognition in Kant’s Critical Philosophy
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006).
McClosky, Mary A., Kant’s Aesthetics (Albany, NY: State University of
New York Press, 1987).
McFarland, John, Kant’s Concept of Teleology (Edinburgh: University of
Edinburgh Press, 1970).
McLaughlin, Peter, Kant’s Critique of Teleology in Biological Explanation:
Antinomy and Teleology (Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press, 1990).
Macmillan, R. A. C., The Crowning Phase of the Critical Philosophy. A Study
in Kant’s Critique of Judgment (London: Macmillan, 1912; repr. New York:
Garland, 1976).
Meerebote, R., and Hudson, R. (eds.), Kant’s Aesthetics (Atascadero,
Calif.: Ridgeview Publishing Company, 1991).
Nuzzo, Angelica, Kant and the Unity of Reason (Indiana: Purdue University
Press, 2005).
Parret, Hermann (ed.), Kants Ästhetik, Kant’s Aesthetics, L’Ésthetique de Kant
(Berlin and New York: de Gruyter, 1998).
Robinson, Hoke (ed.), System and Teleology in Kant’s Critique of Judgment
(Southern Journal of Philosophy 30 [Supplement], Memphis State
University, 1992).

xxx

Select Bibliography

Rogerson, Kenneth, Kant’s Aesthetics: the Roles of Form and Expression
(Lantham, Md.: University Press of America, 1986).
Schaper, Eva, Studies in Kant’s Aesthetics (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press, 1979).
Uehling, Theodore, The Notion of Form in Kant’s Critique of Aesthetic
Judgment (The Hague: Mouton, 1971).
Zumbach, C., The Transcendent Science: Kant’s Conception of Biological
Methodology (The Hague: Nijhoﬀ, 1984).

Historical Context and Earlier Reception of the Third Critique
Ameriks, Karl, The Cambridge Companion to German Idealism (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2000).
Beck, Lewis White, Early German Philosophy: Kant and His Predecessors
(Bristol: Thoemmes Press, 1996).
Beiser, Frederick C., German Idealism. The Struggle against Subjectivism
1781–1801 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2002).
Bernstein, Jay (ed.), Classic and Romantic German Aesthetics (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2003).
Cassirer, Ernst, Rousseau, Kant and Goethe (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1945).
Caygill, Howard, The Art of Judgement (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1989).
Dickie, George, The Century of Taste: The Philosophical Odyssey of Taste in
the Eighteenth Century (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1996).
Henrich, Dieter, Between Kant and Hegel: Lectures on German Idealism
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2003).
Huhn, Tom, Imitation and Society. The Persistence of Mimesis in the Aesthetics
of Burke, Hogarth and Kant (Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania University Press,
2006).
Saville, Anthony, Aesthetic Reconstructions: The Seminal Writings of Lessing,
Kant and Schiller (Oxford: Blackwell, 1987).
Sedgwick, Sally (ed.), The Reception of Kant’s Critical Philosophy: Fichte,
Schelling, Hegel (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).
Zammito, John H., The Genesis of Kant’s Critique of Judgment (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1992).

Legacy and Later Reception of the Third Critique
Banham, Gary, Kant and the Ends of Aesthetics (New York: Macmillan, 2000).
Bernstein, Jay, The Fate of Art. Aesthetic Alienation from Kant to Derrida
and Adorno (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1992).
Bowie, Andrew, Aesthetics and Subjectivity from Kant to Nietzsche
(Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1990).

Select Bibliography

xxxi

—— From Romanticism to Critical Theory: The Philosophy of German Literary
Theory (London: Routledge, 1997).
Budd, Malcolm, The Aesthetic Appreciation of Nature: Essays on the Aesthetics
of Nature (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2002).
Cheetham, Mark, Kant, Art and Art History: Moments of Discipline
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
Courtine, Jean-François, et al., Of the Sublime: Presence in Question (Albany,
NY: State University of New York Press, 1995).
De Duve, Thierry, Kant after Duchamps (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
1996).
Derrida, Jacques, The Truth in Painting (Chicago and London: University
of Chicago Press, 1987).
Ferretti, Silvia, Cassirer, Panofsky, and Warburg: Symbol, Art, and History
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1989).
Gasché, Rudolf, The Idea of Form: Rethinking Kant’s Aesthetics (Stanford,
Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2003).
Horrowitz, Gregg M., Sustaining Loss. Art and Mournful Life (Stanford,
Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2001).
Kirwan, James, Sublimity: The Non-Rational and the Irrational in the History
of Aesthetics (London: Routledge, 2005).
Lyotard, Jean-François, Lectures on the Analytic of the Sublime (Stanford,
Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1994).
Makreel, Rudolf A., Imagination and Interpretation in Kant. The Hermeneutical
Import of the Critique of Judgment (Chicago: Chicago University Press,
1990).
Mothersill, Mary, Beauty Restored (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984).
Myskja, Børn K., The Sublime in Kant and Beckett (Berlin: Walter de
Gruyter, 2002).
Podro, Michael, The Manifold in Perception: Theories of Art from Kant to
Hildebrand (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972).
Saville, Anthony, Kantian Aesthetics Pursued (Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press, 1993).
Schaeﬀer, Jean-Marie, Art of the Modern Age: Philosophy of Art from Kant
to Heidegger (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000).

Further Reading in Oxford World’s Classics
Berkeley, George, Principles of Human Knowledge and Three Dialogues, ed.
Howard Robinson.
Descartes, René, A Discourse on the Method, trans. Ian Maclean.
Hume, David, An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding, ed. Peter
Millican.

A CHRONOLOGY OF IMMANUEL KANT
1724
1732
1732–40
1737
1740

Immanuel Kant born in Königsberg on 22 April.
Birth of Haydn.
Attends the pietistic Friedrichskollegium.
Death of Kant’s mother.
Death of Frederick William II and accession of Frederick II
(‘Frederick the Great’).
1740–6 Enrols at the University of Königsberg and studies mathematics,
natural science and theology.
1746
Death of Kant’s father; he presents Thoughts on the Estimation of
Living Forces at the University (published in 1747).
1747–54 Employed as a private tutor for families in the environs of
Königsberg.
1749
Birth of Goethe.
1755
Publishes Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens;
obtains his Doctoral Degree with the Dissertation On Fire.
1756
Publishes three essays on the Lisbon earthquake, the Physical
Monadology, and New Observations on the Theory of the Winds;
unsuccessfully applies for a professorship in logic and metaphysics at the University of Königsberg; birth of Mozart.
1759
Birth of Schiller.
1762
Publishes The False Subtlety of the Four Syllogistic Figures and
The Only Possible Basis for a Demonstration of the Existence of God.
Rousseau publishes Émile and The Social Contract; birth of Fichte.
1763
Publishes An Attempt to Introduce the Concept of Negative Quantities
into Philosophy.
1764
Declines oﬀer of Professorship of Poetry; publishes Observations
on the Feeling of the Beautiful and the Sublime and the Enquiry
Concerning the Distinctness of the Principles of Natural Theology
and Morals.
1765
Posthumous publication of Leibniz’s New Essays on the Human
Understanding.
1766
Publishes Dreams of a Ghost-Seer.

Chronology
1768

xxxiii

Publishes On the Ultimate Ground of the Diﬀerences of Direction in
Space.
1769
Declines oﬀer of Professorship in Erlangen.
1770
Declines oﬀer of Professorship in Jena; appointed Professor of
Logic and Metaphysics in Königsberg; publishes the Dissertation
On the Forms and Principles of the Sensible and the Intelligible
World; births of Hegel and Beethoven.
1770–80 The so-called ‘silent decade’ during which Kant elaborates the
ﬁrst Critique.
1775
Birth of Schelling.
1776
Death of Hume; the American ‘Declaration of Independence’
and the ‘Declaration of the Rights of Man’.
1778
Declines oﬀer of Professorship in Halle; deaths of Rousseau and
Voltaire.
1781
Publishes the Critique of Pure Reason and dedicates the book to
Karl von Zedlitz, Prussian Minister of Education; death of Lessing.
1783
Publishes Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics. Kant buys a
house.
1784
Publishes Idea for a Universal History and An Answer to the
Question: What is Enlightenment? Death of Diderot.
1785
Publishes Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals.
1786
Publishes The Metaphysical First Principles of Natural Science
and The Conjectural Beginning of Human History; elected Rector
of the University of Königsberg and becomes external member
of the Berlin Academy of Sciences; death of Frederick the
Great and accession of Frederick William II; death of Moses
Mendelssohn.
1786–7 Reinhold publishes his Letters on the Kantian Philosophy.
1787
Second edition of the Critique of Pure Reason.
1788
Publishes the Critique of Practical Reason; death of Hamann;
von Zedlitz replaced by J. C. Wöllner as Minister of Education.
1789
Civil unrest in Paris and the beginnings of the French Revolution.
1790
Publishes the Critique of Judgement.
1792
France declared a republic; execution of Louis XVI; Fichte’s
Essay towards a Critique of All Revelation appears anonymously
and is widely ascribed to Kant.
1793
Publishes Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone and On the
Common Saying: That may be Right in Theory but is not Valid in

xxxiv

1794
1795
1796
1797
1798
1799
1801
1803
1804

Chronology
Practice; second edition of the Critique of Judgement; Schiller
publishes On Grace and Dignity.
Elected member of the St Petersburg Academy of Sciences;
comes into conﬂict with the Prussian Censor and receives royal
reprimand for publishing his book on religion.
Publishes On Perpetual Peace; Schiller publishes Letters on the
Aesthetic Education of Man.
Gives his final lecture at the University of Königsberg.
Publishes The Metaphysics of Morals.
Elected member of the Siena Academy of Sciences; publishes
The Conﬂict of the Faculties and Anthropology from a Pragmatic
Point of View; death of Frederick William II.
Publishes ‘Open Declaration against Fichte’, repudiating the
latter’s interpretation of the Critical Philosophy; third edition of
the Critique of Judgement; Napoleon becomes First Consul.
Schiller publishes his essay On the Sublime.
Kant falls seriously ill in October; death of Herder; Beethoven
completes his third symphony (the ‘Eroica’).
Kant dies on 12 February and is interred on 28 February; Napoleon
crowned Emperor of France.

ANALYTICAL TABLE OF CONTENTS
Critique of Judgement
Preface
Introduction
i. The division of philosophy
ii. The realm of philosophy in general
iii. The critique of judgement as a means of connecting
the two parts of philosophy in a whole
iv. Judgement as a faculty by which laws are
prescribed a priori
v. The principle of the formal purposiveness of nature
is a transcendental principle of judgement
vi. The association of the feeling of pleasure with the
concept of the purposiveness of nature
vii. The aesthetic representation of the purposiveness
of nature
viii. The logical representation of the purposiveness
of nature
ix. The connecting of the legislations of understanding
and reason by means of judgement

3
7
7
10
12
15
16
21
23
27
29

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGEMENT

first section Analytic of aesthetic judgement
First book. Analytic of the beautiful
First moment of the judgement of taste: moment of quality
§ 1. The judgement of taste is aesthetic
35
§ 2. The delight which determines the judgement of
taste is independent of all interest
36
§ 3. Delight in the agreeable is coupled with interest
37
§ 4. Delight in the good is coupled with interest
39
§ 5. Comparison of the three speciﬁcally diﬀerent
kinds of delight
41
Second moment of the judgement of taste: moment of quantity
§ 6. The beautiful is that which, apart from concepts, is
represented as the object of a universal delight
42

xxxvi

Analytical Table of Contents

§ 7. Comparison of the beautiful with the agreeable
and the good by means of the above characteristic
43
§ 8. In a judgement of taste the universality of delight
is only represented as subjective
45
§ 9. Investigation of the question whether in a judgement
of taste the feeling of pleasure precedes the judging
of the object or the latter precedes the former
49
Third moment of judgements of taste: moment of the relation
of the ends brought under review in such judgements
§ 10. Purposiveness in general
51
§ 11. The sole foundation of the judgement of taste is
the form of purposiveness of an object (or mode
of representing it)
52
§ 12. The judgement of taste rests upon a priori grounds 53
§ 13. The pure judgement of taste is independent of
charm and emotion
54
§ 14. Elucidation by means of examples
54
§ 15. The judgement of taste is entirely independent of
the concept of perfection
57
§ 16. A judgement of taste by which an object is
described as beautiful under the condition of a
determinate concept is not pure
60
§ 17. The ideal of beauty
62
Fourth moment of the judgement of taste: moment of the
modality of the delight in the object
§ 18. Character of the modality in a judgement of taste
67
§ 19. The subjective necessity attributed to a judgement
of taste is conditioned
68
§ 20. The condition of the necessity advanced by a
judgement of taste is the idea of a common sense
68
§ 21. Have we any ground for presupposing a
common sense?
69
§ 22. The necessity of the universal assent that is
thought in a judgement of taste, is a subjective
necessity which, under the presupposition of a
common sense, is represented as objective
70
General remark on the ﬁrst section of the analytic
71

Analytical Table of Contents

xxxvii

Second book. Analytic of the sublime
§ 23. Transition from the faculty of judging the
beautiful to that of judging the sublime
§ 24. On the division of an investigation of the feeling
of the sublime
A. The mathematically sublime
§ 25. Definition of the term ‘sublime’
§ 26. The estimation of the magnitude of natural things
requisite for the idea of the sublime
§ 27. Quality of the delight in the judging of the sublime
B. The dynamically sublime in nature
§ 28. Nature as might
§ 29. Modality of the judgement on the sublime in nature
General remark upon the exposition of aesthetic
reﬂective judgements
Deduction of pure aesthetic judgements
§ 30. The deduction of aesthetic judgements upon
objects of nature must not be directed to what
we call sublime in nature, but only to the beautiful
§ 31. Of the method of the deduction of judgements
of taste
§ 32. First peculiarity of the judgement of taste
§ 33. Second peculiarity of the judgement of taste
§ 34. An objective principle of taste is not possible
§ 35. The principle of taste is the subjective principle
of the general power of judgement
§ 36. The problem of a deduction of judgements of taste
§ 37. What exactly it is, that is asserted a priori of
an object in a judgement of taste
§ 38. Deduction of judgements of taste
Remark
§ 39. The communicability of a sensation
§ 40. Taste as a kind of sensus communis
§ 41. The empirical interest in the beautiful
§ 42. The intellectual interest in the beautiful
§ 43. Art in general
§ 44. Fine art

75
77
78
81
87
90
94
96

109
110
111
113
115
116
117
119
119
120
121
123
126
127
132
134

xxxviii

Analytical Table of Contents

§ 45. Fine art is an art, so far as it has at the same
time the appearance of being nature
§ 46. Fine art is the art of genius
§ 47. Elucidation and conﬁrmation of the above
explanation of genius
§ 48. The relation of genius to taste
§ 49. The faculties of the mind which constitute genius
§ 50. The combination of taste and genius in products
of ﬁne art
§ 51. The division of the ﬁne arts
§ 52. The combination of the ﬁne arts in one and the
same product
§ 53. Comparison of the aesthetic worth of the ﬁne arts
§ 54. Remark

135
136
137
140
142
148
149
154
155
159

second section Dialectic of aesthetic judgement
§ 55.
165
§ 56. Representation of the antinomy of taste
165
§ 57. Solution of the antinomy of taste
166
Remark 1
169
Remark 2
172
§ 58. The idealism of the purposiveness of both nature and
art, as the unique principle of aesthetic judgement 174
§ 59. Beauty as the symbol of morality
178
§ 60. Appendix. The methodology of taste
182
PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGEMENT

§ 61. The objective purposiveness of nature

187

first division Analytic of teleological judgement
§ 62. Purely formal, as distinguished from material,
objective purposiveness
§ 63. The relative, as distinguished from the intrinsic,
purposiveness of nature
§ 64. The distinctive character of things considered as
natural ends
§ 65. Things considered as natural ends are organisms
§ 66. The principle on which the intrinsic purposiveness
in organisms is judged

190
194
197
200
204

Analytical Table of Contents

xxxix

§ 67. The principle on which nature in general
is judged teleologically as a system of ends
§ 68. The principle of teleology considered as an
inherent principle of natural science

205
209

second division Dialectic of teleological judgement
§ 69.
§ 70.
§ 71.
§ 72.
§ 73.
§ 74.
§ 75.
§ 76.
§ 77.
§ 78.

What is an antinomy of judgement?
Exposition of this antinomy
Introduction to the solution of the above antinomy
The various kinds of systems dealing with the
purposiveness of nature
None of the above systems does what it
professes to do
The impossibility of treating the concept of a
technic of nature dogmatically springs from
the inexplicability of a natural end
The concept of an objective purposiveness of
nature is a critical principle of reason for the use
of reﬂective judgement
Remark
The peculiarity of human understanding that makes
the concept of a natural end possible for us
The union of the principle of the universal
mechanism of matter with the teleological principle
in the technic of nature

213
214
216
217
220
223
225
228
232
238

appendix Theory of the method of teleological judgement
§ 79. Whether teleology must be treated as a branch of
natural science
§ 80. The necessary subordination of the principle of
mechanism to the teleological principle in the
explanation of a thing regarded as a natural end
§ 81. The association of mechanism with the teleological
principle which we apply to the explanation of
a natural end considered as a product of nature
§ 82. The teleological system in the extrinsic relations
of organisms
§ 83. The ultimate end of nature as a teleological system
§ 84. The ﬁnal end of the existence of the world, that is,
of creation itself

245
246
250
253
258
263

xl

Analytical Table of Contents
§ 85. Physico-theology
§ 86. Ethico-theology
Remark
§ 87. The moral proof of the existence of God
§ 88. Limitation of the validity of the moral proof
Remark
§ 89. The use of the moral argument
§ 90. The type of assurance in a teleological proof
of the existence of God
§ 91. The type of assurance produced by a practical faith
General remark on teleology

265
271
274
276
281
287
288
290
295
304

APPENDIX. THE ‘FIRST INTRODUCTION’ TO
THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGEMENT

i. Philosophy as a system
ii. The system of the higher cognitive faculties which
lies at the basis of philosophy
iii. The system of all the faculties of the human mind
iv. Experience as a system for the power of judgement
v. The reﬂective power of judgement
vi. The purposiveness of natural forms as so many
particular systems
vii. The technic of the power of judgement as the ground
of the idea of a technic of nature
viii. The aesthetic of the faculty of judging
ix. Teleological judging
x. The search for a principle of the technical power
of judgement
xi. The encyclopedic introduction of the critique of
judgement into the system of the critique of pure
reason
xii. The division of the critique of judgement

315
319
321
323
325
329
330
332
340
344
347
352

CRITIQUE OF JUDGEMENT

This page intentionally left blank

PREFACE

167

TO THE FIRST EDITION,* 1790
The faculty of knowledge from a priori principles may be called pure
reason, and the general investigation into its possibility and bounds
the critique of pure reason. This is permissible although ‘pure reason’,
as was the case with the same use of terms in our ﬁrst work, is only
intended to denote reason in its theoretical employment, and although
there is no desire to bring under review its faculty as practical reason
and its special principles as such. That critique is, then, an investigation addressed simply to our faculty of knowing things a priori. Hence
it makes our cognitive faculties its sole concern, to the exclusion of the
feeling of pleasure or displeasure and the faculty of desire; and among
the cognitive faculties it conﬁnes its attention to the understanding and
its a priori principles, to the exclusion of judgement and reason, (faculties that also belong to theoretical cognition,) because it turns out
in the sequel that there is no cognitive faculty other than understanding capable of aﬀording constitutive a priori principles of knowledge.
Accordingly the critique which sifts these faculties one and all, so as to
try the possible claims of each of the other faculties to a share in the
clear possession of knowledge from roots of its own, retains nothing
but what understanding prescribes a priori as a law for nature as the sum
of phenomena—the form of these being similarly furnished a priori.
All other pure concepts it relegates to the rank of ideas, which are
beyond the reach of our faculty of theoretical cognition: though they
are not without their use nor redundant, but discharge certain functions
as regulative principles. For these concepts serve partly to restrain the
oﬃcious pretensions of understanding, which, presuming on its ability to supply a priori the conditions of the possibility of all things which
it is capable of knowing, behaves as if it had thus determined these
bounds as those of the possibility of all things generally, and partly also
to lead understanding, in its study of nature, according to a principle
of completeness, unattainable as this remains for it, and so to promote
the ultimate aim of all knowledge.
Properly, therefore, it was the understanding—which, so far as it
contains constitutive a priori cognitive principles, has its special realm,
and one, moreover, in our faculty of knowledge—that the critique,

168

4

169

Preface to the First Edition

called in a general way that of pure reason, was intended to establish
in secure but particular possession against all other competitors. In the
same way reason, which contains constitutive a priori principles solely
in respect of the faculty of desire, ﬁnds its possessions assigned to it by
the critique of practical reason.
But now comes the power of judgement, which in the order of our cognitive faculties forms a middle term between understanding and reason.
Has it also got independent a priori principles? If so, are they constitutive, or are they merely regulative, thus indicating no special realm?
And do they give a rule a priori to the feeling of pleasure and displeasure, as the middle term between the faculties of cognition and desire,
just as understanding prescribes laws a priori for the former and reason
for the latter? This is the topic to which the present critique is devoted.
A critique of pure reason, i.e. of our faculty of judging on a priori principles, would be incomplete if the critical examination of judgement,
which is a faculty of knowledge, and, as such, lays claim to independent
principles, were not dealt with separately. Still, however, its principles
cannot, in a system of pure philosophy, form a separate constituent part
intermediate between the theoretical and practical divisions, but may
when needful be annexed to one or other as occasion requires. For if
such a system is some day worked out under the general name of metaphysics—and its full and complete execution is both possible and of the
utmost importance for the employment of reason in all areas of its activity—the critical examination of the ground for this ediﬁce must have
been previously carried down to the very depths of the foundations of the
faculty of principles independent of experience, lest in some quarter it
might give way, and, sinking, inevitably bring with it the ruin of all.
We may readily gather, however, from the nature of the power of
judgement (whose correct employment is so necessary and universally
requisite that it is just this faculty that is intended when we speak of
sound understanding) that the discovery of a peculiar principle belonging to it—and some such it must contain in itself a priori, for otherwise
it would not be cognitive faculty the distinctive character of which is
obvious to the most commonplace criticism—must be a task involving considerable diﬃculties. For this principle is one which must not
be derived from a priori concepts, seeing that these are the property
of understanding, and judgement is only directed to their application.
It has, therefore, itself to furnish a concept, and one from which, properly, we get no cognition of a thing, but which it can itself employ as a

Preface to the First Edition

5

rule only—but not as an objective rule to which it can adapt its judgement, because, for that, another faculty of judgement would again be
required to enable us to decide whether the case was one for the application of the rule or not.
It is chieﬂy in those acts of judgement that are called aesthetic, and
which relate to the beautiful and sublime, whether of nature or art,
that one meets with the above diﬃculty about a principle (whether it
be subjective or objective). And yet the critical search for a principle
of judgement in their case is the most important item in a critique of
this faculty. For, although they do not of themselves contribute a whit
to the knowledge of things, they still belong to the faculty of knowledge, and indicate an immediate bearing of this faculty upon the feeling of pleasure or displeasure according to some a priori principle,
and do so without confusing this principle with what is capable of
being a determining ground of the faculty of desire, for the latter has
its principles a priori in concepts of reason.—The logical judging of
nature, however, stands on a diﬀerent footing. It deals with cases in
which experience presents a conformity to law in things, which the
understanding’s general concept of the sensible is no longer adequate
to render intelligible or explicable, and in which judgement may have
recourse to itself for a principle of the reference of the natural thing
to the unknowable supersensible and, indeed, must employ some
such principle, though with a regard only to itself and the knowledge
of nature. For in these cases the application of such an a priori principle for the cognition of what is in the world is both possible and necessary, and simultaneously opens out prospects which are proﬁtable
for practical reason. But here there is no immediate reference to the
feeling of pleasure or displeasure. But this is precisely the enigma in
the principle of judgement that necessitates a separate division for
this faculty in the critique,—for there was nothing to prevent the
formation of logical judgements according to concepts (from which
no immediate conclusion can ever be drawn to the feeling of pleasure
or displeasure) having been treated, with a critical statement of its
limitations, in an appendage to the theoretical part of philosophy.
The present investigation of taste, as a faculty of aesthetic judgement, not being undertaken with a view to the formation or culture of
taste (which will pursue its course in the future, as in the past, independently of such inquiries) but being merely directed to its transcendental aspects, I feel assured of its indulgent criticism in respect of

170

6

Preface to the First Edition

any shortcomings on that score. But in all that is relevant to the transcendental aspect it must be prepared to stand the test of the most
rigorous examination. Yet even here I venture to hope that the diﬃculty
of unravelling a problem so involved in its nature may serve as an
excuse for a certain amount of hardly avoidable obscurity in its solution, provided that the accuracy of our statement of the principle is
proved with all requisite clearness. I admit that the mode of deriving
the phenomenon of the power of judgement from that principle has
not all the lucidity that is rightly demanded elsewhere, where the
subject is cognition by concepts, and that I believe I have in fact
attained in the second part of this work.
With this, then, I bring my entire critical undertaking to a close.
I shall hasten to the doctrinal part, in order, as far as possible, to snatch
from my advancing years what time may yet be favourable to the task.
It is obvious that no separate division of doctrine is reserved for the faculty of judgement, seeing that with judgement critique takes the place
of theory; but, following the division of philosophy into theoretical and
practical, and of pure philosophy in the same way, the whole ground
will be covered by the metaphysics of nature and that of morals.*

INTRODUCTION

171

I
The Division of Philosophy
Philosophy may be said to contain the principles of the rational
cognition that concepts aﬀord us of things (not merely, as with Logic,
the principles of the form of thought in general irrespective of the
objects), and, thus interpreted, the course, usually adopted, of dividing
it into theoretical and practical is perfectly sound. But this makes imperative a speciﬁc distinction on the part of the concepts by which the principles of this rational cognition get their object assigned to them, for
if the concepts are not distinct they fail to justify a division, which
always presupposes that the principles belonging to the rational cognition of the several parts of the science in question are themselves
mutually exclusive.
Now there are but two kinds of concepts, and these yield a corresponding number of distinct principles of the possibility of their objects.
The concepts referred to are those of nature and that of freedom. By the
ﬁrst of these a theoretical cognition from a priori principles becomes
possible. In respect of such cognition, however, the second, by its
very concept, imports no more than a negative principle (that of
simple antithesis), while for the determination of the will, on the
other hand, it establishes fundamental principles which enlarge the
scope of its activity, and which on that account are called practical.
Hence the division of philosophy falls properly into two parts, quite
distinct in their principles—a theoretical part, as philosophy of nature,
and a practical part, as philosophy of morals (for this is what the practical legislation of reason by the concept of freedom is called). Hitherto,
however, in the application of these expressions to the division of the
diﬀerent principles, and with them to the division of philosophy, a
gross misuse of the terms has prevailed; for what is practical according to concepts of nature has been taken as identical with what is
practical according to the concept of freedom, with the result that a
division has been made under these heads of theoretical and practical, by which, in eﬀect, there has been no division at all (seeing that
both parts might have similar principles).

172

8

173

Introduction

The will—for this is what is said—is the faculty of desire and, as
such, is just one of the many natural causes in the world, the one,
namely, which acts through concepts; and whatever is represented as
possible (or necessary) through the eﬃcacy of will is called practically
possible (or necessary): the intention being to distinguish its possibility (or necessity) from the physical possibility or necessity of an eﬀect
the causality of whose cause is not determined in its production by
concepts (but rather, as with lifeless matter, by mechanism, and, as
with the lower animals, by instinct).—Now, the question in respect of
the practical faculty: whether, that is to say, the concept, by which the
causality of the will gets its rule, is a concept of nature or of freedom, is
here left quite open.
The latter distinction, however, is essential. For, let the concept
determining the causality be a concept of nature, and then the principles are technically-practical; but, let it be a concept of freedom, and
they are morally-practical. Now, in the division of a rational science the
diﬀerence between objects that require diﬀerent principles for their cognition is the diﬀerence on which everything turns. Hence technicallypractical principles belong to theoretical philosophy (the theory of
nature), whereas those morally-practical alone form the second part,
that is, practical philosophy (the theory of ethics).
All technically-practical rules (i.e. those of art and skill generally,
or even of prudence, as a skill in exercising an inﬂuence over human
beings and their wills) must, in so far as their principles rest upon
concepts, be reckoned only as corollaries to theoretical philosophy.
For they only touch the possibility of things according to concepts of
nature, and this embraces, not only the means discoverable in nature
for the purpose, but even the will itself (as a faculty of desire, and
consequently a natural faculty), so far as it is determinable in accordance with these rules by natural motives. Still these practical rules
are not called laws (like physical laws), but only precepts. This is due
to the fact that the will does not stand simply under the natural concept,
but also under the concept of freedom. In the latter connexion its
principles are called laws, and these principles, with the addition of
what follows from them, alone constitute the second or practical part
of philosophy.
The solution of the problems of pure geometry is not allocated to
a special part of that science, nor does the art of land-surveying merit

Introduction

9

the name of practical, in contradistinction to pure, as a second part
of the general science of geometry, and with equally little, or perhaps
less, right can the mechanical or chemical art of experiment or of
observation be ranked as a practical part of the science of nature, or,
in ﬁne, domestic, agricultural, or political economy, the art of social
intercourse, the principles of dietetics, or even general instruction
as to the attainment of happiness, or as much as the control of the
inclinations or the restraining of the aﬀects with a view thereto, be
denominated practical philosophy—not to mention forming these
latter into a second part of philosophy in general. For, between them
all, the above contain nothing more than rules of skill, which are thus
only technically practical—the skill being directed to producing an
eﬀect which is possible according to natural concepts of causes and
eﬀects. As these concepts belong to theoretical philosophy they are
subject to those precepts as mere corollaries of theoretical philosophy
(i.e. as corollaries of natural science), and so cannot claim any place
in any special philosophy called practical. On the other hand the
morally practical precepts, which are founded entirely on the concept of freedom, to the complete exclusion of grounds taken from
nature for the determination of the will, form quite a special kind
of precepts. These, too, like the rules obeyed by nature, are, without
qualiﬁcation, called laws—though they do not, like the latter, rest on
sensible conditions, but upon a supersensible principle—and they
require a separate part of philosophy allotted to them as their own,
corresponding to the theoretical part, and termed practical
philosophy.
Hence it is evident that a sum of practical precepts furnished by
philosophy does not form a special part of philosophy, co-ordinate
with the theoretical, by reason of its precepts being practical—for
that they might be, notwithstanding that their principles were derived wholly from the theoretical knowledge of nature (as technicallypractical rules). But an adequate reason only exists where their
principle, being in no way borrowed from the concept of nature,
which is always sensibly conditioned, rests consequently on the
supersensible, which the concept of freedom alone makes cognizable
by means of its formal laws, and where, therefore, they are morallypractical, i.e. not merely precepts and rules in this or that interest,
but laws independent of all antecedent reference to ends or aims.

10
174

Introduction

II
The Realm of Philosophy in General

175

The employment of our faculty of cognition from principles, and with
it philosophy, is coextensive with the applicability of a priori concepts.
Now a division of the sum of all the objects to which those concepts
are referred for the purpose, where possible, of accomplishing knowledge of the former, may be made according to the varied competence
or incompetence of our faculty in that connexion.
Concepts, so far as they are referred to objects apart from the question of whether knowledge of them is possible or not, have their ﬁeld,
which is determined simply by the relation in which their object
stands to our faculty of cognition in general.—The part of this ﬁeld
in which knowledge is possible for us, is a territory (territorium) for these
concepts and the requisite cognitive faculty. The part of the territory
over which they exercise legislative authority is the realm (ditio) of these
concepts, and their appropriate cognitive faculty. Empirical concepts
have, therefore, their territory, doubtless, in nature as the complex of all
sensible objects, but they have no realm (only a dwelling-place, domicilium), for, although they are formed according to law, they are not
themselves legislative, but the rules founded on them are empirical,
and consequently contingent.
Our entire faculty of cognition has two realms, that of natural concepts and that of the concept of freedom, for through both it prescribes
laws a priori. In accordance with this distinction, then, philosophy is
divisible into theoretical and practical. But the territory upon which its
realm is established, and over which it exercises its legislative authority,
is still always conﬁned to the complex of the objects of all possible experience, taken as no more than mere phenomena, for otherwise legislation by the understanding in respect of them is unthinkable.
The function of prescribing laws by means of concepts of nature
is discharged by understanding, and is theoretical. That of prescribing
laws by means of the concept of freedom is discharged by reason and
is merely practical. It is only in the practical sphere that reason can
prescribe laws; in respect of theoretical knowledge (of nature) it can
only (as advised by the understanding with respect to laws) deduce
from given laws their logical consequences, which still always remain
restricted to nature. But we cannot reverse this and say that where

Introduction

11

rules are practical, reason is then and there legislative, since the rules
might be technically practical.
Understanding and reason, therefore, have two distinct jurisdictions over one and the same territory of experience. But neither can
interfere with the other. For the concept of freedom just as little disturbs the legislation of nature, as the concept of nature inﬂuences
legislation through the concept of freedom.—That it is possible for
us at least to think without contradiction of both these jurisdictions,
and their appropriate faculties, as coexisting in the same subject, was
shown by the critique of pure reason, since it disposed of the objections on the other side by detecting their dialectical illusion.
Still, how does it happen that these two diﬀerent realms do not
form one realm, seeing that, while they do not limit each other in their
legislation, they continually do so in their eﬀects in the sensible world?
The explanation lies in the fact that the concept of nature doubtless
represents its objects in intuition, yet not as things in themselves, but
as mere phenomena, whereas the concept of freedom represents in its
object what is no doubt a thing in itself, but it does not make it intuitable, and further that neither the one nor the other is capable,
therefore, of furnishing a theoretical cognition of its object (or even
of the thinking subject) as a thing in itself, or, as this would be, of the
supersensible—the idea of which has certainly to be introduced as
the basis of the possibility of all those objects of experience, although
it cannot itself ever be elevated or extended into a cognition.
Our entire cognitive faculty is, therefore, presented with an
unbounded, but, also, inaccessible ﬁeld—the ﬁeld of the supersensible—in which we seek in vain for a territory, and on which, therefore, we can have no realm for theoretical cognition, be it for concepts
of understanding or of reason. This ﬁeld we must indeed occupy
with ideas in the interest as well of the theoretical as the practical
employment of reason, but in connexion with the laws arising from
the concept of freedom we cannot procure for these ideas any but
practical reality, which, accordingly, fails to advance our theoretical
cognition one step towards the supersensible.
Albeit, then, between the realm of the natural concept, as the sensible, and the realm of the concept of freedom, as the supersensible,
there is a great gulf ﬁxed, so that it is not possible to pass from the
former to the latter (by means of the theoretical employment of reason),

176

12

Introduction

just as if they were so many separate worlds, the ﬁrst of which is powerless to exercise inﬂuence on the second: still the latter is meant to
inﬂuence the former—that is to say, the concept of freedom is meant
to actualize in the sensible world the end proposed by its laws; and
nature must consequently also be capable of being regarded in such a
way that in the conformity to law of its form it at least harmonizes with
the possibility of the ends to be eﬀectuated in it according to the laws
of freedom.—There must, therefore, be a ground of the unity of the
supersensible that lies at the basis of nature, with what the concept of
freedom contains in a practical way, and although the concept of this
ground neither theoretically nor practically attains to a knowledge of it,
and so has no peculiar realm of its own, still it renders possible the transition from the mode of thought according to the principles of the one
to that according to the principles of the other.

III
The Critique of Judgement as a means of
connecting the two parts of Philosophy in a whole
The critique which deals with what our cognitive faculties are capable of yielding a priori has properly speaking no realm in respect of
objects; for it is not a doctrine, its sole business being to investigate
whether, having regard to the general bearings of our faculties, a doctrine is possible by their means, and if so, how. Its ﬁeld extends to all
their pretensions, with a view to conﬁning them within their legitimate bounds. But what is shut out of the division of philosophy may
still be admitted as a principal part into the general critique of our
faculty of pure cognition, in the event, namely, of its containing principles which are not in themselves available either for theoretical or
practical employment.
Concepts of nature contain the ground of all theoretical cognition
a priori and rest, as we saw, upon the legislative authority of understanding.—The concept of freedom contains the ground of all sensuously unconditioned practical precepts a priori, and rests upon that
of reason. Both faculties, therefore, besides their application in point
of logical form to principles of whatever origin, have, in addition,
their own peculiar jurisdiction in the matter of their content, and so,

Introduction

13

there being no further (a priori) jurisdiction above them, the division
of philosophy into theoretical and practical is justiﬁed.
But there is still further in the family of our higher cognitive faculties
a middle term between understanding and reason. This is judgement, of
which we may reasonably presume by analogy that it may likewise contain, if not a special authority to prescribe laws, still a principle peculiar
to itself upon which laws are sought, although one merely subjective
a priori. This principle, even if it has no ﬁeld of objects appropriate to
it as its realm, may still have some territory or other with a certain
character, for which just this very principle alone may be valid.
But in addition to the above considerations there is yet (to judge
by analogy) a further ground, upon which judgement may be brought
into line with another arrangement of our powers of representation,
and one that appears to be of even greater importance than that of its
kinship with the family of cognitive faculties. For all faculties of the
soul, or capacities, are reducible to three, which do not admit of any
further derivation from a common ground: the faculty of knowledge,
the feeling of pleasure or displeasure, and the faculty of desire.1 For the
1 Where one has reason to suppose that a relation subsists between concepts, that are
used as empirical principles, and the faculty of pure cognition a priori, it is worth while
attempting, in consideration of this connexion, to give them a transcendental deﬁnition—
a deﬁnition, that is, by pure categories, so far as these by themselves adequately indicate the
distinction of the concept in question from others. This course follows that of the mathematician, who leaves the empirical data of his problem indeterminate, and only brings their
relation in pure synthesis under the concepts of pure arithmetic, and thus generalizes his
solution.—I have been taken to task for adopting a similar procedure (Critique of Practical
Reason, Preface, p. 16) and fault has been found with my deﬁnition of the faculty of desire,
as a faculty which by means of its representations is the cause of the actuality of the objects of those
representations: for mere wishes would still be desires, and yet in their case every one is ready
to abandon all claim to being able by means of them alone to call their object into existence.—But this proves no more than the presence of desires in man by which he is in contradiction with himself. For in such a case he seeks the production of the object by means
of his representation alone, without any hope of its being eﬀectual, since he is conscious that
his mechanical powers (if I may so call those which are not psychological), which would
have to be determined by that representation, are either unequal to the task of realizing the
object (by the intervention of means, therefore) or else are addressed to what is quite impossible, as, for example, to undo the past (O mihi praeteritos, etc.*) or, to be able to annihilate
the interval that, with intolerable delay, divides us from the wished-for moment.—Now,
conscious as we are in such fantastic desires of the ineﬃciency of our representations,
(or even of their futility,) as causes of their objects, there is still involved in every wish a
reference of the same as cause, and therefore the representation of its causality, and this is
especially discernible where the wish, as longing, is an aﬀect. For such aﬀects, since they
dilate the heart and render it inert and thus exhaust its powers, show that a strain is kept on
being exerted and re-exerted on these powers by the representations, but that the mind is

177

178

14

179

Introduction

faculty of cognition understanding alone is legislative, if (as must be
the case where it is considered on its own account free of confusion
with the faculty of desire) this faculty, as that of theoretical cognition, is
referred to nature, in respect of which alone (as phenomenon) it is possible for us to prescribe laws by means of a priori concepts of nature,
which are properly pure concepts of understanding.—For the faculty
of desire, as a higher faculty operating under the concept of freedom,
only reason (in which alone this concept has a place) prescribes laws
a priori.—Now between the faculties of knowledge and desire stands the
feeling of pleasure, just as judgement is intermediate between understanding and reason. Hence we may, provisionally at least, assume that
judgement likewise contains an a priori principle of its own, and that,
since pleasure or displeasure is necessarily combined with the faculty of
desire (be it antecedent to its principle, as with the lower desires, or, as
with the higher, only supervening upon its determination by the moral
law), it will eﬀect a transition from the faculty of pure knowledge, i.e.
from the realm of concepts of nature, to that of the concept of freedom,
just as in its logical employment it makes possible the transition from
understanding to reason.
Hence, despite the fact of philosophy being only divisible into two
principal parts, the theoretical and the practical, and despite the fact of
all that we may have to say of the special principles of judgement having
to be assigned to its theoretical part, i.e. to rational cognition according
to concepts of nature: still the critique of pure reason, which must settle
this whole question before the above system is taken in hand, so as to
substantiate its possibility, consists of three parts: the critique of pure
understanding, of pure judgement, and of pure reason, which faculties are called pure on the ground of their being legislative a priori.
allowed continually to relapse and become languid upon recognition of the impossibility
before it. Even prayers for the aversion of great, and, so far as we can see, inevitable evils,
and many superstitious means for attaining ends impossible of attainment by natural means,
prove the causal reference of representations to their objects—a causality which not
even the consciousness of ineﬃciency for producing the eﬀect can deter from straining
towards it.—But why our nature should be furnished with a propensity to consciously
vain desires is a teleological problem of anthropology. It would seem that were we not to
be determined to the exertion of our power before we had assured ourselves of the eﬃciency
of our faculty for producing an object, our power would remain to a large extent unused.
For as a rule we only ﬁrst learn to know our powers by making trial of them. This deceit of
vain desires is therefore only the result of a beneﬁcent disposition in our nature.

Introduction

15

IV
Judgement as a Faculty by which Laws are
prescribed A PRIORI
Judgement in general is the faculty of thinking the particular as contained under the universal. If the universal (the rule, principle, or law)
is given, then the judgement which subsumes the particular under it
is determining.* This is so even where such a judgement is transcendental and, as such, provides the conditions a priori in conformity with
which alone subsumption under that universal can be eﬀected. If, however, only the particular is given and the universal has to be found for
it, then the judgement is simply reﬂective.*
Determining judgement determines under universal transcendental laws furnished by understanding and is subsumptive only; the law
is marked out for it a priori, and it has no need to devise a law for its
own guidance to enable it to subordinate the particular in nature to the
universal.—But there are such manifold forms of nature, so many
modiﬁcations, as it were, of the universal transcendental concepts of
nature, left undetermined by the laws furnished by pure understanding a priori as above mentioned, and for the reason that these laws only
touch the general possibility of a nature (as an object of the senses),
that there must also be laws in this regard. These laws, being empirical, may be contingent as far as the light of our understanding goes, but
still, if they are to be called laws (as the concept of a nature requires),
they must be regarded as necessary on a principle, unknown though
it be to us, of the unity of the manifold. Reﬂective judgement which
is compelled to ascend from the particular in nature to the universal,
stands, therefore, in need of a principle. This principle it cannot borrow
from experience, because what it has to do is to establish just the unity
of all empirical principles under higher, though likewise empirical,
principles, and thence the possibility of the systematic subordination
of higher and lower principles. Such a transcendental principle, therefore, reﬂective judgement can only give as a law from and to itself. It
cannot derive it from any other quarter (as it would then be a case of
determining judgement). Nor can it prescribe it to nature, for reﬂection
on the laws of nature adjusts itself to nature, and not nature to the conditions according to which we strive to obtain a concept of it,—a concept
that is quite contingent in respect of these conditions.

180

16

181

Introduction

Now the principle sought can only be this: as universal laws of nature
have their ground in our understanding, which prescribes them to
nature (though only according to the universal concept of it as nature),
particular empirical laws must be regarded, in respect of that which is
left undetermined in them by these universal laws, according to a unity
such as they would have if an understanding (though it be not ours) had
supplied them for the beneﬁt of our cognitive faculties, so as to render
possible a system of experience according to particular natural laws.
This is not to be taken as implying that such an understanding must
be actually assumed (for it is only reﬂective judgement which avails
itself of this idea as a principle for the purpose of reﬂection and not
for determining anything); but this faculty rather gives by this means
a law to itself alone and not to nature.
Now the concept of an object, so far as it contains at the same time
the ground of the actuality of this object, is called its end, and the
agreement of a thing with that constitution of things which is only
possible according to ends, is called the purposiveness of its form.*
Accordingly the principle of judgement, in respect of the form of the
things of nature under empirical laws generally, is the purposiveness
of nature in its multiplicity. In other words, by this concept nature is
represented as if an understanding contained the ground of the unity
of the manifold of its empirical laws.
The purposiveness of nature is, therefore, a particular a priori concept, which has its origin solely in reﬂective judgement. For we cannot
ascribe to the products of nature anything like a reference of nature in
them to ends, but we can only make use of this concept to reﬂect upon
them in respect of the nexus of phenomena in nature—a nexus given
according to empirical laws. Furthermore, this concept is entirely
diﬀerent from practical purposiveness (in human art or even morals),
though it is doubtless thought after this analogy.

V
The Principle of the formal Purposiveness of
Nature is a transcendental Principle of Judgement
A transcendental principle is one through which we represent
a priori the universal condition under which alone things can become
objects of our cognition generally. A principle, on the other hand,

Introduction

17

is called metaphysical, where it represents a priori the condition under
which alone objects whose concept has to be given empirically, may
become further determined a priori. Thus the principle of the cognition of bodies as substances, and as changeable substances, is transcendental where the statement is that their change must have a cause:
but it is metaphysical where it asserts that their change must have an
external cause. For in the ﬁrst case bodies need only be thought through
ontological predicates (pure concepts of understanding), e.g. as substance, to enable the proposition to be cognized a priori; whereas, in
the second case, the empirical concept of a body (as a movable thing
in space) must be introduced to support the proposition, although,
once this is done, it may be seen quite a priori that the latter predicate
(movement only by means of an external cause) applies to bodies.—In
this way, as I shall show presently, the principle of the purposiveness
of nature (in the multiplicity of its empirical laws) is a transcendental
principle. For the concept of objects, regarded as standing under this
principle, is only the pure concept of objects of possible empirical cognition generally, and involves nothing empirical. On the other hand
the principle of practical purposiveness, implied in the idea of the determination of a free will, would be a metaphysical principle, because the
concept of a faculty of desire, as will, has to be given empirically, i.e. is
not included among transcendental predicates. But both these principles are, nonetheless, not empirical, but a priori principles; because
no further experience is required for the synthesis of the predicate
with the empirical concept of the subject of their judgements, but it
may be apprehended quite a priori.
That the concept of a purposiveness of nature belongs to transcendental principles is abundantly evident from the maxims of judgement upon which we rely a priori in the investigation of nature, and
which yet have to do with no more than the possibility of experience,
and consequently of the knowledge of nature,—but of nature not
merely in a general way, but as determined by a manifold of particular laws.—These maxims crop up frequently enough in the course
of this science, though only in a scattered way. They are aphorisms
of metaphysical wisdom, making their appearance in a number of
rules the necessity of which cannot be demonstrated from concepts.
‘Nature takes the shortest way (lex parsimoniae); yet it makes no leap,
either in the sequence of its changes, or in the juxtaposition of
speciﬁcally diﬀerent forms (lex continui in natura); its vast variety in

182

18

183

Introduction

empirical laws is, for all that, unity under a few principles (principia
praeter necessitatem non sunt multiplicanda)’; and so forth.
If we propose to assign the origin of these elementary rules, and
attempt to do so on psychological lines, we are ﬂying entirely in the face
of their meaning. For they tell us, not what happens, i.e. according to
what rule our powers of judgement actually discharge their functions,
and how we judge, but how we ought to judge; and we cannot get this
logical objective necessity where the principles are merely empirical.
Hence the purposiveness of nature for our cognitive faculties and
their employment, which manifestly radiates from them, is a transcendental principle of judgements, and so needs also a transcendental deduction, by means of which the ground for this mode of judging
must be traced to the a priori sources of knowledge.
Now, looking at the grounds of the possibility of an experience, the
ﬁrst thing, of course, that meets us is something necessary— namely,
the universal laws apart from which nature in general (as an object of
sense) cannot be thought. These rest on the categories, applied to the
formal conditions of all intuition possible for us, so far as it is also given
a priori. Under these laws judgement is determining; for it has nothing
else to do than to subsume under given laws. For instance, understanding says: all change has its cause (universal law of nature); transcendental judgement has nothing further to do than to furnish a priori
the condition of subsumption under the concept of understanding
placed before it: this we get in the succession of the determinations of
one and the same thing. Now for nature in general, as an object of possible experience, that law is cognized as absolutely necessary.—But
besides this formal time-condition, the objects of empirical cognition
are determined, or, so far as we can judge a priori, are determinable, in
various ways, so that speciﬁcally diﬀerentiated natures, over and above
what they have in common as things of nature in general, are further
capable of being causes in an inﬁnite variety of ways; and each of these
modes must, on the concept of a cause in general, have its rule, which
is a law, and, consequently, imports necessity: although owing to the
constitution and limitations of our faculties of cognition we may
entirely fail to see this necessity. Accordingly, in respect of nature’s
merely empirical laws, we must think in nature a possibility of an endless multiplicity of empirical laws, which yet are contingent so far as our
insight goes, i.e. cannot be cognized a priori. In respect of these we
judge the unity of nature according to empirical laws, and the possibility

Introduction

19

of the unity of experience, as a system according to empirical laws, to
be contingent. But, now, such a unity is one which must be necessarily
presupposed and assumed, as otherwise we should not have a thoroughgoing connexion of empirical cognition in a whole of experience. For
the universal laws of nature, while providing, certainly, for such a
connexion among things generically, as things of nature in general,
do not do so for them speciﬁcally as such particular things of nature.
Hence judgement is compelled, for its own guidance, to adopt it as
an a priori principle, that what is for human insight contingent in the
particular (empirical) laws of nature contains nevertheless unity of
law in the synthesis of its manifold in an intrinsically possible experience—unfathomable, though still thinkable, as such unity may, no
doubt, be for us. Consequently, as the unity of law in a synthesis,
which is cognized by us in obedience to a necessary aim (a need of the
understanding), though recognized at the same time as contingent, is
represented as a purposiveness of objects (here of nature), so judgement, which, in respect of things under possible (yet to be discovered)
empirical laws, is merely reﬂective, must regard nature in respect of
the latter according to a principle of purposiveness for our cognitive faculty, which then ﬁnds expression in the above maxims of judgement.
Now this transcendental concept of a purposiveness of nature is neither
a concept of nature nor of freedom, since it attributes nothing at all to
the object, i.e. to nature, but only represents the unique mode in which
we must proceed in our reﬂection upon the objects of nature with a view
to getting a thoroughly interconnected whole of experience, and so is a
subjective principle, i.e. maxim, of judgement. For this reason, too, just
as if it were a lucky chance that favoured us, we rejoice (or are properly
speaking relieved of a want) where we meet with such systematic unity
under merely empirical laws: although we must necessarily assume the
presence of such a unity, apart from any ability on our part to apprehend or prove its existence.
In order to convince ourselves of the correctness of this deduction
of the concept before us, and the necessity of assuming it as a transcendental principle of cognition, let us just remind ourselves of the
magnitude of the task. We have to form a connected experience from
given perceptions of a nature containing a maybe endless multiplicity of empirical laws, and this problem has its seat a priori in our
understanding. This understanding is no doubt a priori in possession
of universal laws of nature, apart from which nature would be incapable

184

20

185

Introduction

of being an object of experience at all. But over and above this it needs
a certain order of nature in its particular rules which are only capable of being brought to its knowledge empirically, and which, so far as
it is concerned, are contingent. These rules, without which we would
have no means of advance from the universal analogy of a possible experience in general to a particular, must be regarded by understanding
as laws, i.e. as necessary—for otherwise they would not form one order
of nature—though it be unable to cognize or ever get an insight into their
necessity. Albeit, then, it can determine nothing a priori in respect of
these (objects), it must, in pursuit of such empirical so-called laws, lay
at the basis of all reﬂection upon them an a priori principle, to the
eﬀect, namely, that a cognizable order of nature is possible according
to them. A principle of this kind is expressed in the following propositions. There is in nature a subordination of genera and species comprehensible by us: Each of these genera again approximates to the others on
a common principle, so that a transition may be possible from one to
the other, and thereby to a higher genus: While it seems at the outset
unavoidable for our understanding to assume for the speciﬁc variety of
natural eﬀects a like number of various kinds of causality, yet these may
all be reduced to a small number of principles, the quest for which is our
business; and so forth. This adaptation of nature to our cognitive faculties is presupposed a priori by judgement on behalf of its reﬂection upon
it according to empirical laws. But understanding all the while recognizes it objectively as contingent, and it is merely judgement that attributes it to nature as transcendental purposiveness, i.e. a purposiveness
in respect of the subject’s faculty of cognition. For, were it not for this
presupposition, we should have no order of nature in accordance with
empirical laws, and, consequently, no guiding-thread for an experience
that has to be brought to bear upon these in all their variety, or for an
investigation of them.
For it is quite conceivable that, despite all the uniformity of the
things of nature according to universal laws, without which we would
not have the form of general empirical knowledge at all, the speciﬁc
variety of the empirical laws of nature, with their eﬀects, might still
be so great as to make it impossible for our understanding to discover
in nature an intelligible order, to divide its products into genera and
species so as to avail ourselves of the principles of explanation and
comprehension of one for explaining and interpreting another, and out
of material coming to hand in such confusion (properly speaking only

Introduction

21

inﬁnitely multiform and ill-adapted to our power of apprehension) to
make a consistent context of experience.
Thus judgement, also, is equipped with an a priori principle for
the possibility of nature, but only in a subjective respect. By means
of this it prescribes a law, not to nature (as autonomy), but to itself
(as heautonomy), to guide its reﬂection upon nature. This law may
be called the law of the speciﬁcation of nature in respect of its empirical laws. It is not one cognized a priori in nature, but judgement
adopts it in the interests of a natural order, cognizable by our understanding, in the division which it makes of nature’s universal laws
when it seeks to subordinate to them a variety of particular laws. So
when it is said that nature speciﬁes its universal laws on a principle
of purposiveness for our cognitive faculties, i.e. of suitability for the
human understanding and its necessary function of ﬁnding the universal for the particular presented to it by perception, and again for
varieties (which are, of course, common for each species) connexion
in the unity of principle, we do not thereby either prescribe a law to
nature, or learn one from it by observation—although the principle
in question may be conﬁrmed by this means. For it is not a principle
of determining but merely of reﬂective judgement. All that is
intended is that, no matter what is the order and disposition of nature
in respect of its universal laws, we must investigate its empirical laws
throughout on that principle and the maxims based on it, because
only so far as that principle applies can we make any headway in the
employment of our understanding in experience, or gain knowledge.

VI
The Association of the Feeling of Pleasure with
the Concept of the Purposiveness of Nature
The conceived harmony of nature in the manifold of its particular
laws with our need of ﬁnding universality of principles for it must, so
far as our insight goes, be deemed contingent, but nonetheless indispensable for the requirements of our understanding, and, consequently,
a purposiveness by which nature is in accord with our aim, but only so
far as this is directed to knowledge.—The universal laws of understanding, which are equally laws of nature, are, although arising from
spontaneity, just as necessary for nature as the laws of motion applicable

186

22

187

Introduction

to matter. Their origin does not presuppose any regard to our cognitive
faculties, seeing that it is only by their means that we ﬁrst come by any
conception of the meaning of a knowledge of things (of nature), and they
of necessity apply to nature as object of our cognition in general. But it
is contingent, so far as we can see, that the order of nature in its particular laws, with their wealth of at least possible variety and heterogeneity
transcending all our powers of comprehension, should still in actual fact
be commensurate with these powers. To ﬁnd out this order is an undertaking on the part of our understanding, which pursues it with a regard
to a necessary end of its own, that, namely, of introducing into nature
unity of principle. This end must, then, be attributed to nature by
judgement, since no law can be here prescribed to it by understanding.
The attainment of every aim is coupled with a feeling of pleasure.
Now where such attainment has for its condition a representation
a priori—as here a principle for reﬂective judgement in general—the
feeling of pleasure also is determined by a ground which is a priori
and valid for all human beings: and that, too, merely by virtue of the
reference of the object to our faculty of cognition. As the concept of
purposiveness here takes no cognizance whatever of the faculty of
desire, it diﬀers entirely from all practical purposiveness of nature.
As a matter of fact, we do not, and cannot, ﬁnd in ourselves the
slightest eﬀect on the feeling of pleasure from the coincidence of perceptions with the laws in accordance with the universal concepts of
nature (the categories), since in their case the understanding necessarily follows the bent of its own nature without ulterior aim. But,
while this is so, the discovery, on the other hand, that two or more
empirical heterogeneous laws of nature are allied under one principle
that embraces them both, is the ground of a very appreciable pleasure, often even of admiration, and such, too, as does not wear oﬀ
even though we are already familiar enough with its object. It is true
that we no longer notice any decided pleasure in the comprehensibility of nature, or in the unity of its divisions into genera and species,
without which the empirical concepts, that aﬀord us our knowledge
of nature in its particular laws, would not be possible. Still it is certain that the pleasure appeared in due course, and only by reason of
the most ordinary experience being impossible without it, has it
become gradually fused with simple cognition, and no longer arrests
particular attention.—Something, then, that makes us attentive in
our judging of nature to its purposiveness for our understanding—an

Introduction

23

endeavour to bring, where possible, its heterogeneous laws under higher,
though still always empirical, laws—is required, in order that, on meeting with success, pleasure may be felt in this their accord with our cognitive faculty, an accord which is regarded by us as purely contingent.
As against this a representation of nature would be altogether displeasing to us, if it forewarned us that, on the least investigation carried
beyond the commonest experience, we should come in contact with
such a heterogeneity of its laws as would make the union of its particular laws under universal empirical laws impossible for our understanding. For this would conﬂict with the principle of the subjectively
purposive speciﬁcation of nature in its genera, and with our own
reﬂective judgement in respect of the latter.
Yet this presupposition of judgement is so indeterminate on the
question of the extent of the prevalence of that ideal purposiveness of
nature for our cognitive faculties, that if we are told that a more searching or enlarged knowledge of nature, derived from observation, must
eventually bring us into contact with a multiplicity of laws that no
human understanding could reduce to a principle, we can reconcile ourselves to the thought. But still we listen more gladly to others who hold
out to us the hope that the more intimately we come to know the recesses
of nature, or the better we are able to compare it with further aspects
as yet unknown to us, the more simple shall we ﬁnd it in its principles,
and the further our experience advances the more harmonious shall we
ﬁnd it in the apparent heterogeneity of its empirical laws. For our
judgement calls on us to proceed on the principle of the conformity of
nature to our faculty of cognition, so far as that principle extends,
without deciding—for the rule is not given to us by determining
judgement—whether bounds are anywhere set to it or not. For while
in respect of the rational employment of our cognitive faculty bounds
may be deﬁnitely determined, in the empirical ﬁeld no such determination of bounds is possible.

VII
The Aesthetic Representation of the Purposiveness
of Nature
That which is purely subjective in the representation of an object, i.e.
what constitutes its reference to the subject, not to the object, is its

188

24

189

Introduction

aesthetic character. On the other hand, that which in such a representation serves, or is available, for the determination of the object
(for the purpose of knowledge), is its logical validity. In the cognition
of an object of the senses both sides are presented conjointly. In the sensuous representation of external things the quality of space in which we
intuit them is the merely subjective side of my representation of them (by
which what the things might be in themselves as objects is left quite
open), and it is on account of that reference that the object in being
intuited in space is also thought merely as a phenomenon. But despite
its purely subjective quality, space is still a constituent of the knowledge
of things as phenomena. Sensation (here external) also agrees in
expressing a merely subjective side of our representations of external
things, but one which is properly their matter (through which we are
given something with real existence), just as space is the mere a priori
form of the possibility of their intuition; and so sensation is, nonetheless,
also employed in the cognition of external objects.
But that subjective side of a representation which is incapable of
becoming an element of cognition, is the pleasure or displeasure connected
with it; for through it I cognize nothing in the object of the representation, although it may easily be the result of the operation of some
cognition or other. Now the purposiveness of a thing, so far as it is represented in our perception of it, is in no way a character of the object
itself (for a character of this kind is not one that can be perceived),
although it may be inferred from a cognition of things. In the purposiveness, therefore, which is prior to the cognition of an object, and
which, even apart from any desire to make use of the representation of
it for the purpose of a cognition, is yet immediately connected with it,
we have the subjective character belonging to it that is incapable of
becoming a constituent of knowledge. Hence we only apply the term
‘purposive’ to the object on account of its representation being immediately coupled with the feeling of pleasure: and this representation
itself is an aesthetic representation of the purposiveness.—The only
question is whether such a representation of purposiveness exists at all.
If pleasure is connected with the mere apprehension (apprehensio)
of the form of an object of intuition, apart from any reference it may
have to a concept for the purpose of a determinate cognition, this
does not make the representation referable to the object, but solely to
the subject. In such a case the pleasure can express nothing but the
conformity of the object to the cognitive faculties brought into play

Introduction

25

in reﬂective judgement, and so far as they are in play, and hence merely
a subjective formal purposiveness of the object. For that apprehension
of forms in the imagination can never take place without reﬂective
judgement, even when it has no intention of so doing, comparing them
at least with its faculty of referring intuitions to concepts. If, now, in
this comparison, imagination (as the faculty of intuitions a priori) is
undesignedly brought into accord with understanding (as the faculty
of concepts) by means of a given representation, and a feeling of
pleasure is thereby aroused, then the object must be regarded as purposive for reﬂective judgement. A judgement of this kind is an aesthetic
judgement upon the purposiveness of the object, which does not
depend upon any available concept of the object, and does not provide
one. When the form of an object (as opposed to the matter of its representation, as sensation) is, in the mere act of reﬂecting upon it, without
regard to any concept to be obtained from it, judged as the ground of
a pleasure in the representation of such an object, then this pleasure
is also judged to be combined necessarily with the representation of it,
and so not merely for the subject apprehending this form, but for all in
general who pass judgement. The object is then called beautiful; and
the faculty of judging by means of such a pleasure (and so also with universal validity) is called taste. For since the ground of the pleasure is
made to reside merely in the form of the object for reﬂection generally,
consequently not in any sensation of the object, and without any reference, either, to any concept that might have something or other in view,
it is with the conformity to law in the empirical employment of judgement generally (unity of imagination and understanding) in the subject,
and with this alone, that the representation of the object in reﬂection,
the conditions of which are universally valid a priori, accords. And, as
this accordance of the object with the faculties of the subject is contingent, it gives rise to a representation of a ﬁnality on the part of the object
in respect of the cognitive faculties of the subject.
Here, now, is a pleasure which—as is the case with all pleasure or
displeasure that is not brought about through the agency of the concept
of freedom (i.e. through the antecedent determination of the higher faculty of desire by means of pure reason)—no concepts could ever enable
us to regard as necessarily connected with the representation of an
object. It must always be only through reﬂective perception that it is
cognized as conjoined with this representation. As with all empirical
judgements, it is, consequently, unable to announce objective necessity

190

191

26

192

Introduction

or lay claim to a priori validity. But, then, the judgement of taste in
fact only lays claim, like every other empirical judgement, to be valid
for everyone, and, despite its inner contingency this is always possible. The only point that is strange or out of the way about it, is that
it is not an empirical concept, but a feeling of pleasure (and so not a
concept at all), that is yet demanded from everyone by the judgement
of taste, just as if it were a predicate united to the cognition of the
object, and that is meant to be conjoined with its representation.
A singular empirical judgement, as, for example, the judgement of
one who perceives a movable drop of water in a rock-crystal, rightly
expects everyone to ﬁnd the fact as stated, since the judgement has been
formed according to the universal conditions of determining judgement under the laws of a possible experience in general. In the same
way one who feels pleasure in simple reﬂection on the form of an
object, without having any concept in mind, rightly lays claim to the
agreement of everyone, although this judgement is empirical and a
singular judgement. For the ground of this pleasure is found in the
universal, though subjective, condition of reﬂective judgements,
namely the purposive harmony of an object (whether it be a product
of nature or of art) with the mutual relation of the faculties of cognition (imagination and understanding) which are requisite for every
empirical cognition. The pleasure in judgements of taste is, therefore,
dependent doubtless on an empirical representation, and cannot be
united a priori to any concept (one cannot determine a priori what
object will be in accordance with taste or not—one must ﬁnd out the
object that is so); but then it is only made the determining ground of
this judgement by virtue of our consciousness of its resting simply
upon reﬂection and the universal, though only subjective, conditions
of the harmony of that reﬂection with the knowledge of objects in
general, for which the form of the object is purposive.
This is why judgements of taste are subjected to a critique in
respect of their possibility. For their possibility presupposes an
a priori principle, although that principle is neither a cognitive principle for understanding nor a practical principle for the will, and is
thus in no way determining a priori.
Susceptibility to pleasure arising from reﬂection on the forms of
things (whether of nature or of art) betokens, however, not only a
purposiveness on the part of objects in their relation to reﬂective
judgement in the subject, in accordance with the concept of nature,

Introduction

27

but also, conversely, a purposiveness on the part of the subject, answering to the concept of freedom, in respect of the form, or even formlessness, of objects. The result is that the aesthetic judgement refers not
merely, as a judgement of taste, to the beautiful, but also, as springing
from a higher intellectual feeling, to the sublime. Hence the abovementioned critique of aesthetic judgement must be divided on these
lines into two main parts.

VIII
The Logical Representation of the Purposiveness
of Nature
There are two ways in which purposiveness may be represented in
an object given in experience. It may be made to turn on what is
purely subjective. In this case the object is considered in respect of its
form as present in apprehension (apprehensio) prior to any concept; and
the harmony of this form with the cognitive faculties, promoting the
combination of the intuition with concepts for cognition generally, is
represented as a purposiveness of the form of the object. Or, on the other
hand, the representation of purposiveness may be made to turn on
what is objective, in which case it is represented as the harmony of the
form of the object with the possibility of the thing itself according to
an antecedent concept of it containing the ground of this form. We
have seen that the representation of the former kind of purposiveness
rests on the pleasure immediately felt in mere reﬂection on the form
of the object. But that of the latter kind of purposiveness, as it refers
the form of the object, not to the subject’s cognitive faculties engaged
in its apprehension, but to a deﬁnite cognition of the object under a
given concept, has nothing to do with a feeling of pleasure in things,
but only with understanding and its judging of them. Where the concept of an object is given, the function of judgement, in its employment of that concept for cognition, consists in presentation (exhibitio),
i.e. in placing beside the concept an intuition corresponding to it.
Here it may be that our own imagination is the agent employed, as in
the case of art, where we realize a preconceived concept of an object
which we set before ourselves as an end. Or the agent may be nature
in its technic (as in the case of organic bodies) when we read into it
our own concept of an end to assist our judging of its product. In this

193

28

194

Introduction

case what is represented is not a mere purposiveness of nature in the form
of the thing, but this very product as a natural end.—Although our
concept that nature, in its empirical laws, is subjectively purposive in
its forms is in no way a concept of the object, but only a principle of
judgement for providing itself with concepts in the vast multiplicity
of nature, so that it may be able to take its bearings, yet, on the analogy
of an end, as it were a regard to our cognitive faculties is here attributed
to nature. Natural beauty may, therefore, be looked on as the presentation of the concept of formal, i.e. merely subjective, purposiveness and
natural ends as the presentation of the concept of a real, i.e. objective,
purposiveness. The former of these we judge by taste (aesthetically by
means of the feeling of pleasure), the latter by understanding and
reason (logically according to concepts).
On these considerations is based the division of the critique of judgement into that of the aesthetic and the teleological power of judgement.
By the ﬁrst is meant the faculty of judging formal purposiveness
(otherwise called subjective) by the feeling of pleasure or displeasure,
by the second the faculty of judging the real purposiveness (objective) of nature by the understanding and reason.
In a critique of judgement the part dealing with aesthetic judgement
is essentially relevant, as it alone contains a principle introduced by
judgement completely a priori as the basis of its reﬂection upon nature.
This is the principle of nature’s formal purposiveness for our cognitive
faculties in its particular (empirical) laws—a principle without which
understanding could not ﬁnd itself in nature: whereas no reason is
assignable a priori, nor is so much as the possibility of one apparent
from the concept of nature as an object of experience, whether in its
universal or in its particular aspects, why there should be objective ends
of nature, i.e. things only possible as natural ends. But it is only judgement that, without being itself possessed a priori of a principle in that
regard, in actually occurring cases (of certain products) contains the
rule for employing the concept of ends in the interest of reason, once
the above transcendental principle has already prepared understanding
to apply to nature the concept of an end (at least in respect of its form).
But the transcendental principle by which a purposiveness of
nature, in its subjective reference to our cognitive faculties, is represented in the form of a thing as a principle of its judging, leaves quite
undetermined the question of where and in what cases we have to
judge the object as a product according to a principle of purposiveness,

Introduction

29

instead of simply according to universal laws of nature. It assigns to
the aesthetic judgement the task of deciding the conformity of this
product (in its form) to our cognitive faculties as a question of taste
(a matter which the aesthetic judgement decides, not by any harmony with concepts, but by feeling). On the other hand judgement
as teleologically employed assigns the determinate conditions under
which something (e.g. an organized body) is to be judged in accordance with the idea of an end of nature. But it can adduce no principle from the concept of nature, as an object of experience, to give
it its authority to ascribe a priori to nature a reference to ends, or even
only indeterminately to assume them from actual experience in the
case of such products. The reason for this is that in order to be able
merely empirically to cognize objective purposiveness in a certain
object, many particular experiences must be collected and reviewed
under the unity of their principle.— Aesthetic judgement is, therefore, a special faculty of judging according to a rule, but not according to concepts. Teleological judgement is not a special faculty, but
merely general reﬂective judgement proceeding, as it always does in
theoretical cognition, according to concepts, but in respect of certain
objects of nature, following special principles—those, namely, of a
judgement that is merely reﬂective and does not determine objects.
Hence, as regards its application, it belongs to the theoretical part of
philosophy, and on account of its special principles, which are not
determining, as principles belonging to doctrine have to be, it must
also form a special part of the critique. On the other hand the aesthetic
judgement contributes nothing to the cognition of its objects. Hence
it must only be allocated to the critique of the judging subject and of
its faculties of knowledge so far as these are capable of possessing
a priori principles, whatever their use (theoretical or practical) may
otherwise be—a critique which is the propaedeutic of all philosophy.

IX
The connecting of the Legislations of
Understanding and Reason by means of Judgement
Understanding prescribes laws a priori for nature as an object of the
senses, so that we may have a theoretical knowledge of it in a possible
experience. Reason prescribes laws a priori for freedom and its peculiar

195

30

196

Introduction

causality as the supersensible in the subject, so that we may have a
purely practical knowledge. The realm of the concept of nature under
the one legislation, and that of the concept of freedom under the other,
are completely cut oﬀ from all reciprocal inﬂuence, that they might
severally (each according to its own principles) exert upon the other,
by the broad gulf that divides the supersensible from phenomena. The
concept of freedom determines nothing in respect of the theoretical cognition of nature; and the concept of nature likewise nothing in respect of
the practical laws of freedom. To that extent, then, it is not possible to
throw a bridge from the one realm to the other.—Yet although the
determining grounds of causality according to the concept of freedom
(and the practical rule that this contains) have no place in nature, and the
sensible cannot determine the supersensible in the subject; still the converse is possible (not, it is true, in respect of the knowledge of nature, but
of the consequences arising from the supersensible and bearing on the
sensible). So much indeed is implied in the concept of a causality by
freedom, the agency of which, in conformity with the formal laws of
freedom, is to take eﬀect in the world. The word cause, however, in its
application to the supersensible only signiﬁes the ground that determines the causality of things of nature to an eﬀect in conformity with
their appropriate natural laws, but at the same time also in unison
with the formal principle of the laws of reason—a ground which,
while its possibility is impenetrable, may still be completely cleared
of the charge of contradiction that it is alleged to involve.2 The eﬀect
in accordance with the concept of freedom is the ﬁnal end which (or
the manifestation of which in the sensible world) is to exist, and this
presupposes the condition of the possibility of that end in nature (i.e.
in the nature of the subject as a being of the sensible world, namely,
2
One of the various supposed contradictions in this complete distinction of the
causality of nature from that through freedom, is expressed in the objection that when I
speak of hindrances opposed by nature to causality according to laws of freedom (moral
laws) or of assistance lent to it by nature, I am all the time admitting an inﬂuence of the
former upon the latter. But the misinterpretation is easily avoided, if attention is only
paid to the meaning of the statement. The resistance or furtherance is not between
nature and freedom, but between the former as phenomenon and the eﬀects of the latter
as phenomena in the world of sense. Even the causality of freedom (of pure and practical reason) is the causality of a natural cause subordinated to freedom (a causality of the
subject regarded as a human being, and consequently as a phenomenon), and one, the
ground of whose determination is contained in the intelligible, that is thought under
freedom, in a manner that is not further or otherwise explicable (just as in the case of
that intelligible that forms the supersensible substrate of nature).

Introduction

31

as a human being). It is so presupposed a priori, and without regard to the
practical, by judgement. This faculty, with its concept of a purposiveness
of nature, provides us with the mediating concept between concepts of
nature and the concept of freedom—a concept that makes possible the
transition from the purely theoretical to the purely practical and from
conformity to law in accordance with the former to ﬁnal ends in accordance with the latter. For through that concept we cognize the possibility of the ﬁnal end that can only be actualized in nature and in harmony
with its laws.
Understanding, by the possibility of its supplying a priori laws for
nature, furnishes a proof of the fact that nature is cognized by us only
as phenomenon, and in so doing points to its having a supersensible
substrate; but this substrate it leaves quite undetermined. Judgement
by the a priori principle of its judging of nature according to its possible particular laws provides this supersensible substrate (within as
well as without us) with determinability through the intellectual faculty.
But reason gives determination to the same a priori by its practical law.
Thus judgement makes possible the transition from the realm of the
concept of nature to that of the concept of freedom.
In respect of the faculties of the soul generally, regarded as higher
faculties, i.e. as faculties involving an autonomy, understanding is the
one that contains the constitutive a priori principles for the faculty of
cognition (the theoretical knowledge of nature). The feeling of pleasure
and displeasure is provided for by the judgement in its independence
from concepts and from sensations that refer to the determination of
the faculty of desire and would thus be capable of being immediately
practical. For the faculty of desire there is reason, which is practical
without mediation of any pleasure of whatsoever origin, and which
determines for it, as a higher faculty, the ﬁnal end that is attended at the
same time with pure intellectual delight in the object.—Judgement’s
concept of a purposiveness of nature falls, besides, under the head of
natural concepts, but only as a regulative principle of the cognitive
faculties—although the aesthetic judgement on certain objects (of
nature or of art) which occasions that concept, is a constitutive principle in respect of the feeling of pleasure or displeasure. The spontaneity in the play of the cognitive faculties whose harmonious accord
contains the ground of this pleasure, makes the concept in question, in
its consequences, a suitable mediating link connecting the realm of the
concept of nature with that of the concept of freedom, as this accord

197

32

Introduction

at the same time promotes the receptivity of the mind for moral feeling. The following table may facilitate the review of all the above faculties in their systematic unity.3
All the Faculties of the Mind
Cognitive faculties
Feeling of pleasure and displeasure
Faculty of desire

Cognitive Faculties
Understanding
Judgement
Reason

A priori Principles
Conformity to law
Purposiveness
Final End

Application
Nature
Art
Freedom

3 It has been thought somewhat suspicious that my divisions in pure philosophy should
almost always turn out to be threefold. But it is due to the nature of the case. If a division
is to be a priori it must be either analytic, according to the law of contradiction—and then
it is always twofold (quodlibet ens est aut A aut non A*)—or else it is synthetic. If it is to be
derived in the latter case from a priori concepts (not, as in mathematics, from the a priori
intuition corresponding to the concept,) then, to meet the requirements of synthetic unity
in general, namely (1) a condition, (2) a conditioned, (3) the concept arising from the union
of the conditioned with its condition, the division must of necessity be trichotomous.

PART I

CRITIQUE OF
AESTHETIC JUDGEMENT

This page intentionally left blank

first section
Analytic of Aesthetic Judgement

203

FIRST BOOK
ANALYTIC OF THE BEAUTIFUL

first moment
of the judgement of taste: 1 moment of quality
§1
The judgement of taste is aesthetic
If we wish to discern whether anything is beautiful or not, we do
not refer the representation of it to the object by means of the
understanding with a view to cognition, but by means of the imagination (acting perhaps in conjunction with the understanding) we
refer the representation to the subject and its feeling of pleasure or
displeasure. The judgement of taste, therefore, is not a cognitive
judgement, and so not logical, but is aesthetic—which means that it
is one whose determining ground cannot be other than subjective.
Every reference of representations is capable of being objective, even
that of sensations (in which case it signiﬁes the real in an empirical
representation). The one exception to this is the feeling of pleasure
or displeasure. This denotes nothing in the object, but is a feeling
which the subject has of itself and of the manner in which it is
aﬀected by the representation.
To apprehend a regular and appropriate building with one’s
cognitive faculties, whether the mode of representation be clear
or confused, is quite a diﬀerent thing from being conscious of this
1 The deﬁnition of taste here relied upon is that it is the faculty of judging the beautiful.
But the discovery of what is required for calling an object beautiful must be reserved for
the analysis of judgements of taste. In my search for the moments* to which attention is
paid by this judgement in its reﬂection, I have followed the guidance of the logical functions of judging (for a judgement of taste always involves a reference to understanding).
I have brought the moment of quality ﬁrst under review, because this is what the aesthetic judgement on the beautiful looks to in the ﬁrst instance.

204

36

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

representation with an accompanying sensation of delight.* Here the
representation is referred wholly to the subject, and what is more to
its feeling of life—under the name of the feeling of pleasure or
displeasure—and this forms the basis of a quite separate faculty of
discriminating and judging, that contributes nothing to knowledge.
All it does is to compare the given representation in the subject with
the entire faculty of representations of which the mind is conscious
in the feeling of its state. Given representations in a judgement may
be empirical, and so aesthetic; but the judgement which is pronounced by their means is logical, provided it refers them to the
object. Conversely, even if the given representations be rational, but
are referred in a judgement solely to the subject (to its feeling), they
are always to that extent aesthetic.

§2
The delight which determines the judgement of taste is
independent of all interest

205

The delight which we connect with the representation of the existence of an object is called interest. Such a delight, therefore, always
involves a reference to the faculty of desire, either as its determining
ground, or else as necessarily implicated with its determining
ground. Now, where the question is whether something is beautiful,
we do not want to know, whether we, or anyone else, are, or even
could be, concerned with the existence of the thing, but rather how
we judge it on the basis of mere contemplation (intuition or
reﬂection). If anyone asks me whether I consider that the palace I see
before me is beautiful, I may, perhaps, reply that I do not care for
things of that sort that are merely made to be gaped at. Or I may reply
in the same strain as that Iroquois sachem* who said that nothing in
Paris pleased him better than the eating-houses. I may even go a step
further and inveigh with the vigour of a Rousseau* against the vanity
of the great who spend the sweat of the people on such superﬂuous
things. Or, in ﬁne, I may quite easily persuade myself that if I found
myself on an uninhabited island, without hope of ever again encountering human beings, and could conjure such a splendid ediﬁce into
existence by a mere wish, I should still not trouble to do so, so long
as I had a hut there that was comfortable enough for me. All this
may be admitted and approved; only it is not the point now at issue.

Analytic of the Beautiful

37

All one wants to know is whether the mere representation of the
object is to my liking, no matter how indiﬀerent I may be to the existence of the object of this representation. It is quite plain that in order
to say that the object is beautiful, and to show that I have taste, everything turns on what I make of this representation within myself, and
not on any factor which makes me dependent on the existence of the
object. Everyone must allow that a judgement on the beautiful which
is tinged with the slightest interest, is very partial and not a pure
judgement of taste. One must not be in the least prepossessed in
favour of the existence of the thing, but must preserve complete
indiﬀerence in this respect, in order to play the part of judge in matters of taste.
This proposition, which is of the utmost importance, cannot be
better explained than by contrasting the pure disinterested2 delight
which appears in the judgement of taste with that which is allied to
an interest—especially if we can also assure ourselves that there are
no other kinds of interest beyond those presently to be mentioned.

§3
Delight in the agreeable is coupled with interest
That is agreeable which the senses ﬁnd pleasing in sensation. This at
once aﬀords a convenient opportunity for condemning and directing
particular attention to a prevalent confusion of the double meaning
of which the word ‘sensation’ is capable. All delight (so it is said or
thought) is itself sensation (of a pleasure). Consequently everything
that pleases, and for the very reason that it pleases, is agreeable—and
according to its diﬀerent degrees, or its relations to other agreeable
sensations, is attractive, charming, delicious, enjoyable, etc. But if this
is conceded, then impressions of the senses, which determine inclination, or principles of reason, which determine the will, or mere contemplated forms of intuition, which determine judgement, are all on
a par in everything relevant to their eﬀect upon the feeling of pleasure,
for this would be agreeableness in the sensation of one’s state; and since,
2 A judgement upon an object of our delight may be wholly disinterested but nonetheless very interesting, i.e. it relies on no interest, but it produces one. Of this kind are all
pure moral judgements. But, of themselves, judgements of taste do not even set up any
interest whatsoever. Only in society is it interesting to have taste—a point which will be
explained in the sequel.

206

38

207

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

in the last resort, all the elaborate work of our faculties must issue in
and unite in the practical as its goal, we could credit our faculties with
no other appreciation of things and the worth of things, than that consisting in the gratiﬁcation which they promise. How this is attained is
in the end immaterial; and, as the choice of the means is here the only
thing that can make a diﬀerence, people might indeed blame one
another for folly or imprudence, but never for baseness or wickedness;
for they are all, each according to his own way of looking at things,
pursuing one goal, which for each is the gratiﬁcation in question.
When a modiﬁcation of the feeling of pleasure or displeasure is
termed sensation, this expression is given quite a diﬀerent meaning
to that which it bears when I call the representation of a thing (through
the senses as a receptivity pertaining to the faculty of knowledge)
sensation. For in the latter case the representation is referred to the
object, but in the former it is referred solely to the subject and is not
available for any cognition, not even for that by which the subject
cognizes itself.
Now in the above deﬁnition the word sensation is used to denote
an objective representation of the senses; and, to avoid continually
running the risk of misinterpretation, we shall call that which must
always remain purely subjective, and is absolutely incapable of forming a representation of an object, by the familiar name of feeling.
The green colour of the meadows belongs to objective sensation, as
the perception of an object of the senses; but its agreeableness
belongs to subjective sensation, by which no object is represented: i.e.
to feeling, through which the object is regarded as an object of
delight (which involves no cognition of the object).
Now, that a judgement on an object by which its agreeableness
is aﬃrmed, expresses an interest in it, is evident from the fact that
through sensation it provokes a desire for similar objects, consequently the delight presupposes, not the simple judgement about it,
but the bearing its existence has upon my state so far as it is aﬀected by
such an object. Hence we do not merely say of the agreeable that it
pleases, but that it gratiﬁes. I do not accord it a simple approval,
but inclination is aroused by it, and where agreeableness is of the
liveliest type a judgement on the character of the object is so entirely
out of place, that those who are always intent only on enjoyment
(for that is the word used to denote intensity of gratiﬁcation) would
gladly dispense with all judgement.

Analytic of the Beautiful

39

§4
Delight in the good is coupled with interest
That is good which by means of reason commends itself by its
mere concept. We call that good for something (useful) which only
pleases as a means; but that which pleases on its own account we
call good in itself. In both cases the concept of an end is implied, and
consequently the relation of reason to (at least possible) willing,
and thus a delight in the existence of an object or action, i.e. some
interest or other.
To deem something good, I must always know what sort of a thing
the object is intended to be, i.e. I must have a concept of it. That is not
necessary to enable me to see beauty in something. Flowers, free patterns, lines aimlessly intertwining—technically termed foliage,—have
no signiﬁcation, depend upon no determinate concept, and yet please.
Delight in the beautiful must depend upon the reﬂection on an object
leading towards some concept or other (whatever it may be). It is
thus also diﬀerentiated from the agreeable, which rests entirely upon
sensation.
In many cases, no doubt, the agreeable and the good seem convertible
terms. Thus it is commonly said that all (especially lasting)
gratiﬁcation is of itself good; which is almost equivalent to saying
that to be permanently agreeable and to be good are identical. But
it is readily apparent that this is merely a mistaken confusion of
words, for the concepts appropriate to these expressions are far from
interchangeable. The agreeable, which, as such, represents the object
solely in relation to the senses, must ﬁrst be brought under principles
of reason through the concept of an end, to be, as an object of will,
called good. But that the reference to delight is wholly diﬀerent
where what gratiﬁes is at the same time called good, is evident from
the fact that with the good the question always is whether it is mediately or immediately good, i.e. useful or good in itself; whereas with
the agreeable this point can never arise, since the word always means
what pleases immediately—and it is just the same with what I call
beautiful.
Even in everyday speech a distinction is drawn between the
agreeable and the good. We do not scruple to say of a dish that stimulates the sense of taste with spices and other condiments that it is

208

40

209

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

agreeable—confessing all the while that it is not good: because, while
it immediately satisﬁes the senses, it is mediately displeasing, i.e. to
reason that looks ahead to the consequences. Even in our judgement
of health this same distinction may be traced. To all that possess it,
it is immediately agreeable—at least negatively, i.e. as absence of all
bodily pains. But, if we are to say that it is good, we must further
apply to reason to direct it to ends, that is, we must regard it as a state
that puts us in a congenial mood for all we have to do. Finally, in
respect of happiness everyone believes that the greatest aggregate of
the pleasures of life, taking duration as well as number into account,
merits the name of a true, indeed even of the highest, good. But
reason sets its face against this too. Agreeableness is enjoyment. But
if this is all that we are bent on, it would be foolish to be scrupulous
about the means that procure it for us—whether it be obtained passively by the bounty of nature or actively and by our own eﬀorts. But
that there is any intrinsic worth in the existence of one who merely
lives for enjoyment, however busy he may be in this respect, even
when in so doing he serves others—all equally with himself intent
only on enjoyment—as an excellent means to that one end, and does
so, moreover, because through sympathy he shares all their
gratiﬁcations,—this is a view to which reason will never let itself be
brought round. Only by what one does heedless of enjoyment, in
complete freedom and independently of what nature could passively
procure for him, does he give to his life, as the existence of a person,
an absolute worth. Happiness, with all its plethora of pleasures, is far
from being an unconditioned good.3
But, despite all this diﬀerence between the agreeable and the good,
they both agree in being invariably coupled with an interest in their
object. This is true, not only of the agreeable, § 3, and of the mediately good, i.e. the useful, which pleases as a means to some pleasure,
but also of that which is good absolutely and from every point of
view, namely the moral good which carries with it the highest interest.
For the good is the object of will, i.e. of a rationally determined faculty
of desire). But to will something, and to take a delight in its existence,
i.e. to take an interest in it, are identical.
3 An obligation to enjoyment is a patent absurdity. And the same, then, must also be
said of a supposed obligation to actions that have merely enjoyment for their aim, no
matter how spiritually this enjoyment may be reﬁned in thought (or embellished), and
even if it be a mystical, so-called heavenly, enjoyment.

Analytic of the Beautiful

41

§5
Comparison of the three speciﬁcally diﬀerent kinds of delight
Both the agreeable and the good involve a reference to the faculty
of desire, and are thus attended, the former with a delight pathologically conditioned (by stimuli), the latter with a pure practical
delight. Such delight is determined not merely by the representation
of the object, but also by the represented bond of connexion between
the subject and the existence of the object. It is not merely the object,
but also its existence, that pleases. On the other hand the judgement
of taste is simply contemplative, i.e. it is a judgement which is
indiﬀerent as to the existence of an object, and only decides how its
character stands with the feeling of pleasure and displeasure. But not
even is this contemplation itself directed to concepts; for the judgement of taste is not a cognitive judgement (neither a theoretical one
nor a practical), and hence, also, is not grounded on concepts, nor yet
intentionally directed to them.
The agreeable, the beautiful, and the good thus denote three
diﬀerent relations of representations to the feeling of pleasure and
displeasure, as a feeling in respect of which we distinguish diﬀerent
objects or modes of representation. Also, the corresponding expressions which indicate our satisfaction in them are diﬀerent. The agreeable is what gratifies us; the beautiful what simply pleases us; the
good what is esteemed (approved), i.e. that on which we set an objective worth. Agreeableness is a signiﬁcant factor even with animals
devoid of reason; beauty has purport and signiﬁcance only for human
beings, i.e. for beings at once animal and rational (but not merely for
them as rational beings—as spirits for example—but only for them
as both animal and rational); whereas the good is good for every
rational being in general;—a proposition which can only receive its
complete justiﬁcation and explanation in what follows. Of all these
three kinds of delight, that of taste in the beautiful may be said to be
the one and only disinterested and free delight; for, with it, no interest,
whether of sense or reason, extorts approval. And so we may say that
delight, in the three cases mentioned, is related to inclination, to
favour, or to respect. For favour is the only free liking. An object of
inclination, and one which a law of reason imposes upon our desire,
leaves us no freedom to turn anything into an object of pleasure.

210

42

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

All interest presupposes a need, or calls one forth; and, being a ground
determining approval, deprives the judgement on the object of its
freedom.
So far as the interest of inclination in the case of the agreeable
goes, everyone says: Hunger is the best sauce; and people with a
healthy appetite relish everything, so long as it is something they
can eat. Such delight, consequently, gives no indication of taste
having anything to do with choice. Only when people’s needs have
been satisﬁed can we tell who among the crowd has taste or not.
Similarly there may be correct habits (conduct) without virtue,
politeness without good-will, propriety without honour, etc. For
where the moral law speaks, there is, objectively, no room left for free
choice as to what one has to do; and to show taste in the way one carries out its dictates, or in judging the way others do so, is a totally
diﬀerent matter from displaying the moral frame of one’s mind. For
the latter involves a command and produces a need of something,
whereas moral taste only plays with the objects of delight without
committing itself to any.
211

definition of the beautiful derived from
the first moment
Taste is the faculty of judging an object or a mode of representation
by means of a delight or aversion apart from any interest. The object
of such a delight is called beautiful.

second moment
of the judgement of taste: moment of quantity
§6
The beautiful is that which, apart from concepts, is represented as
the object of a universal delight
This deﬁnition of the beautiful is derivable from the foregoing
deﬁnition of it as an object of delight apart from any interest. For where
anyone is conscious that his delight in an object is with him independent of interest, it is inevitable that he should judge the object as
one containing a ground of delight for all human beings. For, since

Analytic of the Beautiful

43

the delight is not based on any inclination of the subject (or on any
other deliberate interest), but the judging subject feels himself completely free in respect of the liking which he accords to the object, he
can ﬁnd as reason for his delight no personal conditions to which his
own subjective self might alone be party. Hence he must regard it as
resting on what he may also presuppose in every other person; and
therefore he must believe that he has reason for expecting a
similar delight from everyone. Accordingly he will speak of the
beautiful as if beauty were a feature of the object and the judgement
were logical (forming a cognition of the object by concepts of it);
although it is only aesthetic, and contains merely a reference of the
representation of the object to the subject;—because it still bears this
resemblance to the logical judgement, that it may be presupposed
to be valid for everyone. But this universality cannot spring from
concepts. For from concepts there is no transition to the feeling of
pleasure or displeasure (save in the case of pure practical laws, which,
however, carry an interest with them; and such an interest does not
attach to the pure judgement of taste). The result is that the judgement
of taste, with its attendant consciousness of detachment from all
interest, must involve a claim to validity for everyone, and must do
so apart from a universality directed to objects, i.e. there must be
coupled with it a claim to subjective universality.

§7
Comparison of the beautiful with the agreeable and
the good by means of the above characteristic
As regards the agreeable everyone concedes that his judgement,
which he bases on a private feeling, and in which he declares that an
object pleases him, is restricted merely to himself personally. Thus
he does not take it amiss if, when he says that Canary-wine is agreeable, another corrects the expression and reminds him that he ought
to say: It is agreeable to me. This applies not only to the taste of the
tongue, the palate, and the throat, but to what may with anyone be
agreeable to eye or ear. A violet colour is to one soft and lovely, but
to another dull and faded. One person likes the tone of wind instruments, another prefers that of string instruments. To quarrel over
such points with the idea of condemning another’s judgement as
incorrect when it diﬀers from our own, as if the opposition between

212

44

213

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

the two judgements were logical, would be folly. With the agreeable,
therefore, the principle holds good: Everyone has his own taste (that of
the senses).
The beautiful stands on quite a diﬀerent footing. It would, on the
contrary, be ridiculous if anyone who plumed himself on his taste
were to think of justifying himself by saying: This object (the building we see, the dress that person has on, the concert we hear, the
poem submitted to our judgement) is beautiful for me. For if it
merely pleases him, he must not call it beautiful. Many things may for
him possess charm and agreeableness—no one cares about that; but
when he declares something to be beautiful, he expects the same
delight from others. He judges not merely for himself, but for everyone, and then speaks of beauty as if it were a property of things. Thus
he says the thing is beautiful; and it is not as if he counted on others
agreeing in his judgement of liking owing to his having found them
in such agreement on a number of occasions, but he demands this
agreement of them. He blames them if they judge diﬀerently, and
denies them taste, which he still requires of them as something they
ought to have; and to this extent it is not open to us to say: Everyone
has his own taste. This would be equivalent to saying that there is no
such thing at all as taste, i.e. no aesthetic judgement capable of making
a rightful claim upon the assent of everyone.
Yet even in the case of the agreeable we ﬁnd that the judgements
people form do betray a prevalent agreement among them, which
leads to our crediting some with taste and denying it to others,
and that, too, not as an organic sense but as a faculty of judging in
respect of the agreeable generally. So of one who knows how to
entertain his guests with pleasures (of enjoyment through all the
senses) in such a way that one and all are pleased, we say that he has
taste. But the universality here is only understood in a comparative
sense; and the rules that apply are, like all empirical rules, general
only, not universal,—the latter being what the judgement of taste
upon the beautiful deals or claims to deal in. It is a judgement in
respect of sociability in so far as it rests on empirical rules. In respect
of the good it is true that judgements also rightly assert a claim to validity for everyone; but the good is only represented as an object of universal delight by means of a concept, which is the case neither with the
agreeable nor the beautiful.

Analytic of the Beautiful

45

§8
In a judgement of taste the universality of delight is only
represented as subjective
This particular form of the universality of an aesthetic judgement,
which is to be met with in a judgement of taste, is a remarkable feature, not for the logician certainly, but for the transcendental
philosopher. It calls for no small eﬀort on his part to discover its
origin, but in return it brings to light a property of our cognitive faculty which, without this analysis, would have remained unknown.
First, one must get ﬁrmly into one’s mind that by the judgement
of taste (upon the beautiful) the delight in an object is imputed to
everyone, yet without being grounded on a concept (for then it would
be the good), and that this claim to universality is such an essential
factor of a judgement by which we describe anything as beautiful,
that were it not for its being present to the mind it would never enter
into anyone’s head to use this expression, but everything that pleased
without a concept would be ranked as agreeable. For in respect of the
agreeable everyone is allowed to have his own opinion, and no one
insists upon others agreeing with his judgement of taste, which is
what is invariably done in the judgement of taste about beauty. The
ﬁrst of these I may call the taste of the senses, the second, the taste
of reﬂection: the ﬁrst laying down judgements merely private, the
second, on the other hand, judgements ostensibly of general (public)
validity, but both alike being aesthetic (not practical) judgements
about an object merely in respect of the bearings of its representation
on the feeling of pleasure or displeasure. Now it does seem strange
that while with the taste of the senses experience not only shows
that its judgement (of pleasure or displeasure in something) is not
universally valid, but everyone willingly refrains from imputing this
agreement to others (despite the frequent actual prevalence of a considerable consensus of general opinion even in these judgements),
the taste of reﬂection, which, as experience teaches, has often enough
to put up with a dismissal of its claims to the universal validity of
its judgement (upon the beautiful), can (as it actually does) ﬁnd it
possible for all that, to formulate judgements capable of demanding
this agreement in its universality. Such agreement it does in fact

214

46

215

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

require from everyone for each of its judgements of taste—the persons
who pass these judgements not quarrelling over the possibility of
such a claim, but only failing in particular cases to come to terms as
to the correct application of this faculty.
First of all we have here to note that a universality which does not
rest upon concepts of the object (even though these are only empirical)
is in no way logical, but aesthetic, i.e. does not involve any objective
quantity of the judgement, but only one that is subjective. For this
universality I use the expression universal validity, which denotes the
validity of the reference of a representation, not to the cognitive faculties, but to the feeling of pleasure or displeasure for every subject.
(The same expression, however, may also be employed for the logical
quantity of the judgement, provided we add objective universal validity,
to distinguish it from the merely subjective universal validity which
is always aesthetic.)
Now a judgement that has objective universal validity has always
got the subjective also, i.e. if the judgement is valid for everything
which is contained under a given concept, it is valid also for all who
represent an object by means of this concept. But from a subjective
universal validity, i.e. the aesthetic, that does not rest on any concept,
no conclusion can be drawn to the logical; because judgements of
that kind have no bearing upon the object. But for this very reason
the aesthetic universality attributed to a judgement must also be of a
special kind, seeing that it does not join the predicate of beauty to the
concept of the object taken in its entire logical sphere, and yet does
extend this predicate over the whole sphere of judging subjects.
In their logical quantity all judgements of taste are singular judgements. For, since I must present the object immediately to my feeling
of pleasure or displeasure, and that, too, without the aid of concepts,
such judgements cannot have the quantity of judgements with
objective universal validity. Yet by taking the singular representation
of the object of the judgement of taste, and by comparison converting
it into a concept according to the conditions determining that judgement, we can arrive at a logically universal judgement. For instance,
by a judgement of taste I describe the rose at which I am looking
as beautiful. The judgement, on the other hand, resulting from
the comparison of a number of singular representations: Roses in
general are beautiful, is no longer pronounced as a purely aesthetic
judgement, but as a logical judgement grounded on one that is aesthetic.

Analytic of the Beautiful

47

Now the judgement, ‘The rose is agreeable’ (to smell) is also, no
doubt, an aesthetic and singular judgement, but then it is not one of
taste but of the senses. For it has this point of diﬀerence from a
judgement of taste, that the latter imports an aesthetic quantity of
universality, i.e. of validity for everyone which is not to be met with
in a judgement upon the agreeable. It is only judgements upon the
good which, while they also determine the delight in an object, possess logical and not mere aesthetic universality; for it is as involving
a cognition of the object that they are valid of it, and on that account
valid for everyone.
When we judge objects merely on the basis of concepts, all representation of beauty goes by the board. There can, therefore, be no rule
according to which anyone is to be compelled to recognize anything
as beautiful. Whether a dress, a house, or a ﬂower is beautiful is a
matter upon which one declines to allow one’s judgement to be swayed
by any reasons or principles. We want to get a look at the object with
our own eyes, just as if our delight depended on sensation. And yet, if
upon so doing, we call the object beautiful, we believe ourselves to be
speaking with a universal voice, and lay claim to the concurrence of
everyone, whereas no private sensation would be decisive except for
the observer alone and his own liking.
Here, now, we may perceive that nothing is postulated in the judgement of taste but such a universal voice in respect of delight that is
not mediated by concepts; consequently, only the possibility of an
aesthetic judgement capable of being at the same time deemed valid
for everyone. The judgement of taste itself does not postulate the
agreement of everyone (for it is only competent for a logically universal
judgement to do this, in that it is able to bring forward reasons); it
only imputes this agreement to everyone, as an instance of the rule in
respect of which it looks for conﬁrmation, not from concepts, but
from the concurrence of others. The universal voice is, therefore,
only an idea—resting upon grounds the investigation of which is
here postponed. It may be a matter of uncertainty whether a person
who thinks he is laying down a judgement of taste is, in fact, judging
in conformity with that idea; but that this idea is what is contemplated in his judgement, and that, consequently, it is meant to be a
judgement of taste, is proclaimed by his use of the expression ‘beauty’.
For himself he can be certain on the point from his mere consciousness
of the separation of everything belonging to the agreeable and the

216

48

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

good from the delight remaining to him; and this is all for which he
promises himself the agreement of everyone—a claim which, under
these conditions, he would also be warranted in making, were it not
that he frequently violated them, and thus passed an erroneous
judgement of taste.

§9
Investigation of the question of whether in a judgement
of taste the feeling of pleasure precedes the judging of the
object or the latter precedes the former

217

The solution of this problem is the key to the critique of taste, and
so is worthy of all attention.
If the pleasure in a given object came ﬁrst and if the universal
communicability of this pleasure were all that the judgement of taste
is meant to allow to the representation of the object, this approach
would be self-contradictory. For a pleasure of that kind would be
nothing but the feeling of mere agreeableness to the senses, and so,
from its very nature, would possess no more than private validity,
seeing that it would be immediately dependent on the representation
through which the object is given.
Hence it is the universal capacity for being communicated incident
to the state of the mind in the given representation which, as the
subjective condition of the judgement of taste, must underlie the latter,
with the pleasure in the object as its consequence. Nothing, however,
is capable of being universally communicated but cognition and representation in so far as it pertains to cognition. For it is only as thus
pertaining that the representation is objective, and it is this alone that
gives it a universal point of reference with which the power of representation of everyone is obliged to harmonize. If, then, the determining ground of the judgement as to this universal communicability of
the representation is to be merely subjective, that is to say, is to be
conceived independently of any concept of the object, it can be nothing else than the state of the mind that presents itself in the mutual
relation of the powers of representation so far as they refer a given
representation to cognition in general.
The cognitive powers brought into play by this representation are
here engaged in a free play, since no determinate concept restricts
them to a particular rule of cognition. Hence the state of the mind in

Analytic of the Beautiful

49

this representation must be one of a feeling of the free play of the
powers of representation in a given representation for a cognition in
general. Now a representation, whereby an object is given, involves,
in order that it may become a source of cognition at all, imagination
for bringing together the manifold of intuition, and understanding for
the unity of the concept uniting the representations. This state of free
play of the cognitive faculties attending a representation by which an
object is given must admit of universal communication: because
cognition, as a deﬁnition of the object with which given representations (in any subject whatever) are to accord, is the one and only
representation which is valid for everyone.
As the subjective universal communicability of the mode of
representation in a judgement of taste is to obtain apart from the
presupposition of any determinate concept, it can be nothing else
than the state of the mind involved in the free play of imagination
and understanding (so far as these are in mutual accord, as is requisite for cognition in general): for we are conscious that this subjective
relation suitable for a cognition in general must be just as valid for
everyone, and consequently as universally communicable, as is any
determinate cognition, which always rests upon that relation as its
subjective condition.
Now this purely subjective (aesthetic) judging of the object, or of
the representation through which it is given, is antecedent to the
pleasure in it, and is the basis of this pleasure in the harmony of
the cognitive faculties. Again, the above-described universality of the
subjective conditions of judging objects forms the sole foundation of
this universal subjective validity of the delight which we connect
with the representation of the object that we call beautiful.
That an ability to communicate one’s state of mind, even though
it be only in respect of our cognitive faculties, is attended with a pleasure, is a fact which might easily be demonstrated from the natural
propensity of mankind to social life, i.e. empirically and psychologically. But what we have here in view calls for something more than
this. In a judgement of taste the pleasure felt by us is expected from
everyone else as necessary, just as if, when we call something beautiful, beauty was to be regarded as a quality of the object forming part
of its inherent determination according to concepts; although beauty
is for itself, apart from any reference to the feeling of the subject,
nothing. But the discussion of this question must be reserved until

218

50

219

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

we have answered the further one of whether, and how, aesthetic
judgements are possible a priori.
At present we are exercised with the lesser question of the way in
which we become conscious, in a judgement of taste, of a reciprocal
subjective common accord of the powers of cognition. Is it aesthetically by sensation and our mere inner sense? Or is it intellectually by
consciousness of our intentional activity in bringing these powers
into play?
Now if the given representation occasioning the judgement of
taste were a concept which united understanding and imagination in
the judgement of the object so as to give a cognition of the object, the
consciousness of this relation would be intellectual (as in the objective schematism of judgement dealt with in the Critique). But, then,
in that case the judgement would not be laid down with respect to
pleasure and displeasure, and so would not be a judgement of taste.
But, now, the judgement of taste determines the object, independently of concepts, in respect of delight and of the predicate of beauty.
There is, therefore, no other way for the subjective unity of the
relation in question to make itself known than by sensation. The
enlivening of both faculties (imagination and understanding) to an
indeterminate, but yet, thanks to the given representation, harmonious
activity, such as belongs to cognition generally, is the sensation whose
universal communicability is postulated by the judgement of taste.
An objective relation can, of course, only be thought, yet in so far
as, in respect of its conditions, it is subjective, it may be felt in its
eﬀect upon the mind, and, in the case of a relation (like that of the
powers of representation to a faculty of cognition generally) which
does not rest on any concept, no other consciousness of it is possible
beyond that through the sensation of its eﬀect upon the mind—
an eﬀect consisting in the more lightened play of both mental
powers (imagination and understanding) as enlivened by their mutual
accord. A representation which is singular and independent of
comparison with other representations, and, being such, yet accords
with the conditions of the universality that is the general concern of
understanding, is one that brings the cognitive faculties into that
proportionate accord which we require for all cognition and which
we therefore deem valid for everyone who is so constituted as to
judge by means of understanding and the senses in combination
(i.e. for everyone).

Analytic of the Beautiful

51

definition of the beautiful drawn from
the second moment
The beautiful is that which, apart from a concept, pleases universally.

third moment
of judgements of taste: moment of
the RELATION of the ends brought under
review in such judgements
§ 10
Purposiveness in general
Let us deﬁne the meaning of ‘an end’ in transcendental terms (i.e.
without presupposing anything empirical, such as the feeling of
pleasure). An end is the object of a concept so far as this concept is
regarded as the cause of the object (the real ground of its possibility);
and the causality of a concept in respect of its object is purposiveness
( forma ﬁnalis). Where, then, not the cognition of an object merely,
but the object itself (its form or real existence) as an eﬀect, is thought
to be possible only through a concept of it, there we imagine an end.
The representation of the eﬀect is here the determining ground of
its cause and precedes the latter. The consciousness of the causality
of a representation in respect of the state of the subject as one tending to preserve a continuance of that state, may here be said to denote
in a general way what is called pleasure; whereas displeasure is that
representation which contains the ground for converting the state of
the representations into their opposite (for hindering or removing
them).
The faculty of desire, so far as it is determinable only through
concepts, i.e. so as to act in conformity with the representation of an
end, would be the will. But an object, or state of mind, or even an
action may, although its possibility does not necessarily presuppose
the representation of an end, be called purposive simply on account of
its possibility being only explicable and intelligible for us by virtue
of an assumption on our part of a fundamental causality according
to ends, i.e. a will that would have so ordained it according to a

220

52

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

certain represented rule. Purposiveness, therefore, may exist apart
from a purpose, in so far as we do not locate the causes of this form
in a will, but yet are able to render the explanation of its possibility
intelligible to ourselves only by deriving it from a will. Now we are
not always obliged to look with the eye of reason into what we observe
(i.e. to consider it in its possibility). So we may at least observe a
purposiveness with respect to form, and trace it in objects—though
by reﬂection only—without resting it on an end (as the material of
the nexus ﬁnalis).
221

§ 11
The sole foundation of the judgement of taste is the form of
purposiveness of an object (or mode of representing it)
Whenever an end is regarded as a source of delight it always imports
an interest as determining ground of the judgement on the object of
pleasure. Hence the judgement of taste cannot rest on any subjective
end as its ground. But neither can any representation of an objective
end, i.e. of the possibility of the object itself on principles of purposive connexion, determine the judgement of taste, and, consequently,
neither can any concept of the good. For the judgement of taste is an
aesthetic and not a cognitive judgement, and so does not deal with
any concept of the character or of the internal or external possibility,
by this or that cause, of the object, but simply with the relation of the
powers of representation to one another in so far as they are determined by a representation.
Now this relation, present when an object is characterized as beautiful, is coupled with the feeling of pleasure. This pleasure is by the
judgement of taste pronounced valid for everyone; hence an agreeableness attending the representation is just as incapable of containing the determining ground of the judgement as the representation
of the perfection of the object or the concept of the good. We are thus
left with the subjective purposiveness in the representation of an
object, exclusive of any end (objective or subjective)—consequently
the bare form of purposiveness in the representation whereby an
object is given to us, so far as we are conscious of it—as that which
is alone capable of constituting the delight which, apart from any
concept, we judge as universally communicable, and so of forming
the determining ground of the judgement of taste.

Analytic of the Beautiful

53

§ 12
The judgement of taste rests upon a priori grounds
To determine a priori the connexion of the feeling of pleasure or displeasure as an eﬀect, with some representation or other (sensation or
concept) as its cause, is utterly impossible; for that would be a causal
relation which (with objects of experience) is always one that can
only be cognized a posteriori and with the help of experience. True,
in the Critique of Practical Reason we did actually derive a priori from
universal moral concepts the feeling of respect (as a particular and
peculiar modiﬁcation of this feeling which does not strictly answer
either to the pleasure or displeasure which we receive from empirical objects). But there we were further able to pass beyond the limits
of experience and call in aid a causality resting on a supersensible
attribute of the subject, namely that of freedom. But even there it
was not this feeling exactly that we deduced from the idea of the
moral as cause, but from this was derived simply the determination
of the will. But the mental state of a will determined by anything
whatsoever is already in itself a feeling of pleasure and identical with
it, and so does not issue from the latter as an eﬀect. Such an eﬀect
must only be assumed where the concept of the moral as a good precedes the determination of the will by the law; for in that case it
would be futile to derive the pleasure combined with the concept
from this concept as a mere cognition.
Now the pleasure in aesthetic judgements stands on a similar
footing: only that here it is merely contemplative and does not bring
about an interest in the object; whereas in the moral judgement it is
practical. The consciousness of mere formal purposiveness in the
play of the cognitive faculties of the subject attending a representation whereby an object is given, is the pleasure itself, because it
involves a determining ground of the subject’s activity in respect of
the enlivening of its cognitive powers, and thus an internal causality
(which is purposive) in respect of cognition generally, but without
being limited to any determinate cognition, and consequently a mere
form of the subjective purposiveness of a representation in an aesthetic judgement. This pleasure is also in no way practical, neither
resembling that from the pathological ground of agreeableness nor
that from the intellectual ground of the represented good. But still it

222

54

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

involves an inherent causality, that, namely, of preserving a continuance
of the state of the representation itself and the active engagement of the
cognitive powers without ulterior aim. We dwell on the contemplation
of the beautiful because this contemplation strengthens and reproduces itself. The case is analogous (but analogous only) to the way we
dwell upon a charm in the representation of an object which keeps
arresting the attention, the mind all the while remaining passive.
223

§ 13
The pure judgement of taste is independent of charm and emotion
Every interest vitiates the judgement of taste and robs it of its
impartiality. This is especially so where instead of, like the interest
of reason, allowing purposiveness to precede the feeling of pleasure,
it grounds it upon this feeling—which is what always happens in
aesthetic judgements upon anything so far as it gratiﬁes or pains.
Hence judgements so inﬂuenced can either lay no claim at all to a
universally valid delight, or else must diminish their claim in proportion as sensations of the kind in question enter into the determining
grounds of taste. Taste that requires an added element of charm and
emotion for its delight, not to speak of adopting this as the measure of
its approval, has not yet emerged from barbarism.
And yet charms are frequently not only ranked with beauty (which
ought properly to be a question merely of the form) as contributory
to the aesthetic universal delight, but they have been accredited as
beauties in themselves, and consequently the matter of delight
passed oﬀ for the form. This is a misconception which, like many
others that have still an underlying element of truth, may be removed
by a careful deﬁnition of these concepts.
A judgement of taste which is uninﬂuenced by charm or emotion,
(though these may be associated with the delight in the beautiful),
and whose determining ground, therefore, is simply purposiveness
of form, is a pure judgement of taste.

§ 14
Elucidation by means of examples
Aesthetic, just like theoretical (logical) judgements, are divisible
into empirical and pure. The ﬁrst are those by which agreeableness

Analytic of the Beautiful

55

or disagreeableness, the second those by which beauty, is predicated
of an object or its mode of representation. The former are judgements
of the senses (material aesthetic judgements), the latter (as formal)
alone judgements of taste proper.
A judgement of taste, therefore, is only pure so far as its determining
ground is commingled with no merely empirical delight. But this
always transpires where charm or emotion have a share in the judgement by which something is to be described as beautiful.
Here now there is a recrudescence of a number of specious objections that go so far as to claim that charm is not merely a necessary
ingredient of beauty, but is even of itself suﬃcient to merit the
name of beautiful. A mere colour, such as the green of a plot of grass,
or a mere tone (as distinguished from sound or noise), like that of a
violin, is described by most people as in itself beautiful, notwithstanding the fact that both seem to depend merely on the matter of
the representations—in other words, simply on sensation, which
only entitles them to be called agreeable. But it will at the same time
be observed that sensations of colour as well as of tone are only
entitled to be immediately regarded as beautiful where, in either case,
they are pure. This is a determination which directly concerns their
form, and it is the only one which these representations possess that
admits with certainty of being universally communicated. For it is
not to be assumed that even the quality of the sensations agrees in all
subjects, and we can hardly take it for granted that the agreeableness
of a colour, or of the tone of a musical instrument, which we judge to
be preferable to that of another, will be similarly judged by everyone.
Assuming with Euler* that colours are isochronous vibrations
( pulsus) of the aether, as tones are of the air set in vibration by sound,
and, what is most important, that the mind not only perceives by the
senses their eﬀect in stimulating the organs, but also, by reﬂection,
the regular play of the impressions (and consequently the form in
which diﬀerent representations are united)—which I, still, in no way
doubt—then colour and tone would not be mere sensations. They
would be nothing short of formal determinations of the unity of a
manifold of sensations, and in that case could even be ranked as
beauties in their own right.
But the purity of a simple mode of sensation means that its uniformity is not disturbed or broken by any foreign sensation. It belongs
merely to the form; for abstraction may there be made from the

224

56

225

226

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

quality of the mode of such sensation (what colour or tone, if any, it
represents). For this reason all simple colours are regarded as beautiful in so far as they are pure. Composite colours do not possess this
advantage because, not being simple, there is no standard for judging whether they should be called pure or impure.
But as for the beauty ascribed to the object on account of its
form, and the supposition that it is capable of being enhanced by
charm, this is a common error and one very prejudicial to genuine,
uncorrupted, sincere taste. Nevertheless charms may be added to
beauty to lend to the mind, beyond a bare delight, a further interest
in the representation of the object, and thus to advocate taste and
its cultivation. This applies especially where taste is as yet crude
and untrained. But they are positively subversive of the judgement
of taste, if allowed to obtrude themselves as grounds of judging
beauty. For so far are they from contributing to beauty, that it is only
where taste is still weak and untrained, that, like aliens, they are
admitted as a favour, and only on terms that they do not disturb that
beautiful form.
In painting, sculpture, and in fact in all the formative arts, in
architecture and horticulture, in so far as they are ﬁne arts, the design
is what is essential. Here it is not what gratiﬁes in sensation but
merely what pleases by its form, that is the fundamental prerequisite
for taste. The colours which give brilliancy to the sketch are part of
the charm. They may no doubt, in their own way, enliven the object
for sensation, but make it really worth looking at and beautiful they
cannot. Indeed, more often than not the requirements of the beautiful form restrict them to a very narrow compass, and, even where
charm is admitted, it is only this form that serves to ennoble them.
All form of objects of the senses (both of outer and also, mediately,
of inner sense) is either ﬁgure or play. In the latter case it is either
play of ﬁgures (in space: mime and dance), or mere play of sensations
(in time). The charm of colours, or of the agreeable tones of instruments, may be added: but the design in the former and the composition
in the latter constitute the proper object of the pure judgement of
taste. To say that the purity alike of colours and of tones, or their variety and contrast, seem to contribute to beauty, is by no means to imply
that, because in themselves agreeable, they therefore yield an addition
to the delight in the form and one on a par with it. The real meaning
rather is that they make this form more clearly, deﬁnitely, and

Analytic of the Beautiful

57

completely perceptible, and besides enliven the representation by
their charm, as they excite and sustain the attention directed to the
object itself.
Even what is called ornamentation ( parerga), i.e. what is only an
adjunct, and not an intrinsic constituent in the complete representation of the object, in augmenting the delight of taste does so only by
means of its form. Thus it is with the frames of pictures or the drapery on statues, or the colonnades of palaces. But if the ornamentation
does not itself enter into the composition of the beautiful form—if it
is introduced like a gold frame merely to win approval for the picture
by means of its charm—it is then called ﬁnery and takes away from
the genuine beauty.
Emotion—a sensation where an agreeable feeling is produced
merely by means of a momentary check followed by a more powerful
outpouring of the vital force—is quite foreign to beauty. Sublimity
(with which the feeling of emotion is connected) requires, however,
a diﬀerent standard of judging from that which underlies taste. A
pure judgement of taste has, then, for its determining ground neither
charm nor emotion, in a word, no sensation as matter of the aesthetic
judgement.

§ 15
The judgement of taste is entirely independent of the concept
of perfection
Objective purposiveness can only be cognized by means of a reference
of the manifold to a determinate end, and hence only through a concept.
This alone makes it clear that the beautiful, which is judged on the
ground of a mere formal purposiveness, i.e. a purposiveness without
a purpose, is wholly independent of the representation of the good.
For the latter presupposes an objective purposiveness, i.e. the
reference of the object to a determinate end.
Objective purposiveness is either external, i.e. the utility, or internal,
i.e. the perfection, of the object. That the delight in an object on account
of which we call it beautiful is incapable of resting on the representation
of its utility, is abundantly evident from the two preceding moments;
for in that case, it would not be an immediate delight in the object,
which latter is the essential condition of the judgement upon beauty.
But in an objective, internal purposiveness, i.e. perfection, we have

227

58

228

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

what is more akin to the predicate of beauty, and so this has been held
even by philosophers of reputation to be convertible with beauty,
though subject to the qualiﬁcation: where it is thought in a confused way.
In a critique of taste it is of the utmost importance to decide whether
beauty is really reducible to the concept of perfection.
For judging objective purposiveness we always require the concept
of an end, and, where such purposiveness has to be, not an external
one (utility), but an internal one, the concept of an internal end containing the ground of the internal possibility of the object. Now an
end is in general that, the concept of which may be regarded as the
ground of the possibility of the object itself. So in order to represent
an objective purposiveness in a thing we must ﬁrst have a concept of
what sort of a thing it is to be. The agreement of the manifold in a
thing with this concept (which supplies the rule of its synthesis) is
the qualitative perfection of the thing. Quantitative perfection is
entirely distinct from this. It consists in the completeness of anything
after its kind, and is a mere concept of quantity (of totality). In its
case the question of what the thing is to be is regarded as deﬁnitely disposed of, and we only ask whether it is possessed of all the requisites
that go to make it such. What is formal in the representation of a
thing, i.e. the agreement of its manifold with a unity (i.e. irrespective
of what it is to be) does not, of itself, aﬀord us any cognition whatsoever of objective purposiveness. For since abstraction is made from
this unity as end (what the thing is to be) nothing is left but the subjective purposiveness of the representations in the mind of the subject intuiting. This gives a certain purposiveness of the representing
state of the subject, in which the subject feels itself quite at home in
its eﬀort to grasp a given form in the imagination, but no perfection
of any object, the latter not being here thought through any concept
of an end. For instance, if in a forest I light upon a plot of grass,
round which trees stand in a circle, and if I do not then form any
representation of an end, such as that it is meant to be used, say, for
country dances, then not the least hint of a concept of perfection is
given by the mere form. To suppose a formal objective purposiveness
that is yet devoid of any purpose, i.e. the mere form of a perfection
(apart from any matter or concept of that with which it is to agree,
even though there was the mere general idea of a conformity to law)
is a veritable contradiction.

Analytic of the Beautiful

59

Now the judgement of taste is an aesthetic judgement, i.e. one
resting on subjective grounds. No concept can be its determining
ground, and hence not one of a determinate end. Beauty, therefore,
as a formal subjective purposiveness, involves no thought whatsoever
of a perfection of the object, as a would-be formal purposiveness
which yet, for all that, is objective: and the distinction between the
concepts of the beautiful and the good, which represents both as
diﬀering only in their logical form, the ﬁrst being merely a confused,
the second a clearly deﬁned, concept of perfection, while otherwise
alike in content and origin, all goes for nothing: for then there would
be no speciﬁc diﬀerence between them, but the judgement of taste
would be just as much a cognitive judgement as one by which something is described as good—just as the man in the street, when he
says that deceit is wrong, bases his judgement on confused, but
the philosopher on clear grounds, while both appeal in reality to
the same principles of reason. But I have already stated that an aesthetic judgement is quite unique, and aﬀords absolutely no (not even
a confused) knowledge of the object. It is only through a logical
judgement that we get knowledge. The aesthetic judgement, on
the other hand, refers the representation, by which an object is given,
solely to the subject, and brings to our notice no character of
the object, but only the purposive form in the determination of the
powers of representation engaged upon it. The judgement is called
aesthetic for the very reason that its determining ground cannot be a
concept, but is rather the feeling (of inner sense) of the concerted
play of the mental powers as something only capable of being felt. If,
on the other hand, confused concepts, and the objective judgement
based on them, are going to be called aesthetic, we shall ﬁnd
ourselves with an understanding judging by sense, or a sense representing its objects by concepts—a mere choice of contradictions.
The faculty of concepts, whether they be confused or clear, is
understanding; and although understanding has (as in all judgements) its rôle in the judgement of taste, as an aesthetic judgement,
its rôle there is not that of a faculty for cognizing an object, but of
a faculty for determining that judgement and its representation
(without a concept) according to its relation to the subject and its
inner feeling, and for doing so in so far as that judgement is possible
according to a universal rule.

229

60

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

§ 16
A judgement of taste by which an object is described as beautiful
under the condition of a determinate concept is not pure

230

There are two kinds of beauty: free beauty (pulchritudo vaga), or
beauty which is merely dependent (pulchritudo adhaerens). The ﬁrst
presupposes no concept of what the object should be; the second
does presuppose such a concept and, with it, an answering perfection
of the object. Those of the ﬁrst kind are said to be (self-subsisting)
beauties of this thing or that thing; the other kind of beauty, being
attached to a concept (conditioned beauty), is ascribed to objects
which come under the concept of a particular end.
Flowers are free beauties of nature. Hardly anyone but a botanist
knows the true nature of a ﬂower, and even he, while recognizing in
the ﬂower the reproductive organ of the plant, pays no attention to
this natural end when using his taste to judge of its beauty. Hence no
perfection of any kind—no internal purposiveness, as something to
which the arrangement of the manifold is related—underlies this
judgement. Many birds (the parrot, the humming-bird, the bird of
paradise), and a number of marine crustacea, are self-subsisting
beauties which have nothing to do with any object deﬁned with
respect to its end, but please freely and on their own account. So
designs à la grecque,* foliage for framework or on wall-papers, etc.,
have no intrinsic meaning; they represent nothing—no object under
a determinate concept—and are free beauties. We may also rank in
the same class what in music are called fantasias (without a theme),
and, indeed, all music that is not set to words.
In the judgement of a free beauty (according to mere form) we
have the pure judgement of taste. No concept is here presupposed of
any end for which the manifold should serve the given object, and
which the latter, therefore, should represent—an incumbrance
which would only restrict the freedom of the imagination that, as it
were, is at play in the contemplation of the outward form.
But the beauty of man (including under this head that of a man,
woman, or child), the beauty of a horse, or of a building (such as a
church, palace, arsenal, or summer-house), presupposes a concept of
the end that deﬁnes what the thing has to be, and consequently a concept of its perfection; and is therefore merely adherent beauty. Now, just

Analytic of the Beautiful

61

as it hinders the purity of the judgement of taste to have the agreeable
(of sensation) joined with beauty to which properly only the form is
relevant, so to combine the good with beauty (the good, namely, of the
manifold to the thing itself according to its end) mars its purity.
Much might be added to a building that would immediately please
the eye, were it not intended for a church. A ﬁgure might be
beautiﬁed with all manner of ﬂourishes and light but regular lines, as
is done by the New Zealanders with their tattooing, were we dealing
with anything but the ﬁgure of a human being. And here is one
whose rugged features might be softened and given a more pleasing
countenance, only he has got to be a man, or is, perhaps, a warrior
that has to have a warlike appearance.
Now the delight in the manifold of a thing, in reference to the
internal end that determines its possibility, is a delight based on a
concept, whereas delight in the beautiful is such as does not presuppose any concept, but is immediately coupled with the representation through which the object is given (not through which it is
thought). If, now, the judgement of taste in respect of the latter
delight is made dependent upon the end involved in the former
delight as a judgement of reason, and is thus placed under a restriction, then it is no longer a free and pure judgement of taste.
Taste, it is true, stands to gain by this combination of intellectual
delight with the aesthetic. For it becomes ﬁxed, and, while not universal, it enables rules to be prescribed for it in respect of certain
purposively determined objects. But these rules are then not rules of
taste, but merely rules for establishing a union of taste with reason, i.e.
of the beautiful with the good—rules by which the former becomes
available as an intentional instrument in respect of the latter, for the
purpose of bringing that temper of the mind which is self-sustaining
and of subjective universal validity to the support and maintenance
of that mode of thought which, while possessing objective universal
validity, can only be preserved by a resolute eﬀort. But, strictly
speaking, perfection neither gains by beauty, nor beauty by perfection. The truth is rather this, when we compare the representation
through which an object is given to us with the object (in respect of
what it is meant to be) by means of a concept, we cannot help reviewing it also in respect of the sensation in the subject. Hence there
results a gain to the entire faculty of our power of representation
when harmony prevails between both states of mind.

231

62

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

In respect of an object with a determinate internal end, a judgement of taste would only be pure where the person judging either has
no concept of this end, or else makes abstraction from it in his judgement. But in cases like this, although such a person should lay down
a correct judgement of taste, since he would be judging the object as
a free beauty, he would still be censured by another who saw nothing in its beauty but a dependent quality (i.e. who looked to the end
of the object) and would be accused by him of false taste, though
both would, in their own way, be judging correctly: the one according to what he had present to his senses, the other according to what
was present in his thoughts. This distinction enables us to settle
many disputes about beauty on the part of critics; for we may show
them how one side is dealing with free beauty, and the other with
that which is dependent: the former making a pure judgement of
taste, the latter an applied judgement taste.

§ 17
The ideal of beauty

232

There can be no objective rule of taste by which what is beautiful
may be deﬁned by means of concepts. For every judgement from that
source is aesthetic, i.e. its determining ground is the feeling of the
subject, and not any concept of an object. It is merely wasted labour
to look for a principle of taste that aﬀords a universal criterion of the
beautiful by determinate concepts; because what is sought is something impossible and inherently contradictory. But in the universal
communicability of the sensation (of delight or aversion)—a communicability, too, that exists apart from any concept—in the accord, so
far as possible, of all ages and nations as to this feeling in the representation of certain objects, we have the empirical criterion, weak
indeed and scarce suﬃcient to raise a presumption, of the derivation
of a taste, thus conﬁrmed by examples, from a deep-seated ground,
one shared alike by all human beings, underlying their agreement in
judging the forms under which objects are given to them.
For this reason some products of taste are looked on as
exemplary—not meaning thereby that by imitating others taste may
be acquired. For taste must be an intrinsically original faculty;
whereas one who imitates a model, while showing skill commensurate with his success, only displays taste in so far as he judges this

Analytic of the Beautiful

63

model himself.4 Hence it follows that the highest model, the archetype of taste, is a mere idea, which each person must produce in his
own consciousness, and according to which he must form his judgement of everything that is an object of taste, or that is an example of
critical taste, and even of universal taste itself. Properly speaking, an
idea signiﬁes a concept of reason, and an ideal the representation of
an individual existence as adequate to an idea. Hence this archetype
of taste—which rests, indeed, upon reason’s indeterminate idea of a
maximum, but is not, however, capable of being represented by
means of concepts, but only in an individual presentation—may
more appropriately be called the ideal of the beautiful. While not
having this ideal in our possession, we still strive to produce it within
us. But it is bound to be merely an ideal of the imagination, seeing
that it rests, not upon concepts, but upon the presentation—the
faculty of presentation being the imagination.—Now, how do we
arrive at such an ideal of beauty? Is it a priori or empirically? Further,
what species of the beautiful admits of an ideal?
First of all, we do well to observe that the beauty for which an ideal
has to be sought cannot be a beauty that is free and at large, but must
be one ﬁxed by a concept of objective purposiveness. Hence it cannot
belong to the object of an altogether pure judgement of taste, but
must attach to one that is partly intellectual. In other words, whatever kind of grounds there may be for judging an ideal, there must
be some underlying idea of reason according to determinate concepts, by which the end underlying the internal possibility of the
object is determined a priori. An ideal of beautiful ﬂowers, of a beautiful suite of furniture, or of a beautiful view, is unthinkable. But, it
may also be impossible to represent an ideal of a beauty dependent
on determinate ends, e.g. a beautiful residence, a beautiful tree, a
beautiful garden, etc., presumably because their ends are not
suﬃciently deﬁned and ﬁxed by their concept, with the result that
their purposiveness is nearly as free as with beauty that is quite at
large. Only what has in itself the end of its existence—only the
human being that is able himself to determine his ends by reason, or,
4 Models of taste with respect to the arts of speech must be composed in a dead and
learned language; the ﬁrst, to prevent their having to suﬀer the changes that inevitably overtake living ones, making digniﬁed expressions become degraded, common ones antiquated,
and ones newly created after a short period of time obsolete; the second to ensure its having
a grammar that is not subject to the caprices of fashion, but has ﬁxed rules of its own.

233

64

234

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

where he has to derive them from external perception, can still
compare them with essential and universal ends, and then further
pronounce aesthetically upon their accord with such ends, only this,
among all objects in the world, admits, therefore, of an ideal of
beauty, just as humanity in his person, as intelligence, alone admits
of the ideal of perfection.
Two factors are here involved. First, there is the aesthetic normal
idea, which is an individual intuition (of the imagination). This represents the norm by which we judge a human being as a member of
a particular animal species. Secondly, there is the rational idea. This
deals with the ends of humanity so far as they are incapable of sensuous representation, and converts them into a principle for judging
his outward form, through which these ends are revealed in their
phenomenal eﬀect. The normal idea must draw from experience the
constituents which it requires for the form of an animal of a particular kind. But the greatest purposiveness in the construction of this
form—that which would serve as a universal norm for the aesthetic
judging of each individual of the species in question—the image
that, as it were, forms an intentional basis underlying the technic of
nature, to which no separate individual, but only the species as a whole,
is adequate, has its seat merely in the idea of the judging subject. Yet
it is, with all its proportions, an aesthetic idea, and, as such, capable
of being fully presented in concreto in a model image. Now, how is this
eﬀected? In order to render the process to some extent intelligible
(for who can wrest nature’s whole secret from her?), let us attempt a
psychological explanation.
It is of note that the imagination, in a manner quite incomprehensible to us, is able on occasion, even after a long lapse of time, not only
to recall the signs for concepts, but also to reproduce the image and
shape of an object out of a countless number of others of a diﬀerent,
or even of the very same, kind. And, further, if the mind is engaged
upon comparisons, we may well suppose that it can in actual fact,
though the process is partly unconscious, superimpose as it were
one image upon another, and from the coincidence of a number of
the same kind arrive at a mean contour which serves as a common
standard for all. Say, for instance, a person has seen a thousand
full-grown men. Now if he wishes to judge normal size determined
upon a comparative estimate, then imagination (to my mind) allows

Analytic of the Beautiful

65

a great number of these images (perhaps the whole thousand) to fall
one upon the other, and, if I may be allowed to extend to the case the
analogy of optical presentation, in the space where they come most
preponderantly together, and within the contour where the place is
illuminated by the greatest concentration of colour, one gets a perception of the average size, which alike in height and breadth is
equally removed from the extreme limits of the greatest and smallest
statures; and this is the stature of a beautiful man. (The same result
could be obtained in a mechanical way, by taking the measures of all
the thousand, and adding together their heights, and their breadths
(and thicknesses), and dividing the sum in each case by a thousand.)
But the power of imagination does all this by means of a dynamical
eﬀect upon the organ of inner sense, arising from the frequent apprehension of such forms. If, again, for our average man we seek on similar lines for the average head, and for this the average nose, and so
on, then we get the ﬁgure that underlies the normal idea of a beautiful man in the country where the comparison is instituted. For this
reason a black man must necessarily (under these empirical conditions) have a diﬀerent normal idea of the beauty of forms from what
a white man has, and the Chinese person one diﬀerent from the
European. And the process would be just the same with the model of
a beautiful horse or dog (of a particular breed).—This normal idea is
not derived from proportions taken from experience as determinate
rules: rather it is according to this idea that rules for judging ﬁrst
become possible. It is something intermediate between all singular
intuitions of individuals, with their manifold variations—a ﬂoating
image for the whole genus, which nature has set as an archetype
underlying those of her products that belong to the same species, but
which in no single case she seems to have completely attained. But
the normal idea is far from giving the complete archetype of beauty in
the genus. It only gives the form that constitutes the indispensable
condition of all beauty, and, consequently, only correctness in the presentation of the genus. It is, as the famous Doryphorus of Polycletus
was called, the rule (and Myron’s Cow* might be similarly employed
for its kind). It cannot, for that very reason, contain anything
speciﬁcally characteristic; for otherwise it would not be the normal
idea for the genus. Further, it is not by beauty that its presentation
pleases, but merely because it does not contradict any of the conditions

235

66

236

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

under which alone a thing belonging to this genus can be beautiful.
The presentation is merely academically correct.5
But the ideal of the beautiful is still something diﬀerent from its
normal idea. For reasons already stated it is only to be sought in the
human ﬁgure. Here the ideal consists in the expression of the moral,
apart from which the object would not please at once universally and
positively (not merely negatively in a presentation that is academically correct). The visible expression of moral ideas that govern
the human being inwardly can, of course, only be drawn from
experience; but their combination with all that our reason connects
with the morally good in the idea of the highest purposiveness—
benevolence, purity, strength, or equanimity, etc.—may be made, as
it were, visible in bodily manifestation (as eﬀect of what is internal),
and this embodiment involves a union of pure ideas of reason and
great imaginative power, in one who would even form a judgement
of it, not to speak of being the author of its presentation. The correctness of such an ideal of beauty is evidenced by its not permitting any
sensuous charm to mingle with the delight in its object, in which it
still allows us to take a great interest. This fact in turn shows that
judging according to such a standard can never be purely aesthetic,
and that judging according to an ideal of beauty cannot be a simple
judgement of taste.

definition of the beautiful derived
from this third moment
Beauty is the form of purposiveness in an object, so far as this is
perceived in it apart from the representation of an end.6
5 It will be found that a perfectly regular face—one that a painter might ﬁx his
eye on for a model—ordinarily conveys nothing. This is because it is devoid of anything characteristic, and so the idea of the species is expressed in it rather than the
speciﬁc qualities of a person. The exaggeration of what is characteristic in this way,
i.e. exaggeration violating the normal idea (the purposiveness of the species), is called
caricature. Also experience shows that these quite regular faces indicate as a rule only
an inwardly mediocre human being; presumably—if one may assume that nature in
its external form expresses the proportions of the inner—because, where none of
the mental qualities exceed the proportion requisite to constitute an individual free
from faults, nothing can be expected in the way of what is called genius, in which nature
seems to make a departure from its usual relations of the mental powers in favour of
some special one.
6 As telling against this explanation, the instance may be adduced, that there are
things in which we see a form suggesting adaptation to an end, without any end being
cognized in them—as, for example, the stone implements frequently obtained from

Analytic of the Beautiful

67

fourth moment
of the judgement of taste: moment of
the modality of the delight in the object
§ 18
Character of the modality in a judgement of taste
I may assert in the case of every representation that the connection of
a pleasure with the representation (as a cognition) is at least possible.
Of what I call agreeable I assert that it actually causes pleasure in me.
But what we have in mind in the case of the beautiful is a necessary
reference on its part to delight. However, this necessity is of a special
kind. It is not a theoretical objective necessity—such as would let us
cognize a priori that everyone will feel this delight in the object that
is called beautiful by me. Nor yet is it a practical necessity, in which
case, thanks to concepts of a pure rational will in which free agents
are supplied with a rule, this delight is the necessary consequence of
an objective law, and simply means that one ought absolutely (without ulterior aim) to act in a certain way. Rather, being such a necessity as is thought in an aesthetic judgement, it can only be termed
exemplary. In other words it is a necessity of the assent of all to a
judgement regarded as exemplifying a universal rule which cannot
be formulated. Since an aesthetic judgement is not an objective or
cognitive judgement, this necessity is not derivable from determinate
concepts, and so is not apodictic. Much less is it inferable from the
universality of experience (of a complete agreement of judgements
about the beauty of a certain object). For, apart from the fact that
experience would hardly furnish suﬃcient evidence for this purpose,
empirical judgements do not aﬀord any foundation for a concept of
the necessity of these judgements.
sepulchral tumuli and supplied with a hole, as if designed for a handle; and although
these by their shape manifestly indicate a purposiveness, the end of which is unknown,
they are not on that account described as beautiful. But the very fact of their being
regarded as artiﬁcial products involves an immediate recognition that their shape is
attributed to some purpose or other and to a deﬁnite end. For this reason there is no
immediate delight whatever in their contemplation. A ﬂower, on the other hand, such
as a tulip, is regarded as beautiful, because we meet with a certain purposiveness in its
perception, which, in our judgement of it, is not referred to any end whatever.

237

68

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

§ 19
The subjective necessity attributed to a judgement
of taste is conditioned
The judgement of taste expects agreement from everyone; and
a person who describes something as beautiful insists that everyone ought to give the object in question his approval and follow
suit in describing it as beautiful. The ought in aesthetic judgements, therefore, despite an accordance with all the requisite data
for passing judgement, is still only pronounced conditionally.
We are suitors for agreement from everyone else, because we are
fortiﬁed with a ground common to all. Further, we would be able
to count on this agreement, provided we were always assured of
the correct subsumption of the case under that ground as the rule
of approval.

§ 20
The condition of the necessity advanced by a judgement
of taste is the idea of a common sense
238

If judgements of taste (like cognitive judgements) were in possession
of a deﬁnite objective principle, then one who in his judgement followed such a principle would claim unconditioned necessity for it.
Again, if they were devoid of any principle, as are those of the mere
taste of the senses, then no thought of any necessity on their part
would enter one’s head. Therefore they must have a subjective principle, and one which determines what pleases or displeases, by means
of feeling only and not through concepts, but yet with universal
validity. Such a principle, however, could only be regarded as a
common sense. This diﬀers essentially from common understanding,
which is also sometimes called common sense (sensus communis): for
the judgement of the latter is not one by feeling, but always one by
concepts, though usually only in the shape of obscurely represented
principles.
The judgement of taste, therefore, depends on our presupposing
the existence of a common sense. (But this is not to be taken to
mean some external sense, but the eﬀect arising from the free play

Analytic of the Beautiful

69

of our powers of cognition.) Only under the presupposition, I repeat,
of such a common sense, are we able to lay down a judgement of
taste.

§ 21
Have we any ground for presupposing a common sense?
Cognitions and judgements must, together with their attendant
conviction, admit of being universally communicated; for otherwise
no correspondence with the object could be ascribed to them. They
would all amount to nothing but a mere subjective play of the powers
of representation, just as scepticism would have it. But if cognitions
are to admit of communication, then our state of mind, i.e. the way
the cognitive powers are attuned for cognition generally, and, in fact,
the relative proportion suitable for a representation (by which an
object is given to us) from which cognition is to result, must also
admit of being universally communicated, since, without this, which
is the subjective condition of the act of knowing, knowledge, as an
eﬀect, would not arise. And this is always what actually happens
where a given object, through the intervention of the senses, sets the
imagination to work in combining the manifold, and the imagination,
in turn, sets the understanding to work in unifying the manifold
under concepts. But this disposition of the cognitive powers has a
relative proportion diﬀering with the diversity of the objects that are
given. However, there must be one in which this internal ratio suitable for enlivening (one faculty by the other) is best adapted for both
mental powers in respect of cognition (of given objects) generally;
and this disposition can only be determined through feeling (and not
by concepts). Since, now, this disposition itself must admit of being
universally communicated, and hence also the feeling of it (in the
case of a given representation), while again, the universal communicability of a feeling presupposes a common sense: it follows that our
assumption of it is well founded. And here, too, we do not have to
take our stand on psychological observations, but we assume a
common sense as the necessary condition of the universal communicability of our knowledge, which is presupposed in every logic and
every principle of knowledge that is not one of scepticism.

239

70

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

§ 22
The necessity of the universal assent that is thought in a judgement
of taste, is a subjective necessity which, under the presupposition
of a common sense, is represented as objective

240

I n all judgements by which we describe anything as beautiful we tolerate no one else being of a diﬀerent opinion, and yet we do not rest
our judgement upon concepts, but only on our feeling. Accordingly
we introduce this underlying feeling not as a private feeling, but as a
common one. Now, for this purpose, experience cannot be made the
ground of this common sense, for the latter is invoked to justify
judgements containing an ‘ought’. The assertion is not that everyone
will fall in with our judgement, but rather that everyone ought to agree
with it. Here I put forward my judgement of taste as an example of
the judgement of common sense, and attribute to it on that account
exemplary validity. Hence common sense is a mere ideal norm. With
this as presupposition, a judgement that acccords with it, as well as
the delight in an object expressed in that judgement, is rightly
converted into a rule for everyone. For the principle, while it is only
subjective, being yet assumed as subjectively universal (a necessary
idea for everyone), could, in what concerns the consensus of diﬀerent
judging subjects, demand universal assent like an objective principle,
provided we were assured of our subsumption under it being correct.
This indeterminate norm of a common sense is, as a matter of fact,
presupposed by us; as is shown by our presuming to lay down judgements of taste. But does such a common sense in fact exist as a
constitutive principle of the possibility of experience, or is it formed
for us as a regulative principle by a still higher principle of reason,
that for higher ends ﬁrst seeks to produce in us a common sense? Is
taste, in other words, a natural and original faculty, or is it only the
idea of one that is artiﬁcial and to be acquired by us, so that a judgement of taste, with its expectation of universal assent, is but a
demand of reason for generating such unanimity in this sensing, and
does the ‘ought’, i.e. the objective necessity of the coincidence of the
feeling of all with the particular feeling of each, only betoken the
possibility of arriving at some sort of agreement in these matters, and
the judgement of taste only adduce an example of the application of
this principle? These are questions which as yet we are neither

Analytic of the Beautiful

71

willing nor in a position to investigate. For the present we have only
to resolve the faculty of taste into its elements, and to unite these
ultimately in the idea of a common sense.

definition of the beautiful drawn
from the fourth moment
The beautiful is that which, apart from a concept, is cognized as
object of a necessary delight.

general remark on the first section
of the analytic*
The result to be extracted from the foregoing analysis is in eﬀect this:
that everything comes down to the concept of taste as a faculty for
judging an object in reference to the free conformity to law of the
imagination. If, now, imagination must in the judgement of taste be
regarded in its freedom, then, to begin with, it is not taken as reproductive, as in its subjection to the laws of association, but as productive and active in its own right (as originator of arbitrary forms of
possible intuitions). And although in the apprehension of a given
object of the senses it is tied down to a determinate form of this object
and, to that extent, does not enjoy free play (as it does in poetry), still
it is easy to conceive that the object may supply ready-made to the
imagination just such a form of the arrangement of the manifold, as
the imagination, if it were left to itself, would freely project in harmony with the general conformity to law of the understanding. But that
the imagination should be both free and of itself conformable to law, i.e.
carry autonomy with it, is a contradiction. The understanding alone
gives the law. Where, however, the imagination is compelled to
follow a course laid down by a determinate law, then what the form of
the product is to be is determined by concepts; but, in that case, as
already shown, the delight is not delight in the beautiful, but in the
good, (in perfection, though it be no more than formal perfection), and
the judgement is not one due to taste. Hence it is only a conformity to
law without a law, and a subjective harmonizing of the imagination and
the understanding without an objective one—which latter would
mean that the representation was referred to a determinate concept of
the object—that is consistent with the free conformity to law of the
understanding (which has also been called purposiveness without a
pupose) and with the speciﬁc character of a judgement of taste.

241

72

242

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

Now geometrically regular ﬁgures, a circle, a square, a cube, and
the like, are commonly brought forward by critics of taste as the most
simple and unquestionable examples of beauty. And yet the very
reason why they are called regular, is because the only way of representing them is by looking on them as mere presentations of a determinate concept by which the ﬁgure has its rule (according to which
alone it is possible) prescribed for it. One or other of these two views
must, therefore, be wrong: either the verdict of the critics that attributes beauty to such ﬁgures, or else our own, which makes purposiveness apart from any concept necessary for beauty.
One would scarce think it necessary for a person with taste to take
more delight in a circle than in a scrawled outline, in an equilateral
and equiangular quadrilateral than in one that is all lob-sided, and, as
it were, deformed. The requirements of common understanding
ensure such a preference without the least demand upon taste.
Where some purpose is perceived, as, for instance, that of judging
the area of a plot of land, or rendering intelligible the relation of
divided parts to one another and to the whole, then regular ﬁgures,
and those of the simplest kind, are needed; and the delight does not
rest immediately upon the way the ﬁgure strikes the eye, but upon its
serviceability for all manner of possible purposes. A room with the
walls making oblique angles, a plot laid out in a garden in a similar
way, even any violation of symmetry, as well in the ﬁgure of animals
(e.g. being one-eyed) as in that of buildings, or of ﬂower-beds, is displeasing because of its counter-purposive form, not only in a practical way in respect of some deﬁnite use to which the thing may be put,
but for a judgement that looks to all manner of possible purposes.
With the judgement of taste the case is diﬀerent. For, when it is pure,
it combines delight or aversion immediately with the bare contemplation of the object irrespective of its use or of any end.
The regularity that conduces to the concept of an object is, in fact,
the indispensable condition (conditio sine qua non) of grasping the
object as a single representation and giving to the manifold its determinate form. This determination is an end in respect of knowledge;
and in this connexion it is invariably coupled with delight (such as
attends the accomplishment of any, even problematical, purpose).
Here, however, we have merely the value set upon the solution that
satisﬁes the problem, and not a free and indeterminately purposive
entertainment of the powers of the mind with what is called beautiful.

Analytic of the Beautiful

73

In the latter case understanding is at the service of imagination, in
the former this relation is reversed.
With a thing that owes its possibility to a purpose, a building, or
even an animal, its regularity, which consists in symmetry, must
express the unity of the intuition accompanying the concept of its
end, and belongs with it to cognition. But where all that is intended
is the maintenance of a free play of the powers of representation
(subject, however, to the condition that there is to be nothing for
understanding to take exception to), in ornamental gardens, in the
decoration of rooms, in all kinds of tasteful implements etc., regularity
that betrays constraint is to be avoided as far as possible. Thus
English taste in gardens, and baroque taste in furniture, push the
freedom of imagination to the verge of what is grotesque—the idea
being that in this divorce from all constraint of rules the precise
instance is being aﬀorded where taste can exhibit its perfection in
projects of the imagination to the fullest extent.
All stiﬀ regularity (such as that which borders on mathematical
regularity) is inherently repugnant to taste, in that the contemplation
of it aﬀords us no lasting entertainment. Indeed, where it has neither
cognition nor some determinate practical end expressly in view, we
get heartily tired of it. On the other hand, anything that gives the
imagination scope for unstudied and purposive play is always fresh
to us. We do not grow weary of the very sight of it. Marsden in his
description of Sumatra* observes that the free beauties of nature so
surround the beholder on all sides that they cease to have much
attraction for him. On the other hand he found a pepper garden full
of charm, on coming across it in mid-forest with its rows of parallel
stakes on which the plant twines itself. From all this he infers that
wild, and in its appearance quite irregular beauty, is only pleasing as
a change to one whose eyes have become surfeited with regular
beauty. But he need only have made the experiment of passing one
day in his pepper garden to realize that once the regularity has
enabled the understanding to put itself in accord with the order that
is its constant requirement, instead of the object diverting him any
longer, it imposes an irksome constraint upon the imagination:
whereas nature subject to no constraint of artiﬁcial rules, and lavish,
as it there is, in its luxuriant variety can supply constant nourishment
for his taste.— Even a bird’s song, which we can reduce to no musical
rule, seems to have more freedom in it, and thus to oﬀer more for

243

74

244

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

taste, than the human voice singing in accordance with all the rules
that the art of music prescribes; for we grow tired much sooner of
frequent and lengthy repetitions of the latter. Yet here most likely
our sympathy with the joy of a dear little creature is confused with
the beauty of its song, for if exactly imitated by a human being (as has
been sometimes done with the notes of the nightingale) it would
strike our ear as wholly destitute of taste.
Further, beautiful objects have to be distinguished from beautiful
views of objects (where the distance often prevents a clear perception). In the latter case taste appears to fasten, not so much on what
the imagination grasps in this ﬁeld, as on the encouragement it
receives in the way of invention, i.e. in the peculiar fantasies with
which the mind entertains itself as it is being continually stirred by
the variety that strikes the eye. It is just as when we watch the changing shapes of the ﬁre in the hearth or of a rippling brook: neither of
which are things of beauty, but nonetheless convey a charm to the
imagination, because they sustain its free play.

Analytic of the Sublime

75

SECOND BOOK
ANALYTIC OF THE SUBLIME

§ 23
Transition from the faculty of judging the beautiful
to that of judging the sublime
The beautiful and the sublime agree on the point of pleasing on
their own account. Further they agree in not presupposing either a
judgement of the senses or a logically determining judgement, but
one of reﬂection. Hence it follows that the delight does not depend
upon a sensation, as with the agreeable, nor upon a deﬁnite concept,
as does the delight in the good, although it has, for all that, an indeterminate reference to concepts. Consequently the delight is connected with the mere presentation or faculty of presentation, and is
thus taken to express the accord, in a given intuition, of the faculty
of presentation, or the imagination, with the faculty of concepts that
belongs to understanding or reason, in the sense of the former faculty
assisting the latter. Hence both kinds of judgements are singular, and
yet such as profess to be universally valid in respect of every subject,
despite the fact that their claims are directed merely to the feeling of
pleasure and not to any knowledge of the object.
There are, however, also important and striking diﬀerences
between the two. The beautiful in nature is a question of the form of
the object, and this consists in limitation, whereas the sublime is to
be found in an object even devoid of form, so far as it immediately
involves, or else by its presence provokes, a representation of limitlessness, yet with a super-added thought of its totality. Accordingly the
beautiful seems to be regarded as a presentation of an indeterminate
concept of the understanding, the sublime as a presentation of an indeterminate concept of reason. Hence the delight is in the former case
coupled with the representation of quality, but in this case with that of
quantity. Moreover, the former delight is very diﬀerent from the latter
in kind. For the beautiful is directly attended with a feeling of the
furtherance of life, and is thus compatible with charms and a playful
imagination. On the other hand, the feeling of the sublime is a pleasure
that only arises indirectly, being brought about by the feeling of a

245

76

246

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

momentary check to the vital forces followed at once by a discharge all
the more powerful, and so it is an emotion that seems to be no play, but
a serious matter in the exercise of the imagination. Hence charms are
also incompatible with it; and, since the mind is not simply attracted by
the object, but is also alternately repelled thereby, the delight in the
sublime does not so much involve positive pleasure as admiration or
respect, i.e. merits the name of a negative pleasure.
But the most important and vital distinction between the sublime
and the beautiful is certainly this: that if, as is allowable, we here
conﬁne our attention in the ﬁrst instance to the sublime in objects of
nature (that of art being always restricted by the conditions of an
agreement with nature), we observe that whereas natural beauty
(such as is self-subsisting) conveys a purposiveness in its form making
the object appear, as it were, already adapted to our power of judgement, so that it thus forms of itself an object of our delight, that
which, without our indulging in any reﬁnements of thought, but,
simply in our apprehension of it, excites the feeling of the sublime,
may appear, indeed, in point of form to contravene the ends of our
power of judgement, to be ill-adapted to our faculty of presentation,
and to do violence, as it were, to the imagination, and yet it is judged
all the more sublime on that account.
From this it may be seen at once that we express ourselves on the
whole inaccurately if we term any object of nature sublime, although
we may with perfect propriety call many such objects beautiful. For
how can that which is apprehended as inherently counter-purposive
be noted with an expression of approval? All that we can say is that
the object lends itself to the presentation of a sublimity discoverable in
the mind. For the sublime, in the strict sense of the word, cannot be
contained in any sensuous form, but rather concerns ideas of reason,
which, although no adequate presentation of them is possible, may be
aroused and called to mind by that very inadequacy itself which does
admit of sensuous presentation. Thus the broad ocean agitated by
storms cannot be called sublime. The sight of it is horrible, and one
must have stored one’s mind in advance with a wealth of ideas, if
such an intuition is to attune it to a feeling which is itself sublime—
sublime because the mind has been incited to abandon sensibility,
and employ itself upon ideas involving a higher purposiveness.
Self-subsisting natural beauty reveals to us a technic of nature
which shows it in the light of a system ordered in accordance with

Analytic of the Sublime

77

laws the principle of which is not to be found within the range of our
entire faculty of understanding. This principle is that of a purposiveness relative to the employment of judgement in respect of phenomena which have thus to be assigned, not merely to nature regarded as
aimless mechanism, but also to nature regarded after the analogy of
art. Hence it gives a veritable extension, not, of course, to our knowledge of objects of nature, but to our conception of nature itself—
nature as mere mechanism being enlarged to the conception of
nature as art—an extension inviting profound inquiries as to the
possibility of such a form. But in what we are wont to call sublime in
nature there is such an absence of anything leading to particular
objective principles and corresponding forms of nature, that it is
rather in its chaos, or in its wildest and most irregular disorder and
desolation, provided it gives signs of magnitude and power, that
nature chieﬂy excites the ideas of the sublime. Hence we see that the
concept of the sublime in nature is far less important and rich in consequences than that of its beauty. It gives on the whole no indication
of anything purposive in nature itself, but only in the possible employment of our intuitions of it in inducing a feeling in our own selves of a
purposiveness quite independent of nature. For the beautiful in
nature we must seek a ground external to ourselves, but for the sublime one merely in ourselves and the attitude of mind that introduces
sublimity into the representation of nature. This is a very needful preliminary remark. It entirely separates the ideas of the sublime from
that of a purposiveness of nature, and makes the theory of the sublime
a mere appendage to the aesthetic judgement of the purposiveness of
nature, because it does not give a representation of any particular
form in nature, but involves no more than the development of a purposive employment by the imagination of its own representation.

§ 24
On the division of an investigation of the feeling of the sublime
In the division of the moments of an aesthetic estimate of objects in
respect of the feeling of the sublime, the course of the analytic will
be able to follow the same principle as in the analysis of judgements
of taste. For, the judgement being one of the aesthetic reﬂective
judgement, the delight in the sublime, just like that in the beautiful,
must in its quantity be shown to be universally valid, in its quality

247

78

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

independent of interest, in its relation subjective purposiveness, and
the latter, in its modality, necessary. Hence the method here will not
depart from the lines followed in the preceding section: unless something is made of the point that there, where the aesthetic judgement
bore on the form of the object, we began with the investigation of its
quality, whereas here, considering the formlessness that may belong
to what we call sublime, we begin with that of its quantity, as ﬁrst
moment of the aesthetic judgement on the sublime—a divergence of
method the reason for which is evident from § 23.
But the analysis of the sublime demands a division not required by
that of the beautiful, namely one into the mathematically and the
dynamically sublime.
For the feeling of the sublime involves as its characteristic feature
a movement of the mind combined with the judging of the object,
whereas taste in respect of the beautiful presupposes that the mind is
in restful contemplation, and preserves it in this state. But this movement has to be judged as subjectively purposive (since the sublime
pleases). Hence it is referred through the imagination either to the faculty of cognition or to that of desire; but to whichever faculty the reference is made the ﬁnality of the given representation is judged only in
respect of these faculties (apart from end or interest). Accordingly the
ﬁrst is attributed to the object as a mathematical, the second as a
dynamical, attunement of the imagination. Hence we arrive at the
above mentioned twofold mode of representing an object as sublime.

248

A. The Mathematically Sublime
§ 25
Deﬁnition of the term ‘sublime’
Sublime is the name given to what is absolutely great. But to be great
and to be a magnitude are entirely diﬀerent concepts (magnitudo and
quantitas). In the same way to assert without qualiﬁcation (simpliciter)
that something is great, is quite a diﬀerent thing from saying that it
is absolutely great (absolute, non comparative magnum). The latter is
what is beyond all comparison great.—What, then, is the meaning of
the assertion that anything is great, or small, or of medium size?
What is indicated is not a pure concept of understanding, still less an

Analytic of the Sublime

79

intuition of the senses; and just as little is it a concept of reason, for
it does not import any principle of cognition. It must, therefore, be a
concept of judgement, or have its source in one, and must introduce
as basis of the judgement a subjective purposiveness of the representation with reference to the power of judgement. Given a multiplicity of the homogeneous together constituting one thing, and we may
at once cognize from the thing itself that it is a magnitude (quantum).
No comparison with other things is required. But to determine how
great it is always requires something else, which itself has magnitude,
for its measure. Now, since in the judging of magnitude we have to
take into account not merely the multiplicity (number of units) but
also the magnitude of the unit (the measure), and since the magnitude of this unit in turn always requires something else as its measure and as the standard of its comparison, and so on, we see that the
computation of the magnitude of phenomena is, in all cases, utterly
incapable of aﬀording us any absolute concept of a magnitude, and
can, instead, only aﬀord one that is always based on comparison.
If, now, I assert without qualiﬁcation that anything is great, it
would seem that I have nothing in the way of a comparison present
to my mind, or at least nothing involving an objective measure, for
no attempt is thus made to determine how great the object is. But,
despite the standard of comparison being merely subjective, the
claim of the judgement is nonetheless one to universal agreement;
the judgements: ‘That man is beautiful’ and ‘He is tall’ do not purport to speak only for the judging subject, but, like theoretical judgements, they demand the assent of everyone.
Now in a judgement that without qualiﬁcation describes anything
as great, it is not merely meant that the object has a magnitude, but
greatness is ascribed to it pre-eminently among many other objects
of a like kind, yet without the extent of this pre-eminence being
determined. Hence a standard is certainly laid at the basis of the
judgement, which standard is presupposed to be one that can be taken
as the same for everyone, but which is available only for an aesthetic
judging of the greatness, and not for one that is logical (mathematically determined), for the standard is a merely subjective one underlying the reﬂective judgement upon the greatness. Furthermore, this
standard may be empirical, as, let us say, the average size of the men
known to us, of animals of a certain kind, of trees, of houses, of
mountains, and so forth. Or it may be a standard given a priori, which

249

80

250

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

by reason of the imperfections of the judging subject is restricted to
subjective conditions of presentation in concreto: as, in the practical
sphere, the greatness of a particular virtue, or of public liberty and
justice in a country; or, in the theoretical sphere, the greatness of the
accuracy or inaccuracy of an experiment or measurement, etc.
Here, now, it is noteworthy that, although we have no interest whatever in the object, i.e. its real existence may be a matter of no concern
to us, still its mere greatness, regarded even as devoid of form, is able
to convey a universally communicable delight and so involve the consciousness of a subjective purposiveness in the employment of our
cognitive faculties, but not, be it remembered, a delight in the object,
for the latter may be formless, but, in contradistinction to what is the
case with the beautiful, where the reﬂective judgement ﬁnds itself set
to a key that is ﬁnal in respect of cognition generally, a delight in an
extension aﬀecting the imagination itself.
If (under the aforementioned restriction) we say of an object, without
qualiﬁcation, that it is great, this is not a mathematically determining, but a mere reﬂective judgement upon its representation, which
is subjectively purposive for a particular employment of our cognitive faculties in the judging of magnitude, and we then always couple
with the representation a kind of respect, just as we couple a kind of
contempt with what we call absolutely small. Moreover, the judging
of things as great or small extends to everything, even to all their
qualities. Thus we call even their beauty great or small. The reason
for this is to be found in the fact that we have only got to present a
thing in intuition, as the faculty of judgement directs (consequently
to represent it aesthetically), for it to be in its entirety a phenomenon,
and hence a quantum.
If, however, we call anything not merely great, but, without
qualiﬁcation, absolutely, and in every respect (beyond all comparison) great, that is to say, sublime, we soon perceive that for this it is
not permissible to seek an appropriate standard outside itself, but
merely in itself. It is a greatness comparable to itself alone. Hence it
comes that the sublime is not to be looked for in the things of nature,
but only in our own ideas. But it must be left to the deduction to
show in which of them it resides.
The above deﬁnition may also be expressed in this way: that is sublime in comparison with which all else is small. Here we readily see that
nothing can be given in nature, no matter how great we may judge it

Analytic of the Sublime

81

to be, which, regarded in some other relation, may not be degraded
to the level of the inﬁnitely little, and nothing so small which in comparison with some still smaller standard may not for our imagination
be enlarged to the greatness of a world. Telescopes have put within
our reach an abundance of material to go upon in making the ﬁrst
observation, and microscopes the same in making the second.
Nothing, therefore, which can be an object of the senses is to be
termed sublime when treated on this footing. But precisely because
there is a striving in our imagination towards progress ad inﬁnitum,
while reason demands absolute totality, as a real idea that same
inability on the part of our faculty for the estimation of the magnitude of things of the world of the senses to attain to the idea, is the
awakening of a feeling of a supersensible faculty within us; and it is
the use to which judgement naturally puts particular objects on
behalf of this latter feeling, and not the object of the senses, that is
absolutely great, and every other contrasted employment small.
Consequently it is the attunement of the spirit evoked by a particular representation engaging the attention of reﬂective judgement, and
not the object, that is to be called sublime.
The foregoing formulae deﬁning the sublime may, therefore, be
supplemented by yet another: The sublime is that, the mere capacity of
thinking which evidences a faculty of mind transcending every standard
of the senses.

§ 26
The estimation of the magnitude of natural things requisite
for the idea of the sublime
The estimation of magnitude by means of concepts of number (or
their signs in algebra) is mathematical, but that in mere intuition (by
the eye) is aesthetic. Now we can only get deﬁnite concepts of how
great anything is by having recourse to numbers (or, at any rate, by
getting approximate measurements by means of numerical series
progressing ad inﬁnitum), the unit being the measure; and to this
extent all logical estimation of magnitude is mathematical. But, as the
magnitude of the measure has to be assumed as a known quantity, if,
to form an estimate of this, we must again have recourse to numbers
involving another standard for their unit, and consequently must again
proceed mathematically, we can never arrive at a ﬁrst or fundamental

251

82

252

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

measure, and so cannot get any deﬁnite concept of a given magnitude.
The estimation of the magnitude of the fundamental measure must,
therefore, consist merely in the immediate grasp which we can get of
it in intuition, and the use to which our imagination can put this in
presenting the numerical concepts: i.e. all estimation of the magnitude of objects of nature is in the last resort aesthetic (i.e. subjectively
and not objectively determined).
Now for the mathematical estimation of magnitude there is, of
course, no greatest possible magnitude (for the power of numbers
extends to inﬁnity), but for the aesthetic estimation there certainly is,
and of it I say that where it is considered an absolute measure beyond
which no greater is possible subjectively (i.e. for the judging subject),
it then conveys the idea of the sublime, and calls forth that emotion
which no mathematical estimation of magnitudes by numbers can
evoke (except in so far as the fundamental aesthetic measure is
vividly preserved for the imagination): because the latter presents
only the relative magnitude due to comparison with others of a like
kind, whereas the former presents magnitude absolutely, so far as the
mind can grasp it in an intuition.
To take in a quantum intuitively in the imagination so as to be able
to use it as a measure, or unit for estimating magnitude by numbers,
involves two operations of this faculty: apprehension (apprehensio) and
comprehension (comprehensio aesthetica). Apprehension presents no
diﬃculty: for this process can be carried on ad inﬁnitum; but with the
advance of apprehension comprehension becomes more diﬃcult at
every step and soon attains its maximum, and this is the aesthetically
greatest fundamental measure for the estimation of magnitude. For
if the apprehension has reached a point beyond which the representations of sensuous intuition in the case of the parts ﬁrst apprehended begin to disappear from the imagination as this advances to
the apprehension of yet others, as much, then, is lost at one end as is
gained at the other, and for comprehension we get a maximum which
the imagination cannot exceed.
This explains Savary’s observations in his account of Egypt,* that
in order to get the full emotional eﬀect of the size of the pyramids we
must avoid coming too near just as much as remaining too far away.
For in the latter case the representation of the apprehended parts
(the tiers of stones) is merely obscure, and produces no eﬀect upon
the aesthetic judgement of the subject. In the former, however,

Analytic of the Sublime

83

it takes the eye some time to complete the apprehension from the
base to the summit; but in this interval the ﬁrst tiers always in part
disappear before the imagination has taken in the last, and so the comprehension is never complete.—The same explanation may also
suﬃciently account for the bewilderment, or sort of perplexity, which,
as is said, seizes the visitor on ﬁrst entering St. Peter’s in Rome. For
here a feeling comes home to him of the inadequacy of his imagination
for presenting the idea of a whole within which that imagination
attains its maximum, and, in its fruitless eﬀorts to extend this limit,
recoils upon itself, but in so doing succumbs to an emotional delight.
At present I am not disposed to deal with the ground of this
delight, connected, as it is, with a representation in which we would
least of all look for it—a representation, namely, that lets us see its
own inadequacy, and consequently its subjective lack of purposiveness for our judgement in the estimation of magnitude—but conﬁne
myself to the remark that if the aesthetic judgement is to be pure
(unmixed with any teleological judgement which, as such, belongs to
reason), and if we are to give a suitable example of it for the critique
of aesthetic judgement, we must not point to the sublime in works of
art, e.g. buildings, statues and the like, where a human end determines the form as well as the magnitude, nor yet in things of nature,
that in their very concept import a determinate end, e.g. animals of a
recognized natural order, but in raw nature merely as involving magnitude (and only in this so far as it does not convey any charm or any
emotion arising from actual danger). For in a representation of this
kind nature contains nothing monstrous (nor what is either
magniﬁcent or horrible)—the magnitude apprehended may be
increased to any extent provided imagination is able to grasp it all in
one whole. An object is monstrous where by its size it defeats the end
that forms its concept. The colossal is the mere presentation of a concept which is almost too great for presentation, i.e. borders on the
relatively monstrous; for the end to be attained by the presentation
of a concept is made harder to realize by the intuition of the object
being almost too great for our faculty of apprehension.—A pure
judgement upon the sublime must, however, have no end belonging
to the object as its determining ground, if it is to be aesthetic and not
to be tainted with any judgement of understanding or reason.

253

84

254

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

Since whatever is to be a source of pleasure, apart from interest, to
the merely reﬂective judgement must involve in its representation
subjective, and, as such, universally valid purposiveness—though
here, however, no purposiveness of the form of the object underlies
our judging (as it does in the case of the beautiful)—the question
arises: What is this subjective purposiveness, and what enables it to
be prescribed as a norm so as to yield a ground for universally valid
delight in the mere estimation of magnitude, and that, too, in a case
where it is pushed to the point at which our faculty of imagination
breaks down in presenting the concept of a magnitude, and proves
unequal to its task?
In the successive aggregation of units requisite for the representation of magnitudes the imagination of itself advances ad inﬁnitum
without let or hindrance—understanding, however, conducting it
by means of concepts of number for which the former must supply
the schema. This procedure belongs to the logical estimation of magnitude, and, as such, is doubtless something objectively purposive
according to the concept of an end (as all measurement is), but it is not
anything which for the aesthetic judgement is purposive or pleasing.
Further, in this intentional purposiveness there is nothing compelling us to tax the utmost powers of the imagination, and drive it
as far as ever it can reach in its presentations, so as to enlarge the size
of the measure, and thus make the single intuition holding the many
in one (the comprehension) as great as possible. For in the estimation
of magnitude by the understanding (arithmetic) we get just as far,
whether the comprehension of the units is pushed to the number 10
(as in the decadic system) or only to 4 (as in the tetradic); the further
production of magnitude being earned out by the successive aggregation of units, or, if the quantum is given in intuition, by apprehension, merely progressively (not comprehensively), according to an
adopted principle of progression. In this mathematical estimation of
magnitude understanding is as well served and as satisﬁed whether
imagination selects for the unit a magnitude which one can take in at
a glance, e.g. a foot, or a perch, or else a German mile, or even the
earth’s diameter, the apprehension of which is indeed possible, but
not its comprehension in an intuition of the imagination (i.e. it is not
possible by means of a comprehensio aesthetica, though quite so by
means of a comprehensio logica in a numerical concept). In each case

Analytic of the Sublime

85

the logical estimation of magnitude advances ad inﬁnitum with nothing to stop it.
The mind, however, hearkens now to the voice of reason within
itself, which for all given magnitudes—even for those which can never
be completely apprehended, though (in sensuous representation)
judged as completely given—requires totality, and consequently
comprehension in one intuition, and which calls for a presentation
answering to all the above members of a progressively increasing
numerical series, and does not exempt even the inﬁnite (space and
time past) from this requirement, but rather renders it inevitable for
us to regard this inﬁnite (in the judgement of common reason) as
completely given (i.e. given in its totality).
But the inﬁnite is absolutely (not merely comparatively) great. In
comparison with this all else (in the way of magnitudes of the same
order) is small. But the point of capital importance is that the mere
ability even to think it as a whole indicates a faculty of mind transcending every standard of the senses. For the latter would entail a
comprehension yielding as unit a standard bearing to the inﬁnite a
deﬁnite ratio expressible in numbers, which is impossible. Still the mere
ability even to think the given inﬁnite without contradiction, is something that requires the presence in the human mind of a faculty that is
itself supersensible. For it is only through this faculty and its idea of a
noumenon, which latter, while not itself admitting of any intuition, is
yet introduced as substrate underlying the intuition of the world as
mere phenomenon, that the inﬁnite of the sensible world, in the pure
intellectual estimation of magnitude, is completely comprehended under
a concept, although in the mathematical estimation by means of numerical concepts it can never be completely thought. Even a faculty enabling
the inﬁnite of supersensible intuition to be regarded as given (in its
intelligible substrate), transcends every standard of sensibility, and is
great beyond all comparison even with the faculty of mathematical
estimation: not, of course, from a theoretical point of view that looks to
the interests of our faculty of knowledge, but as a broadening of the mind
that from another (the practical) point of view feels itself empowered to
pass beyond the narrow conﬁnes of sensibility.
Nature, therefore, is sublime in such of its phenomena as in their
intuition convey the idea of their inﬁnity. But this can only occur
through the inadequacy of even the greatest eﬀort of our imagination

255

86

256

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

in the estimation of the magnitude of an object. But, now, in the case
of the mathematical estimation of magnitude imagination is quite
competent to supply a measure equal to the requirements of any
object. For the numerical concepts of the understanding can by progressive synthesis make any measure adequate to any given magnitude. Hence it must be the aesthetic estimation of magnitude in which
we get at once a feeling of the eﬀort towards a comprehension that
exceeds the faculty of imagination for mentally grasping the progressive apprehension in a whole of intuition, and, with it, a perception
of the inadequacy of this faculty, which has no bounds to its
progress, for taking in and using for the estimation of magnitude a
fundamental measure that understanding could turn to account
without the least trouble. Now the proper unchangeable fundamental measure of nature is its absolute whole, which, with it, regarded
as a phenomenon, means inﬁnity comprehended. But, since this
fundamental measure is a self-contradictory concept (owing to the
impossibility of the absolute totality of an endless progression), it
follows that where the size of a natural object is such that the imagination spends its whole faculty of comprehension upon it in vain, it
must carry our concept of nature to a supersensible substrate (underlying both nature and our faculty of thought) which is great beyond
every standard of the senses. Thus, instead of the object, it is rather the
disposition of the mind in estimating it that we have to judge as sublime.
Therefore, just as the aesthetic judgement in its judgement of the
beautiful refers the imagination in its free play to the understanding,
to bring out its agreement with the concepts of the latter in general
(apart from their determination): so in its judging of a thing as sublime it refers that faculty to reason to bring out its subjective accord
with ideas of reason (indeterminately indicated), i.e. to induce a disposition of the mind conformable to that which the inﬂuence of
deﬁnite (practical) ideas would produce upon feeling, and in common
accord with it.
This makes it evident that true sublimity must be sought only in
the mind of the judging subject, and not in the object of nature that
occasions this disposition by the judgement formed of it. Who would
apply the term ‘sublime’ even to shapeless mountain masses towering
one above the other in wild disorder, with their pyramids of ice, or
to the dark tempestuous ocean, or such like things? But in the contemplation of them, without any regard to their form, the mind abandons

Analytic of the Sublime

87

itself to the imagination and to a reason placed, though quite apart
from any deﬁnite end, in conjunction therewith, and merely broadening
its view, and it feels itself elevated in its own judgement of itself on
ﬁnding all the might of imagination still unequal to its ideas.
We get examples of the mathematically sublime of nature in mere
intuition in all those instances where our imagination is aﬀorded, not
so much a greater numerical concept as a large unit as measure (for
shortening the numerical series). A tree judged by the height of a
human being gives, at all events, a standard for a mountain; and, supposing this is, say, a mile high, it can serve as unit for the number
expressing the earth’s diameter, so as to make it intuitable; similarly
the earth’s diameter for the known planetary system; this again for
the system of the Milky Way; and the immeasurable host of such systems, which go by the name of nebulae, and most likely in turn themselves form such a system, holds out no prospect of a limit. Now in
the aesthetic judging of such an immeasurable whole, the sublime
does not lie so much in the greatness of the number, as in the fact
that in our onward advance we always arrive at proportionately
greater units. The systematic division of the cosmos conduces to this
result. For it represents all that is great in nature as in turn becoming
little; or, to be more exact, it represents our imagination in all its
boundlessness, and with it nature, as sinking into insigniﬁcance before
the ideas of reason, once their adequate presentation is attempted.

§ 27
Quality of the delight in the judging of the sublime
The feeling of our incapacity to attain to an idea that is a law for us,
is respect. Now the idea of the comprehension of any phenomenon
whatever, that may be given us, in a whole of intuition, is an idea
imposed upon us by a law of reason, which recognizes no deﬁnite,
universally valid and unchangeable measure except the absolute
whole. But our imagination, even when taxing itself to the uttermost
on the score of this required comprehension of a given object in a
whole of intuition (and so with a view to the presentation of the idea
of reason), betrays its limits and its inadequacy, but still, at the same
time, its proper vocation of making itself adequate to the same as a
law. Therefore the feeling of the sublime in nature is respect for our
own vocation, which we attribute to an object of nature by a certain

257

88

258

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

subreption (substitution of a respect for the object in place of one for
the idea of humanity in our own self—the subject); and this feeling
renders, as it were, intuitable the supremacy of our cognitive faculties on the rational side over the greatest faculty of sensibility.
The feeling of the sublime is, therefore, at once a feeling of displeasure, arising from the inadequacy of imagination in the aesthetic
estimation of magnitude to attain to its estimation by reason, and a
simultaneously awakened pleasure, arising from this very judgement
of the inadequacy of the greatest faculty of sense being in accord with
ideas of reason, so far as the eﬀort to attain to these is for us a law.
It is, in other words, for us a law (of reason), which belongs to our
vocation, that we should esteem as small in comparison with ideas of
reason everything which for us is great in nature as an object of the
senses; and that which makes us alive to the feeling of this supersensible side of our being harmonizes with that law. Now the greatest
eﬀort of the imagination in the presentation of the unit for the estimation of magnitude involves in itself a reference to something
absolutely great, consequently a reference also to the law of reason that
this alone is to be adopted as the supreme measure of what is great.
Therefore the inner perception of the inadequacy of every standard
of sense to serve for the rational estimation of magnitude is a coming
into accord with reason’s laws, and a displeasure that arouses the
feeling of our own supersensible vocation, according to which it is
purposive, and consequently a pleasure, to ﬁnd every standard of
sensibility falling short of the ideas of reason.
The mind feels itself set in motion in the representation of the
sublime in nature; whereas in the aesthetic judgement upon what is
beautiful therein it is in restful contemplation. This movement, especially in its inception, may be compared with a shaking, i.e. with a
rapidly alternating repulsion and attraction produced by one and the
same object. This excess for the imagination (towards which it is
driven in the apprehension of the intuition) is like an abyss in which
it fears to lose itself; yet again for the rational idea of the supersensible it is not excessive, but conformable to law, and directed to eliciting such an eﬀort on the part of the imagination: and so in turn as
much a source of attraction as it was repellent to mere sensibility. But
the judgement itself all the while steadfastly preserves its aesthetic
character, because it represents, without being grounded on any determinate concept of the object, merely the subjective play of the mental

Analytic of the Sublime

89

powers (imagination and reason) as harmonious by virtue of their
very contrast. For just as in the judging of the beautiful imagination
and understanding by their concord generate a subjective purposiveness
of the mental faculties, so imagination and reason do so here by their
conﬂict—that is to say they induce a feeling of our possessing a pure
and self-suﬃcient reason, or a faculty for the estimation of magnitude,
whose pre-eminence can only be made intuitively evident by the
inadequacy of that faculty which in the presentation of magnitudes
(of objects of the senses) is itself unbounded.
Measurement of a space (as apprehension) is at the same time a
description of it, and so an objective movement in the imagination
and a progression. On the other hand the comprehension of the manifold in the unity, not of thought, but of intuition, and consequently the
comprehension of the successively apprehended parts at one glance,
is a retrogression that removes the time-condition in the progression
of the imagination, and renders co-existence intuitable. Therefore,
since the time-series is a condition of inner sense and of an intuition,
it is a subjective movement of the imagination by which it does violence to inner sense—a violence which must be proportionately
more striking the greater the quantum which the imagination comprehends in one intuition. The eﬀort, therefore, to receive in a single
intuition a measure for magnitudes which it takes an appreciable time
to apprehend, is a mode of representation which, subjectively considered, is counter-purposive, but, objectively, is requisite for the
estimation of magnitude, and is consequently purposive. Here the
very same violence that is wrought on the subject through the imagination is judged as purposive with respect to the entire vocation of the mind.
The quality of the feeling of the sublime consists in its being, in
respect of the faculty of aesthetic judging, a feeling of displeasure at
an object, which yet, at the same time, is represented as purposive—
a representation which derives its possibility from the fact that the
subject’s very incapacity betrays the consciousness of an unlimited
capacity of the same subject, and that the mind can aesthetically
judge the latter only through the former.
In the case of the logical estimation of magnitude the impossibility of ever arriving at absolute totality by the progressive measurement
of things of the sensible world in time and space was cognized as an
objective impossibility, i.e. one of thinking the inﬁnite as given, and
not as simply subjective, i.e. an incapacity for grasping it; for nothing

259

90

260

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

turns there on the amount of the comprehension in one intuition, as
measure, but everything depends on a numerical concept. But in an
aesthetic estimation of magnitude the numerical concept must drop
away or undergo a change. The only thing that is purposive for
such estimation is the comprehension on the part of imagination in
respect of the unit of measure (the concept of a law of the successive
production of the concept of magnitude being consequently
avoided).—If, now, a magnitude begins to tax the utmost stretch of
our faculty of comprehension in an intuition, and numerical magnitudes—in respect of which we are conscious of the boundlessness of
our faculty—still call upon the imagination for aesthetic comprehension in a greater unit, the mind then gets a feeling of being aesthetically conﬁned within bounds. Nevertheless, with a view to the
extension of imagination necessary for adequacy with what is
unbounded in our faculty of reason, namely the idea of the absolute
whole, the attendant displeasure, and, consequently, the lack of purposiveness in our faculty of imagination is still represented as purposive for ideas of reason and their arousal. But in this very way the aesthetic judgement itself is subjectively purposive for reason as source
of ideas, i.e. of such an intellectual comprehension as makes all aesthetic comprehension small, and the object is received as sublime
with a pleasure that is only possible by means of a displeasure.

B. The Dynamically Sublime in Nature
§ 28
Nature as Might
Might is a power which is superior to great hindrances. It is termed
dominion if it is also superior to the resistance of that which itself possesses might. Nature considered in an aesthetic judgement as might
that has no dominion over us, is dynamically sublime.
If we are to judge nature as dynamically sublime, it must be represented as a source of fear (though the converse, that every object
that is a source of fear is, in our aesthetic judgement, sublime, does
not hold). For in forming an aesthetic judgement (no concept being
present) the superiority to hindrances can only be judged according
to the greatness of the resistance. Now that which we strive to resist

Analytic of the Sublime

91

is an evil, and, if we do not ﬁnd our powers commensurate to the
task, an object of fear. Hence the aesthetic judgement can only deem
nature a might, and so dynamically sublime, in so far as it is looked
upon as an object of fear.
But we may look upon an object as fearful, and yet not be afraid of
it, if, that is, our judgement takes the form of our simply picturing to
ourselves the case of our wishing to oﬀer some resistance to it, and
recognizing that all such resistance would be quite futile. So the
righteous man fears God without being afraid of him, because he
regards the case of his wishing to resist God and his commandments
as one which need cause him no anxiety. But in every such case,
regarded by him as not intrinsically impossible, he cognizes him as
one to be feared.
One who is in a state of fear can no more play the part of a judge
of the sublime of nature than one captivated by inclination and
appetite can of the beautiful. He ﬂees from the sight of an object
ﬁlling him with dread; and it is impossible to take delight in terror
that is seriously entertained. Hence the agreeableness arising from
the cessation of an uneasiness is a state of joy. But this, depending upon
deliverance from a danger, is a rejoicing accompanied with a resolve
never again to put oneself in the way of the danger: in fact we do not
like bringing back to mind how we felt on that occasion—not to
speak of going in search of an opportunity for experiencing it again.
Bold, overhanging, and, as it were, threatening rocks, thunderclouds piled up the vault of heaven, borne along with ﬂashes and
peals, volcanoes in all their violence of destruction, hurricanes leaving desolation in their track, the boundless ocean rising with rebellious force, the high waterfall of some mighty river, and the like,
make our power of resistance of triﬂing moment in comparison with
their might. But, provided our own position is secure, their aspect is
all the more attractive for its fearfulness; and we readily call these
objects sublime, because they raise the forces of the soul above the
height of vulgar commonplace, and discover within us a power of
resistance of quite another kind, which gives us courage to be able to
measure ourselves against the seeming omnipotence of nature.
In the immeasurableness of nature and the inadequacy of our faculty
for adopting a standard proportionate to the aesthetic estimation of
the magnitude of its realm, we found our own limitation. But with this
we also found in our rational faculty another non-sensuous standard,

261

92

262

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

one which has that inﬁnity itself under it as unit, and in comparison
with which everything in nature is small, and so found in our minds
a pre-eminence over nature even in its immeasurability. Now in just
the same way the irresistibility of the might of nature forces upon us
the recognition of our physical helplessness as beings of nature, but
at the same time reveals a faculty of judging ourselves as independent of nature, and discovers a pre-eminence above nature that is the
foundation of a self-preservation of quite another kind from that
which may be assailed and brought into danger by external nature.
This saves humanity in our own person from humiliation, even
though as human beings we would have to submit to external violence.
In this way external nature is not aesthetically judged as sublime in so
far as it arouses fear, but rather because it summons our power (one
not of nature) to regard as small those things of which we are inclined
to be solicitous (worldly goods, health, and life), and hence to regard
its might (to which in these matters we are no doubt subjected) as
exercising over us and our personality no such rude dominion that
we should bow down before it, once the question becomes one of our
highest principles and of our asserting or forsaking them. Therefore
nature is here called sublime merely because it elevates the imagination to a presentation of those cases in which the mind can come to
feel the sublimity of its own vocation even over nature.
This self-esteem loses nothing by the fact that we must see ourselves
safe in order to feel this soul-stirring delight—a fact from which it
might seemingly be argued that, as there is no seriousness in the
danger, so there is just as little seriousness in the sublimity of our
spiritual faculty. For here the delight only concerns the vocation of
our faculty disclosed in such a case, in so far as this faculty has its
root in our nature although its development and exercise is left to
ourselves and remains our responsibility. Here indeed there is
truth—no matter how conscious we may be, when we stretch our
reﬂection so far, of our actual present helplessness.
This principle has, doubtless, the appearance of being too farfetched and subtle, and so of lying beyond the reach of an aesthetic
judgement. But observation of human beings proves the reverse, and
that it may be the foundation of the commonest judgements, although
one is not always conscious of its presence. For what is it that, even
to the savage, is the object of the greatest admiration? It is someone
who is undaunted, who knows no fear, and who, therefore, does not

Analytic of the Sublime

93

give way to danger, but sets vigorously to work with full deliberation.
Even where civilization has reached a high pitch there remains this
special reverence for the soldier; only that there is then further
required of him that he should also exhibit all the virtues of peace—
gentleness, sympathy and even proper care for his own person; and
for the reason that in this we recognize that his mind is above the
threats of danger. And so, comparing the statesman and the general,
men may argue as they please as to the pre-eminent respect which is
due to either above the other; but the verdict of the aesthetic judgement is for the latter. War itself, provided it is conducted with order
and a sacred respect for the rights of civilians, has something sublime
about it, and gives nations that carry it on in such a manner a stamp
of mind only the more sublime the more numerous the dangers to
which they are exposed, and which they are able to meet with fortitude.
On the other hand, a prolonged peace favours the predominance
of a mere commercial spirit, and with it a debasing self-interest,
cowardice, and weakness, and tends to degrade the character of the
people.
So far as sublimity is predicated of might, this solution of the
concept of it appears at variance with the fact that we tend to
represent God in the tempest, the storm, the earthquake, and the
like, as presenting himself in his wrath, but at the same time also in
his sublimity, and yet here it would be alike folly and presumption to
imagine a pre-eminence of our minds over the operations and, as it
appears, even over the direction of such might. Here, instead of a
feeling of the sublimity of our own nature, submission, prostration,
and a feeling of utter helplessness seem more to constitute the attitude of mind beﬁtting the manifestation of such an object, and to be
that also more customarily associated with the idea of it on the occasion of a natural phenomenon of this kind. In religion, as a rule, prostration, adoration with bowed head, coupled with contrite, timorous
posture and voice, seems to be the only becoming demeanour in
presence of the Divinity, and accordingly most peoples have assumed
and still observe it. Yet this cast of mind is far from being intrinsically and necessarily involved in the idea of the sublimity of a religion
and of its object. The individual that is actually in a state of fear,
ﬁnding in himself good reason to be so, because he is conscious of
oﬀending with his evil disposition against a might directed by a will
at once irresistible and just, is far from being in the frame of mind for

263

94

264

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

admiring divine greatness, for which a mood of calm reﬂection and a
quite free judgement are required. Only when he becomes conscious
of having a disposition that is upright and acceptable to God, do
those operations of might serve to stir within him the idea of the
sublimity of this being, so far as he recognizes the existence in himself
of a sublimity of disposition consonant with the divine will, and is
thus raised above the dread of such operations of nature, in which he
no longer sees God pouring forth his wrath. Even humility, taking
the form of an uncompromising judgement upon his shortcomings,
which, with the consciousness of good intentions, might readily be
glossed over on the ground of the frailty of human nature, is a sublime
temper of the mind voluntarily to undergo the pain of remorse as a
means of more and more eﬀectually eradicating its cause. In this way
religion is intrinsically distinguished from superstition, which latter
rears in the mind, not reverence for the sublime, but dread and
apprehension of the all-powerful being to whose will terror-stricken
man sees himself subjected, yet without according him due honour.
From this nothing can arise but grace-begging and vain adulation,
instead of a religion consisting in a good life.
Sublimity, therefore, does not reside in any of the things of nature,
but only in our own mind, in so far as we may become conscious of
our superiority over nature within, and thus also over nature without
us (as exerting inﬂuence upon us). Everything that provokes this
feeling in us, including the might of nature which challenges our
strength, is then, though improperly, called sublime, and it is only
under presupposition of this idea within us, and in relation to it, that
we are capable of attaining to the idea of the sublimity of that being
which inspires deep respect in us, not by the mere display of its
might in nature, but more by the faculty which is harboured in us of
judging that might without fear, and of regarding our vocation as
sublimely exalted above it.

§ 29
Modality of the judgement on the sublime in nature
Beautiful nature contains countless things as to which we at once
take everyone as in their judgement concurring with our own, and as
to which we may further expect this concurrence without going very
far wrong. But in respect of our judgement upon the sublime in nature

Analytic of the Sublime

95

we cannot so easily vouch for its ready acceptance by others. For a
far higher degree of culture, not merely of the aesthetic judgement,
but also of the faculties of cognition which lie at its basis, seems to be
requisite to enable us to lay down a judgement upon this high distinction of natural objects.
The mental mood appropriate for a feeling of the sublime requires
the mind’s susceptibility for ideas, since it is precisely in the failure
of nature to attain to these—and consequently only under presupposition of this susceptibility and of the straining of the imagination to
use nature as a schema for ideas—that there is something forbidding
to sensibility, but which, for all that, has an attraction for us, arising
from the fact of its being a dominion which reason exercises over
sensibility with a view to extending it to the requirements of its own
realm (the practical) and letting it look out beyond itself into the
inﬁnite, which for it is an abyss. In fact, without the development of
moral ideas, that which, thanks to preparatory culture, we call sublime, merely strikes the untutored individual as terrifying. He will
see in the evidences which the ravages of nature give of her dominion, and in the vast scale of her might, compared with which his own
is diminished to insigniﬁcance, only the misery, peril, and distress
that would encompass those who were thrown to its mercy. So the
simple-minded, and, for the most part, intelligent Savoyard peasant
(as Herr von Saussure relates)* unhesitatingly called all lovers of
snow-mountains fools. And who can tell whether he would have
been so wide of the mark, if that student of nature had taken the risk
of the dangers to which he exposed himself merely, as most travellers
do, for a fad, or so as some day to be able to give a moving account of
his adventures? But the mind of Saussure was bent on the instruction
of mankind, and soul-stirring sensations that excellent man indeed
enjoyed, and the reader of his travels got them thrown into the
bargain.
But the fact that culture is requisite for the judgement upon the
sublime in nature (more than for that upon the beautiful) does not
involve its being an original product of culture and something introduced in a more or less conventional way into society. Rather is it in
human nature that its foundations are laid, and, in fact, in that which,
at once with common understanding, we may expect everyone to
possess and may require of them, namely, a native capacity for the
feeling for (practical) ideas, i.e. for moral feeling.

265

96

266

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

This, now, is the foundation of the necessity of that agreement
between other people’s judgements upon the sublime and our own,
which we make our own imply. For just as we taunt a person who is
quite inappreciative when judging an object of nature in which
we see beauty, with lack of taste, so we say of a person who remains
unaﬀected in the presence of what we consider sublime, that he has no
feeling. But we demand both taste and feeling of everyone, and, granted
some degree of culture, we give them credit for both. Still, we do so
with this diﬀerence: that, in the case of the former, since judgement
there refers the imagination merely to the understanding, as the faculty
of concepts, we make the requirement as a matter of course, whereas in
the case of the latter, since here the judgement refers the imagination to
reason, as a faculty of ideas, we do so only under a subjective presupposition (which, however, we believe we are warranted in making),
namely that of the moral feeling in human beings. And, on this assumption, we attribute necessity to the latter aesthetic judgement also.
In this modality of aesthetic judgements, namely their assumed
necessity, lies what is for the critique of judgement a moment of capital importance. For this is exactly what makes an a priori principle
apparent in their case, and lifts them out of the sphere of empirical psychology, in which otherwise they would remain buried amid the feelings of gratiﬁcation and pain (only with the senseless epithet of ﬁner
feeling), so as to place them, and, thanks to them, to place the faculty
of judgement itself, in the class of judgements of which the basis of an
a priori principle is the distinguishing feature, and, thus distinguished,
to introduce them into transcendental philosophy.

general remark upon the exposition
of aesthetic reflective judgements
In relation to the feeling of pleasure an object is to be counted either
as agreeable, or beautiful, or sublime, or good (absolutely), (iucundum,
pulchrum, sublime, honestum).
As the motive of desires the agreeable is invariably of one and the
same kind, no matter what its source or how speciﬁcally diﬀerent the
representation (of sense and sensation objectively considered).
Hence in judging its inﬂuence upon the mind the multitude of its
charms (simultaneous or successive) is alone relevant, and so only, as it
were, the mass of the agreeable sensation, and it is only by its quantity,

Analytic of the Sublime

97

therefore, that this can be made intelligible. Further it in no way conduces to our culture, but belongs only to mere enjoyment.—The
beautiful, on the other hand, requires the representation of a certain
quality of the object, that permits also of being understood and reduced
to concepts, (although in the aesthetic judgement it is not so reduced),
and it cultivates, as it instructs us to attend to purposiveness in the
feeling of pleasure.—The sublime consists merely in the relation
exhibited by the judgement of the serviceability of the sensible in the
representation of nature for a possible supersensible employment.—
The absolutely good, judged subjectively according to the feeling it
inspires, (the object of the moral feeling,) as the determinability of
the powers of the subject by means of the representation of an
absolutely necessitating law, is principally distinguished by the modality of a necessity resting upon concepts a priori, and involving not a
mere claim, but a command upon everyone to assent, and belongs
intrinsically not to the aesthetic, but to the pure intellectual judgement. Further, it is not ascribed to nature but to freedom, and that
in a determining and not a merely reﬂective judgement. But the
determinability of the subject by means of this idea, and, what is more,
that of a subject which can be sensible, in the way of a modiﬁcation of
its state, to hindrances on the part of sensibility, while, at the same
time, it can by surmounting them feel superiority over them—a
determinability, in other words, as moral feeling—is still so allied to
aesthetic judgement and its formal conditions as to be capable of being
pressed into the service of the aesthetic representation of the conformity to law of action from duty, i.e. of the representation of this
as sublime, or even as beautiful, without forfeiting its purity—an
impossible result were one to make it naturally bound up with the
feeling of the agreeable.
The eﬀective result to be extracted from the exposition so far
given of both kinds of aesthetic judgements may be summed up in
the following brief deﬁnitions:
The beautiful is what pleases in the mere judging of it (consequently not by intervention of any feeling of sense in accordance with
a concept of the understanding). From this it follows at once that it
must please apart from all interest.
The sublime is what pleases immediately through its resistance to
the interest of the senses.

267

98

268

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

Both, as deﬁnitions of aesthetic universally valid judging, have reference to subjective grounds. In the one case the reference is to
grounds of sensibility, in so far as these are purposive on behalf of the
contemplative understanding, in the other case in so far as, in their
opposition to sensibility, they are, on the contrary, purposive in reference to the ends of practical reason. Both, however, as united in the
same subject, are purposive in reference to the moral feeling. The
beautiful prepares us to love something, even nature, apart from any
interest: the sublime to esteem something highly even in opposition
to our (sensuous) interest.
The sublime may be described in this way: It is an object (of nature)
the representation of which determines the mind to regard the elevation of
nature beyond our reach as equivalent to a presentation of ideas.
In a literal sense and according to their logical import, ideas cannot
be presented. But if we enlarge our empirical faculty of representation (mathematical or dynamical) with a view to the intuition of
nature, reason inevitably steps forward, as the faculty concerned with
the independence of the absolute totality, and calls forth the eﬀort of
the mind, unavailing though it be, to make the representation of
sense adequate to this totality. This eﬀort, and the feeling of the
unattainability of the idea by means of imagination, is itself a presentation of the subjective purposiveness of our mind in the employment
of the imagination in the interests of the mind’s supersensible vocation, and compels us subjectively to think nature itself in its totality
as a presentation of something supersensible, without our being able
to produce this presentation objectively.
For we readily see that nature in space and time falls entirely short
of the unconditioned, consequently also of the absolutely great,
which still the commonest reason demands. And by this we are also
reminded that we have only to do with nature as phenomenon, and
that this itself must be regarded as the mere presentation of a nature
in itself (which exists in the idea of reason). But this idea of the
supersensible, which no doubt we cannot further determine—so
that we cannot cognize nature as its presentation, but only think it
as such—is awakened in us by an object the aesthetic judging of
which strains the imagination to its utmost, whether in respect of its
extension (mathematical), or of its might over the mind (dynamical).
For it is founded upon the feeling of a sphere of the mind which
altogether exceeds the realm of nature (i.e. upon the moral feeling),

Analytic of the Sublime

99

with regard to which the representation of the object is judged as
subjectively purposive.
As a matter of fact, a feeling for the sublime in nature is hardly
thinkable unless in association with a disposition of mind resembling
the moral. And though, like that feeling, the immediate pleasure in
the beautiful in nature presupposes and cultivates a certain liberality
of thought, i.e. makes our delight independent of any mere enjoyment of sense, still it represents freedom rather as in play than as
exercising a law-governed activity, which is the genuine characteristic of human morality, where reason has to impose its dominion upon
sensibility. There is, however, this qualiﬁcation, that in the aesthetic
judgement upon the sublime this dominion is represented as exercised through the imagination itself as an instrument of reason.
Thus, too, delight in the sublime in nature is only negative (whereas
that in the beautiful is positive): that is to say it is a feeling of imagination by its own act depriving itself of its freedom by receiving a purposive determination in accordance with a law other than that of its
empirical employment. In this way it gains an extension and a might
greater than that which it sacriﬁces. But the ground of this is hidden
from it, and in its place it feels the sacriﬁce or deprivation, as well as
its cause, to which it is subjected. The astonishment amounting
almost to terror, the horror and sacred awe, that seizes us when
gazing upon the prospect of mountains ascending to heaven, deep
ravines and torrents raging there, deep-shadowed solitudes that
invite to brooding melancholy, and the like—all this, when we are
assured of our own safety, is not actual fear. Rather is it an attempt
to gain access to it through imagination, for the purpose of feeling
the might of this faculty in combining the movement of the mind
thereby aroused with its serenity, and of thus being superior to internal and, therefore, to external, nature, so far as the latter can have any
bearing upon our feeling of well-being. For the imagination, in accordance with laws of association, makes our state of contentment dependent upon physical conditions. But acting in accordance with principles
of the schematism of judgement (consequently so far as it is subordinated to freedom) it is at the same time an instrument of reason and
its ideas. But in this capacity it is a might enabling us to assert our
independence as against the inﬂuences of nature, to degrade what is
great in respect of the latter to the level of what is little, and thus to
locate the absolutely great only in the proper vocation of the subject.

269

100

270

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

This reﬂection of aesthetic judgement by which it raises itself to the
point of adequacy with reason, though without any determinate concept
of reason, is still a representation of the object as subjectively purposive, by virtue even of the objective inadequacy of the imagination in
its greatest extension for meeting the demands of reason (as the
faculty of ideas).
Here we have to attend generally to what has been already adverted
to, that in the transcendental aesthetic of judgement there must be no
question of anything but pure aesthetic judgements. Consequently
examples are not to be selected from such beautiful or sublime objects
as presuppose the concept of an end. For then the purposiveness
would be either teleological, or based upon mere sensations of an
object (gratiﬁcation or pain) and so, in the ﬁrst case, not aesthetic,
and, in the second, not merely formal. So, if we call the sight of the
starry heaven sublime, we must not found our judgement of it upon
any concepts of worlds inhabited by rational beings, with the bright
spots, which we see ﬁlling the space above us, as their suns moving
in orbits prescribed for them with the wisest regard to ends. But we
must take it, just as it strikes the eye, as a broad and all-embracing
canopy: and it is merely under such a representation that we may
posit the sublimity which the pure aesthetic judgement attributes to
this object. Similarly, as to the prospect of the ocean, we are not to
regard it as we, with our minds stored with knowledge on a variety
of matters (which, however, is not contained in the immediate intuition), are accustomed to represent it in thought, as, let us say, a spacious realm of aquatic creatures, or as the mighty reservoirs from
which are drawn the vapours that ﬁll the air with clouds of moisture
for the good of the land, or yet as an element which no doubt divides
continent from continent, but at the same time aﬀords the means of
the greatest commercial intercourse between them—for in this way
we get nothing beyond teleological judgements. Instead of this we
must be able to see sublimity in the ocean, regarding it, as the poets
do, according to what the impression upon the eye reveals, as, let us
say, in its calm, a clear mirror of water bounded only by the heavens,
or, be it disturbed, as threatening to overwhelm and engulf everything. The same is to be said of the sublime and beautiful in the
human form. Here, for determining grounds of the judgement, we
must not have recourse to concepts of ends subserved by all its limbs
and members, or allow their accordance with these ends to inﬂuence

Analytic of the Sublime

101

our aesthetic judgement (in such case no longer pure), although it is
certainly also a necessary condition of aesthetic delight that they should
not conﬂict with these ends. Aesthetic purposiveness is the conformity
to law of judgement in its freedom. The delight in the object depends
upon the reference which we seek to give to the imagination, namely
that it is to entertain the mind in a free activity. If, on the other hand,
something else,—be it sensation or concept of the understanding—
determines the judgement, it is then conformable to law, no doubt,
but not an act of free judgement.
Hence to speak of intellectual beauty or sublimity is to use expressions which, in the ﬁrst place, are not quite correct. For these are aesthetic modes of representation which would be entirely foreign to us
were we merely pure intelligences (or if we even put ourselves in
thought in the position of such). Secondly, although both, as objects of
an intellectual (moral) delight, are compatible with aesthetic delight to
the extent of not resting upon any interest, still, on the other hand,
there is a diﬃculty in the way of their alliance with such delight, since
their function is to produce an interest, and, on the assumption that the
presentation has to accord with delight in the aesthetic judging, this
interest could only be eﬀected by means of an interest of the senses
combined with it in the presentation. But in this way the intellectual
purposiveness would be violated and rendered impure.
The object of a pure and unconditioned intellectual delight is the
moral law in the might which it exerts in us over all antecedent motives
of the mind. Now, since it is only through sacriﬁces that this might
makes itself known to us aesthetically, (and this involves a deprivation of something—though in the interests of inner freedom—whilst
in turn it reveals in us an unfathomable depth of this supersensible
faculty, the consequences of which extend beyond our visible reach),
it follows that the delight, looked at from the aesthetic side (in reference to sensibility) is negative, i.e. opposed to this interest, but from
the intellectual side, positive and bound up with an interest. Hence
it follows that the intellectual and intrinsically purposive (moral)
good, estimated aesthetically, instead of being represented as beautiful, must rather be represented as sublime, with the result that it
arouses more a feeling of respect (which disdains charm) than of love
or of the heart being drawn towards it—for human nature does not of
its own proper motion accord with the good, but only by virtue of the
dominion which reason exercises over sensibility. Conversely, that,

271

102

272

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

too, which we call sublime in external nature, or even internal nature
(e.g. certain aﬀects) is only represented as a might of the mind
enabling it to overcome this or that hindrance of sensibility by means
of moral principles, and it is from this that it derives its interest.
I must dwell a while on the latter point. The idea of the good
connected with aﬀect is enthusiasm. This state of mind appears to be
sublime: so much so that there is a common saying that nothing great
can be achieved without it. But now every aﬀect7 is blind either as to
the choice of its end, or, supposing this has been furnished by reason,
in the way it is eﬀected—for it is that movement of the mind whereby
the exercise of free deliberation upon fundamental principles, with a
view to determining oneself accordingly, is rendered impossible. On
this account it cannot merit any delight on the part of reason. Yet,
from an aesthetic point of view, enthusiasm is sublime, because it is
an eﬀort of one’s powers called forth by ideas which give to the mind
an impetus of far stronger and more enduring eﬃcacy than the stimulus aﬀorded by sensible representations. But (as seems strange)
even freedom from aﬀect (apatheia, phlegma in signiﬁcatu bono) in a
mind that strenuously follows its unswerving principles is sublime,
and that, too, in a manner vastly superior, because it has at the same
time the delight of pure reason on its side. Such a stamp of mind is
alone called noble. This expression, however, comes in time to be
applied to things—such as buildings, a garment, literary style, a
person’s bearing, and the like—provided they do not so much excite
astonishment (the aﬀect attending the representation of novelty
exceeding expectation) as admiration (an astonishment which does
not cease when the novelty wears oﬀ )—and this obtains where ideas
undesignedly and artlessly accord in their presentation with aesthetic
delight.
Every aﬀect of the strenuous type (such, that is, as excites the
consciousness of our power of overcoming every resistance (animi
strenui)) is aesthetically sublime, e.g. anger, even desperation (the rage
of forlorn hope but not faint-hearted despair). On the other hand,
7
There is a speciﬁc distinction between aﬀects and passions. Aﬀects are related merely
to feeling; passions belong to the faculty of desire, and are inclinations that hinder or
render impossible all determinability of the power of choice through principles. Aﬀects
are impetuous and irresponsible: passions are abiding and deliberate. Thus resentment,
in the form of anger, is an aﬀect: but in the form of hatred (vindictiveness) it is a passion. Under no circumstances can the latter be called sublime; for, while the freedom of
the mind is, no doubt, impeded in the case of aﬀects, in passion it is abrogated.

Analytic of the Sublime

103

aﬀect of the languid type (which converts the very eﬀort of resistance into an object of displeasure (animum languidum)) has nothing
noble about it, though it may take its rank as possessing beauty of the
sensuous order. Hence the emotions capable of attaining the strength
of an aﬀect are very diverse. We have spirited, and we have tender
emotions. When the strength of the latter reaches that of an aﬀect
they can be turned to no account. The propensity to indulge in them
is sentimentality. A sympathetic grief that refuses to be consoled, or
one that has to do with imaginary misfortune to which we deliberately give way so far as to allow our fantasy to delude us into thinking it actual fact, indicates and goes to make a tender, but at the same
time weak, soul, which shows a beautiful side, and may no doubt be
called fanciful, but never enthusiastic. Romances, maudlin dramas,
shallow homilies, which triﬂe with so-called (though falsely so) noble
sentiments, but in fact make the heart enervated, insensitive to the
stern precepts of duty, and incapable of respect for the worth of
humanity in our own person and the rights of human beings (which
is something quite other than their happiness), and in general incapable of all ﬁrm principles; even a religious discourse which recommends a cringing and abject grace-begging and favour-seeking,
abandoning all reliance on our own ability to resist the evil within us,
in place of the vigorous resolution to try to get the better of our inclinations by means of those powers which, frail though we may be, are
still left to us; that false humility by which self-abasement, whining
hypocritical repentance and a merely passive frame of mind are set
down as the method by which alone we can become acceptable to
the Supreme Being—these have nothing to do with what may be
reckoned to belong to beauty, not to speak of the sublimity of mental
temperament.
But even impetuous movements of the mind—whether they be
allied under the name of ediﬁcation with ideas of religion, or, as
pertaining merely to culture, with ideas involving a social interest—
no matter how much they strain the imagination, can in no way lay
claim to the honour of a sublime presentation, if they do not leave
behind them a temper of mind which, though it be only indirectly,
has an inﬂuence upon the consciousness of the mind’s strength and
resoluteness in respect of that which carries with it pure intellectual
purposiveness (the supersensible). For, in the absence of this, all
these emotions belong only to motion, which we welcome in the

273

104
274

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

interests of good health. The agreeable lassitude that follows upon
being stirred up in that way by the play of the aﬀects, is a fruition of
the state of well-being arising from the restoration of the equilibrium
of the various vital forces within us. This, in the last resort, comes to
no more than what the Eastern voluptuaries ﬁnd so soothing when
they get their bodies massaged, and all their muscles and joints softly
pressed and bent; only that in the ﬁrst case the principle that occasions the movement is chieﬂy internal, whereas here it is entirely
external. Thus, many an individual believes himself ediﬁed by a
sermon in which there is no establishment of anything (no system of
good maxims); or thinks himself improved by a tragedy, when he is
merely glad at having relieved himself of boredom. Thus the sublime
must in every case have reference to our way of thinking, i.e. to maxims
directed to giving to the intellectual side of our nature and to the
ideas of reason supremacy over sensibility.
We have no reason to fear that the feeling of the sublime will suﬀer
from an abstract mode of presentation like this, which is altogether
negative with regard to the sensuous. For though the imagination, no
doubt, ﬁnds nothing beyond the sensible world on which it can lay
hold, still this thrusting aside of the sensible barriers gives it a feeling
of being unbounded; and that removal is thus a presentation of
the inﬁnite. As such it can never be anything more than a negative
presentation—but still it expands the soul. Perhaps there is no more
sublime passage in the Jewish Law than the commandment: Thou
shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any
thing that is in heaven or on earth, or under the earth, etc. This commandment can alone explain the enthusiasm which the Jewish
people, in their moral period, felt for their religion when comparing
themselves with others, or the pride inspired by Mohammedanism.
The very same holds good of our representation of the moral law and
of our intrinsic capacity for morality. The fear that, if we divest this
representation of everything that can commend it to the senses, it
will thereupon be attended only with a cold and lifeless approbation
and not with any moving force or emotion, is wholly unwarranted. The
very reverse is the truth. For when nothing any longer presents itself
to the senses, and the unmistakable and ineﬀaceable idea of morality
is all that now remains, there would be need rather of tempering the
ardour of an unbounded imagination to prevent it rising to enthusiasm,
than of seeking to lend these ideas the aid of images and childish

Analytic of the Sublime

105

devices for fear of their lack of power. For this reason governments
have gladly let religion be fully equipped with these accessories, seeking in this way to relieve their subjects of the exertion, but to deprive
them, at the same time, of the ability, required for expanding their
spiritual powers beyond the limits arbitrarily laid down for them,
and this makes it all the easier to treat them as though they were
merely passive.
This pure, elevating, merely negative presentation of morality
involves, on the other hand, no fear of fanaticism, which is a delusion
that would will some vision beyond all the bounds of sensibility; i.e.
would dream according to principles (rational raving). The safeguard
is the purely negative character of the presentation. For the inscrutability of the idea of freedom precludes all positive presentation. The moral
law, however, is a suﬃcient and original source of determination
within us: so it does not for a moment permit us to cast about for a
ground of determination external to itself. If enthusiasm is comparable
to delirium, fanaticism may be compared to mania. Of these the latter
is least of all compatible with the sublime, for it is profoundly ridiculous. In enthusiasm, as an aﬀect, the imagination is unbridled; in
fanaticism, as a deep-seated, brooding passion, it is ungoverned. The
ﬁrst is a transitory state to which the healthiest understanding is liable
to become at times the victim; the second is an undermining disease.
Simplicity (artless purposiveness) is, as it were, the style adopted
by nature in the sublime. It is also that of morality. The latter is a
second (supersensible) nature, whose laws alone we know, without
being able to attain to an intuition of the supersensible faculty within
us—that which contains the ground of this legislation.
One further remark. The delight in the sublime, no less than in
the beautiful, by reason of its universal communicability is not only
plainly distinguished from other aesthetic judgements, but also from
this same property acquires an interest in society (in which it admits
of such communication). Yet, despite this, we have to note the fact
that isolation from all society is looked upon as something sublime,
provided it rests upon ideas which disregard all sensible interest. To
be self-suﬃcing, and so not to stand in need of society, yet without
being unsociable, i.e. without shunning it, is something approaching
the sublime—a remark applicable to all superiority over needs. On
the other hand, to shun our fellow human beings from misanthropy,
because of enmity towards them, or from anthropophobia, because we

275

276

106

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

imagine the hand of everyone is against us, is partly odious, partly
contemptible. There is, however, a misanthropy, (most improperly
so called,) the tendency towards which is to be found with advancing
years in many right-minded people, that, as far as good will goes,
is, no doubt, philanthropic enough, but as the result of long and
sad experience, is widely removed from delight in mankind. We see
evidences of this in the propensity to reclusiveness, in the fanciful
desire for a retired country seat, or else (with the young) in the dream
of the happiness of being able to spend one’s life with a little family
on an island unknown to the rest of the world—material of which
novelists or writers of Robinsonades know how to make such good
use. Falsehood, ingratitude, injustice, the puerility of the ends which
we ourselves look upon as great and momentous, and to attain which
we inﬂict upon our fellow human beings all imaginable evils—these
all so contradict the idea of what people might be if they only would,
and are so at variance with our active wish to see them better, that, to
avoid hating where we cannot love, it seems but a slight sacriﬁce to
forgo all the joys of fellowship with our kind. This sadness which is not
directed to the evils which fate brings down upon others (a sadness
which springs from sympathy), but to those which they inﬂict upon
themselves (one which is based on antipathy in questions of principle),
is sublime because it is founded on ideas, whereas that springing from
sympathy can only be accounted beautiful.—Saussure, who was no less
ingenious than profound, in the description of his Alpine travels
remarks of Bonhomme, one of the Savoy mountains, ‘There reigns there
a certain insipid sadness.’ He recognized, therefore, that, besides this,
there is an interesting sadness, such as is inspired by the sight of some
desolate place into which men might gladly withdraw themselves so as
to hear no more of the world without, and be no longer versed in its
aﬀairs, a place, however, which must yet not be so altogether inhospitable as only to aﬀord a most miserable retreat for a human being.—
I only make this observation as a reminder that even sorrow (but not
dispirited sadness) may take its place among the vigorous aﬀects, provided it has its root in moral ideas. If, however, it is grounded upon sympathy, and, as such, is lovable, it belongs only to the languid aﬀections.
And this serves to call attention to the mental temperament which in
the ﬁrst case alone is sublime.

Analytic of the Sublime

107

The transcendental exposition of aesthetic judgements now
brought to a close may be compared with the physiological one, as
worked out by Burke and many acute men among us, so that we may
see where a merely empirical exposition of the sublime and beautiful
would bring us. Burke,8 who deserves to be called the foremost
author* in this method of treatment, deduces, on these lines, ‘that
the feeling of the sublime is grounded on the impulse towards selfpreservation and on fear, i.e. on a pain, which, since it does not go the
length of disordering the bodily parts, calls forth movements which,
as they clear the vessels, whether ﬁne or gross, of a dangerous and
troublesome encumbrance, are capable of producing delight; not
pleasure but a sort of delightful horror, a sort of tranquillity tinged
with terror.’ The beautiful, which he grounds on love (from which,
still, he would have desire kept separate), he reduces to ‘the relaxing,
slackening, and enervating of the ﬁbres of the body, and consequently a softening, a dissolving, a languor, and a fainting, dying,
and melting away for pleasure’. And this explanation he supports, not
alone by instances in which the feeling of the beautiful as well as of
the sublime is capable of being excited in us by the imagination in
conjunction with the understanding, but even by instances when it is
in conjunction with sensations.—As psychological observations
these analyses of our mental phenomena are extremely ﬁne, and
supply a wealth of material for the favourite investigations of empirical anthropology. But, besides that, there is no denying the fact that
all representations within us, no matter whether they are objectively
merely sensible or wholly intellectual, are still subjectively associable
with gratiﬁcation or pain, however imperceptible either of these
may be. (For these representations one and all aﬀect the feeling of
life, and none of them, so far as it is a modiﬁcation of the subject, can
be indiﬀerent.) We must even admit that, as Epicurus maintained,
gratiﬁcation and pain though proceeding from the imagination or
even from representations of the understanding, are always in the
last resort corporeal, since apart from any feeling of the bodily organ
life would be merely a consciousness of one’s existence, and could
not include any feeling of well-being or the reverse, i.e. of the furtherance or hindrance of the vital forces. For, of itself alone, the
8
See p. 223 of the German translation of his work: Philosophische Untersuchungen über den
Ursprung unserer Begriffe vom Schönen und Erhabenen. Riga, published by Hartknock, 1773.

277

278

108

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

mind is all life (the life-principle itself ), and hindrance or furtherance
has to be sought outside it, and yet in the human being himself, consequently in the connexion with his body.
But if we attribute the delight in the object wholly and entirely
to the gratiﬁcation which it aﬀords through charm or emotion, then
we must not expect from anyone else agreement with the aesthetic
judgement passed by us. For in such matters each person rightly consults his own personal feeling alone. But in that case there is an end
of all censure in matters of taste—unless the example aﬀorded by
others as the result of a contingent coincidence of their judgements
is to be held over us as commanding our assent. But this principle we
would presumably resent, and appeal to our natural right of submitting a judgement to our own sense, where it rests upon the immediate feeling of personal well-being, instead of submitting it to that of
others.
Hence if the import of the judgement of taste, where we appraise
it as a judgement entitled to require the concurrence of everyone,
cannot be egoistic, but must necessarily, from its inner nature, be
allowed a pluralistic validity, i.e. on account of what taste itself is, and
not on account of the examples which others give of their taste, then
it must found upon some a priori principle (whether it be subjective
or objective), and no amount of prying into the empirical laws of the
changes that go on within the mind can succeed in establishing such
a principle. For these laws only yield a knowledge of how we do judge,
but they do not give us a command as to how we ought to judge, and,
what is more, such a command as is unconditioned—and commands
of this kind are presupposed by judgements of taste, inasmuch as
they require delight to be taken as immediately connected with a
representation. Accordingly, though the empirical exposition of
aesthetic judgements may be a ﬁrst step towards accumulating the
material for a higher investigation, yet a transcendental examination
of this faculty is possible, and forms an essential part of the critique
of taste. For, if taste were not in possession of a priori principles, it
could not possibly sit in judgement upon the judgements of others,
and pass sentence of commendation or condemnation upon them,
with even the least semblance of authority.
The remaining part of the Analytic of aesthetic judgement contains ﬁrst of all the:—

Analytic of the Sublime

109

deduction of pure aesthetic judgements
§ 30
The deduction of aesthetic judgements* upon objects of nature
must not be directed to what we call sublime in nature,
but only to the beautiful
The claim of an aesthetic judgement to universal validity for every
subject, being a judgement which must rely on some a priori principle,
stands in need of a deduction (i.e. a derivation of its title). Further,
where the delight or aversion turns on the form of the object this has
to be something over and above the exposition of the judgement.
Such is the case with judgements of taste upon the beautiful in
nature. For there the purposiveness has its foundation in the object
and its outward form—although it does not signify the reference of
this to other objects according to concepts (for the purpose of cognitive judgements), but is merely concerned in general with the apprehension of this form so far as it proves accordant in the mind with
the faculty of concepts as well as with that of their presentation
(which is identical with that of apprehension). With regard to the
beautiful in nature, therefore, we may start a number of questions
touching the cause of this purposiveness of their forms: e.g. How we
are to explain why nature has scattered beauty abroad with so lavish
a hand, even in the depth of the ocean where it can but seldom be
glimpsed by the human eye—for which alone it is purposive.
But the sublime in nature—if we pass upon it a pure aesthetic
judgement unmixed with concepts of perfection, as objective purposiveness, which would make the judgement teleological—may be
regarded as completely lacking in form or ﬁgure, and nonetheless be
looked upon as an object of pure delight, and indicate a subjective
purposiveness of the given representation. So, now, the question
suggests itself, whether in addition to the exposition of what is
thought in an aesthetic judgement of this kind, we may be called upon
to give a deduction of its claim to some (subjective) a priori principle.
This we may meet with the reply that the sublime in nature is
improperly so called, and that sublimity should, in strictness, be
attributed merely to the attitude of thought, or, rather, to that which
serves as the basis for this in human nature. The apprehension of an

279

280

110

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

object otherwise formless and in conﬂict with ends supplies the mere
occasion for our coming to a consciousness of this basis; and the
object is in this way put to a subjectively purposive use, but it is not
judged as subjectively-purposive on its own account and because of its
form. (It is, as it were, a species ﬁnalis accepta, non data.) Consequently
the exposition we gave of judgements upon the sublime in nature was
at the same time their deduction. For in our analysis of the reﬂection
on the part of judgement in this case we found that in such judgements there is a purposive relation of the cognitive faculties, which
has to be laid a priori at the basis of the faculty of ends (the will), and
which is therefore itself a priori purposive. This, then, at once involves
the deduction, i.e. the justiﬁcation of the claim of such a judgement
to universally-necessary validity.
Hence we may conﬁne our search to one for the deduction of
judgements of taste, i.e. of judgements upon the beauty of things of
nature, and this will satisfactorily dispose of the problem for the
entire aesthetic faculty of judgement.

§ 31
Of the method of the deduction of judgements of taste

281

The obligation to furnish a deduction, i.e. a guarantee of the legitimacy of judgements of a particular kind, only arises where the judgement lays claim to necessity. This is the case even where it requires
subjective universality, i.e. the agreement of everyone, even though
the judgement is not a cognitive judgement, but only one of pleasure
or displeasure in a given object, i.e. an assumption of a subjective
purposiveness that has a thorough-going validity for everyone, and
which, since the judgement is one of taste, is not to be grounded
upon any concept of the thing.
Now, in the latter case, we are not dealing with a judgement of
cognition—neither with a theoretical one based on the concept of a
nature in general, supplied by the understanding, nor with a (pure)
practical one based on the idea of freedom, as given a priori by reason—
and so we are not called upon to justify a priori the validity of a judgement
which represents either what a thing is, or that there is something
which I ought to do in order to produce it. Consequently, if for
judgement generally we demonstrate the universal validity of a singular
judgement expressing the subjective purposiveness of an empirical

Analytic of the Sublime

111

representation of the form of an object, we shall do all that is needed
to explain how it is possible that something can please in the mere
judging of it (without sensation or concept), and how, just as the
judging of an object for the sake of a cognition generally has universal
rules, the delight of any one person may be pronounced as a rule for
every other.
Now if this universal validity is not to be based on a collection of
votes and interrogation of others as to what sort of sensations they experience, but is to rest, as it were, upon an autonomy of the subject passing judgement on the feeling of pleasure (in the given representation),
i.e. upon his own taste, and yet is also not to be derived from
concepts; then it follows that such a judgement—and such the judgement of taste in fact is—has a double and also logical peculiarity. For,
ﬁrst, it has universal validity a priori, yet without having a logical universality according to concepts, but only the universality of a singular
judgement. Secondly, it has a necessity (which must invariably rest
upon a priori grounds) but one which depends upon no a priori proofs
by the representation of which it would be competent to enforce the
assent which the judgement of taste demands of everyone.
The solution of these logical peculiarities, which distinguish a
judgement of taste from all cognitive judgements, will of itself suﬃce
for a deduction of this strange faculty, provided we abstract at the
outset from all content of the judgement, namely from the feeling of
pleasure, and merely compare the aesthetic form with the form of
objective judgements as prescribed by logic. We shall ﬁrst try, with
the help of examples, to illustrate and bring out these characteristic
properties of taste.

§ 32
First peculiarity of the judgement of taste
The judgement of taste determines its object in respect of delight (as
a thing of beauty) with a claim to the agreement of everyone, just as
if it were objective.
To say: This ﬂower is beautiful, is tantamount to repeating its
own proper claim to the delight of everyone. The agreeableness of its
smell gives it no claim at all. One person revels in it, but it gives
another a headache. Now what else are we to suppose from this than
that its beauty is to be taken for a property of the ﬂower itself which

282

112

283

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

does not adapt itself to the diversity of heads and the individual
senses of the multitude, but to which they must adapt themselves, if
they are going to pass judgement upon it. And yet this is not the way
the matter stands. For the judgement of taste consists precisely in a
thing being called beautiful solely in respect of that quality in which
it adapts itself to our mode of receiving it.
Besides, every judgement which is to show the taste of the individual, is required to be an independent judgement of the individual
in question. There must be no need of groping about among other
people’s judgements and getting previous instruction from their
delight in or aversion to the same object. Consequently his judgement
should be given out a priori, and not as an imitation relying on the
general pleasure a thing gives as a matter of fact. One would think,
however, that a judgement a priori must involve a concept of the
object for the cognition of which it contains the principle. But the
judgement of taste is not grounded on concepts, and is in no way a
cognition, but only an aesthetic judgement.
Hence it is that a youthful poet refuses to allow himself to be
dissuaded from the conviction that his poem is beautiful, either by the
judgement of the public or of his friends. And even if he lends them
an ear, he does so, not because he has now come to a diﬀerent judgement, but because, though the whole public, at least so far as his work
is concerned, should have false taste, he still, in his desire for recognition, ﬁnds good reason to accommodate himself to the popular error
(even against his own judgement). It is only later, when his judgement
has been sharpened by exercise, that of his own free will and accord
he deserts his former judgements—behaving in just the same way as
with those of his judgements which depend wholly upon reason.
Taste lays claim simply to autonomy. To make the judgements of
others the determining ground of one’s own would be heteronomy.
The fact that we recommend the works of the ancients as models,
and rightly too, and call their authors classical, as constituting a sort
of nobility among writers that leads the way and thereby gives laws
to the people, seems to indicate a posteriori sources of taste, and to
contradict the autonomy of taste in each individual. But we might
just as well say that the ancient mathematicians, who, to this day, are
looked upon as the almost indispensable models of perfect thoroughness and elegance in synthetic methods, prove that reason also is on
our part only imitative, and that it is incompetent with the deepest

Analytic of the Sublime

113

intuition to produce of itself rigorous proofs by means of the
construction of concepts. There is no employment of our powers, no
matter how free, not even of reason itself (that must draw all
its judgements from the common a priori source), which, if each
individual had always to start afresh with the crude equipment of his
natural state, would not get itself involved in blundering attempts, if
those of others did not lie before it as a warning. Not that predecessors
make those who follow in their steps mere imitators, but by their
methods they set others upon the track of seeking in themselves for
the principles, and so of adopting their own, often better, course. Even
in religion—where undoubtedly everyone has to derive his rule of
conduct from himself, seeing that he himself remains responsible for
it, and, when he goes wrong, cannot shift the blame upon others as
teachers or leaders—general precepts learned at the feet either of
priests or philosophers, or even drawn from one’s own resources, are
never so eﬃcacious as an example of virtue or holiness, which, historically portrayed, does not dispense with the autonomy of virtue
drawn from the spontaneous and original idea of morality (a priori),
or convert this into a mechanical process of imitation. Following
which has reference to a precedent, and not imitation, is the proper
expression for all inﬂuence which the products of an exemplary
author may exert upon others—and this means no more than going
to the same sources for a creative work as those to which he went for
his creations, and learning from one’s predecessor no more than the
mode of availing oneself of such sources. Taste, just because its
judgement cannot be determined by concepts or precepts, is among
all faculties and talents the very one that stands most in need of
examples of what has in the course of culture maintained itself
longest in esteem. Thus it avoids an early lapse into crudity, and a
return to the rudeness of its earliest eﬀorts.

§ 33
Second peculiarity of the judgement of taste
Proofs are of no avail whatever for determining the judgement of
taste, and in this connexion matters stand just as they would were
that judgement simply subjective.
If anyone does not think a building, view, or poem beautiful, then,
in the ﬁrst place he refuses, so far as his inmost conviction goes, to

284

114

285

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

allow approval to be wrung from him by a hundred voices all lauding
it to the skies. Of course he may aﬀect to be pleased with it, so as not
to be considered as wanting in taste. He may even begin to harbour
doubts as to whether he has formed his taste upon an acquaintance
with a suﬃcient number of objects of a particular kind (just as one
who in the distance recognizes, as he believes, something as a wood,
which everyone else regards as a town, becomes doubtful of the
judgement of his own eyesight). But, for all that, he clearly perceives
that the approval of others aﬀords no valid proof, available for the
judging of beauty. He recognizes that others, perchance, may see and
observe for him, and that, what many have seen in one and the same
way may, for the purpose of a theoretical, and therefore logical judgement, serve as an adequate ground of proof for him, albeit he believes
he saw otherwise, but that what has pleased others can never serve
him as the ground of an aesthetic judgement. The judgement of
others, where unfavourable to ours, may, no doubt, rightly make us
suspicious in respect of our own, but convince us that it is wrong it
never can. Hence there is no empirical ground of proof that can coerce
anyone’s judgement of taste.
In the second place, a proof a priori according to deﬁnite rules is still
less capable of determining the judgement as to beauty. If anyone
reads me his poem, or brings me to a play, which, all said and done,
fails to commend itself to my taste, then let him adduce Batteux or
Lessing,* or still older and more famous critics of taste, with all the
host of rules laid down by them, as a proof of the beauty of his poem;
let certain passages particularly displeasing to me accord completely
with the rules of beauty, (as set out by these critics and universally
recognized): I stop my ears: I do not want to hear any reasons or any
arguing about the matter. I would prefer to suppose that those rules
of the critics were at fault, or at least have no application, than to
allow my judgement to be determined by a priori proofs. I take my
stand on the ground that my judgement is to be one of taste, and not
one of understanding or reason.
This would appear to be one of the chief reasons why this faculty
of aesthetic judgement has been given the name of taste. For someone may recount to me all the ingredients of a dish, and observe of each
and everyone of them that it is just what I like, and, in addition, rightly
commend the wholesomeness of the food; yet I am deaf to all these
arguments. I try the dish with my own tongue and palate, and I pass

Analytic of the Sublime

115

judgement according to their verdict (not according to universal
principles).
As a matter of fact the judgement of taste is invariably laid down
as a singular judgement upon the object. The understanding can,
from the comparison of the object, in point of delight, with the
judgements of others, form a universal judgement, e.g. ‘All tulips
are beautiful’. But that judgement is then not one of taste, but is a
logical judgement which converts the reference of an object to our
taste into a predicate belonging to things of a certain kind. But it is
only the judgement whereby I regard an individual given tulip as
beautiful, i.e. regard my delight in it as of universal validity, that is
a judgement of taste. Its peculiarity, however, consists in the fact
that, although it has merely subjective validity, still it extends its
claims to all subjects, as unreservedly as it would if it were an objective judgement, resting on grounds of cognition and capable of being
proved by demonstration.

§ 34
An objective principle of taste is not possible
A principle of taste would mean a fundamental premiss under the
condition of which one might subsume the concept of an object, and
then, by a syllogism, draw the inference that it is beautiful. That,
however, is absolutely impossible. For I must feel the pleasure
immediately in the representation of the object, and I cannot be talked
into it by any grounds of proof. Thus although critics, as Hume says,*
are able to reason more plausibly than cooks, they must still share the
same fate. For the determining ground of their judgement they are not
able to look to the force of demonstrations, but only to the reﬂection
of the subject upon his own state (of pleasure or displeasure), to the
exclusion of precepts and rules.
There is, however, a matter upon which it is competent for critics
to exercise their subtlety, and upon which they ought to do so, so
long as it tends to the rectiﬁcation and extension of our judgements
of taste. But that matter is not one of exhibiting the determining
ground of aesthetic judgements of this kind in a universally applicable formula—which is impossible. Rather it is the investigation of the
faculties of cognition and their function in these judgements, and the
illustration, by the analysis of examples, of their mutual subjective

286

116

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

purposiveness, the form of which in a given representation has been
shown above to constitute the beauty of their object. Hence with
regard to the representation whereby an object is given, the
critique of taste itself is only subjective; viz. it is the art or science
of reducing the mutual relation of the understanding and the imagination in the given representation (without reference to antecedent
sensation or concept), consequently their accordance or discordance,
to rules, and of determining them with regard to their conditions.
It is art if it only illustrates this by examples; it is science if it deduces
the possibility of such judging from the nature of these faculties
as faculties of knowledge in general. It is only with the latter, as
transcendental critique, that we have here any concern. Its proper
scope is the development and justiﬁcation of the subjective principle of taste, as an a priori principle of judgement. As an art, critique merely looks to the physiological (here psychological), and,
consequently, empirical rules, according to which in actual fact
taste proceeds (passing by the question of their possibility), and
seeks to apply them in judging its objects. The latter critique criticizes the products of ﬁne art, just as the former does the faculty of
judging them.

§ 35
The principle of taste is the subjective principle
of the general power of judgement

287

The judgement of taste is diﬀerentiated from logical judgement by
the fact that, whereas the latter subsumes a representation under a
concept of the object, the judgement of taste does not subsume under
a concept at all—for, if it did, necessary and universal approval would
be capable of being enforced by proofs. And yet it does bear this
resemblance to the logical judgement, that it asserts a universality and
necessity, not, however, according to concepts of the object, but a
universality and necessity that are, consequently, merely subjective.
Now the concepts in a judgement constitute its content (what belongs
to the cognition of the object). But the judgement of taste is not
determinable by means of concepts. Hence it can only have its ground
in the subjective formal condition of a judgement in general. The
subjective condition of all judgements is the judging faculty itself, or
the power of judgement. Employed in respect of a representation

Analytic of the Sublime

117

whereby an object is given, this requires the harmonious accordance
of two powers of representation. These are, the imagination (for the
intuition and the arrangement of the manifold of intuition), and
the understanding (for the concept as a representation of the unity
of this arrangement). Now, since no concept of the object underlies
the judgement here, it can consist only in the subsumption of the
imagination itself (in the case of a representation whereby an object
is given) under the conditions enabling the understanding in general
to advance from the intuition to concepts. That is to say, since
the freedom of the imagination consists precisely in the fact that
it schematizes without a concept, the judgement of taste must found
upon a mere sensation of the mutually enlivening activity of the
imagination in its freedom, and of the understanding with its conformity to law. It must therefore rest upon a feeling that allows the
object to be estimated by the purposiveness of the representation
(by which an object is given) for the furtherance of the cognitive
faculties in their free play. Taste, then, as a subjective power of
judgement, contains a principle of subsumption, not of intuitions
under concepts, but of the faculty of intuitions or presentations, i.e. of
the imagination, under the faculty of concepts, i.e. the understanding,
so far as the former in its freedom accords with the latter in its conformity
to law.
For the discovery of this title by means of a deduction of judgements of taste, we can only avail ourselves of the guidance of the
formal peculiarities of judgements of this kind, and consequently the
mere consideration of their logical form.

§ 36
The problem of a deduction of judgements of taste
To form a cognitive judgement we may immediately connect with
the perception of an object the concept of an object in general, the
empirical predicates of which are contained in that perception. In
this way a judgement of experience is produced. Now this judgement
rests on the foundation of a priori concepts of the synthetic unity of the
manifold of intuition enabling it to be thought as the determination
of an object. These concepts (the categories) call for a deduction, and
such was supplied in the Critique of Pure Reason. That deduction
enabled us to solve the problem, How are synthetic a priori

288

118

289

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

cognitive judgements possible? This problem had, accordingly, to do
with the a priori principles of pure understanding and its theoretical
judgements.
But we may also immediately connect with a perception a feeling
of pleasure (or displeasure) and a delight attending the representation of the object and serving it instead of a predicate. In this way
there arises a judgement which is aesthetic and not cognitive. Now,
if such a judgement is not merely one of sensation, but a formal
judgement of reﬂection that demands this delight from everyone
as necessary, something must lie at its basis as its a priori principle.
This principle may, indeed, be a mere subjective one (supposing an
objective one should be impossible for judgements of this kind), but,
even as such, it requires a deduction to make it intelligible how an
aesthetic judgement can lay claim to necessity. That, now, is what
lies at the bottom of the problem upon which we are at present
engaged, i.e. How are judgements of taste possible? This problem,
therefore, is concerned with the a priori principles of pure judgement
in aesthetic judgements, i.e. not those in which (as in theoretical
judgements) it has merely to subsume under objective concepts of
understanding, and in which it comes under a law, but rather those
in which it is itself, subjectively, object as well as law.
We may also put the problem in this way: How is a judgement
possible which, going merely upon the individual’s own feeling of
pleasure in an object independent of the concept of it, judges this as
a pleasure attached to the representation of the same object in every
other individual, and does so a priori, i.e. without being allowed to
wait and see if other people will be of the same mind?
It is easy to see that judgements of taste are synthetic, for they go
beyond the concept and even the intuition of the object, and join
as predicate to that intuition something which is not even a cognition
at all, namely, the feeling of pleasure (or displeasure). But, although
the predicate (the personal pleasure that is connected with the representation) is empirical, still we need not go further than what is
involved in the expressions of their claim to see that, so far as concerns the agreement required of everyone, they are a priori judgements, or mean to pass for such. This problem of the critique of
the power of judgement, therefore, is part of the general problem of
transcendental philosophy: How are synthetic a priori judgements
possible?

Analytic of the Sublime

119

§ 37
What exactly it is, that is asserted a priori of an object in a
judgement of taste
The immediate connection of the representation of an object with
pleasure can only be a matter of internal perception, and, if nothing
more than this were at issue, would only yield a mere empirical
judgement. For with no representation can I a priori connect a
determinate feeling (of pleasure or displeasure) except where I rely
upon the basis of an a priori principle in reason determining the will.
The truth is that the pleasure (in the moral feeling) is the consequence of the determination of the will by the principle. It cannot,
therefore, be compared with the pleasure in taste. For it requires a
determinate concept of a law: whereas the pleasure in taste has to be
connected immediately with the mere judging prior to any concept.
For the same reason, also, all judgements of taste are singular judgements, for they unite their predicate of delight, not to a concept, but
to a given singular empirical representation.
Hence, in a judgement of taste, what is represented a priori as a
universal rule for the judgement and as valid for everyone, is not the
pleasure but the universal validity of this pleasure perceived, as it is,
to be combined in the mind with the mere judging of an object. A
judgement to the eﬀect that it is with pleasure that I perceive and
judge some object is an empirical judgement. But if it asserts that I
think the object beautiful, i.e. that I may attribute that delight to
everyone as necessary, it is then an a priori judgement.

§ 38
Deduction of judgements of taste
Admitting that in a pure judgement of taste the delight in the
object is connected with the mere judging of its form, then what we
feel to be associated in the mind with the representation of the object
is nothing else than its subjective purposiveness for judgement.
Since, now, in respect of the formal rules of judging, apart from all
matter (whether sensation or concept), judgement can only be
directed to the subjective conditions of its employment in general
(which is not restricted to the particular mode of the senses nor to a

290

120

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

particular concept of the understanding) and so can only be directed
to that subjective factor which we may presuppose in all human
beings (as requisite for a possible experience generally), it follows
that the accordance of a representation with these conditions of the
judgement must admit of being assumed valid a priori for everyone.
In other words, we are warranted in expecting from everyone the
pleasure or subjective purposiveness of the representation in respect
of the relation of the cognitive faculties engaged in the judging of a
sensible object in general.9

Remark

291

What makes this deduction so easy is that it is spared the necessity of
having to justify the objective reality of a concept. For beauty is not
a concept of the object, and the judgement of taste is not a cognitive
judgement. The latter simply claims that we are justiﬁed in presupposing that the same subjective conditions of judgement which we
ﬁnd in ourselves are universally present in everyone, and further that
we have rightly subsumed the given object under these conditions.
The latter, no doubt, has to face unavoidable diﬃculties which do not
aﬀect the logical judgement. (For there the subsumption is under
concepts; whereas in the aesthetic judgement it is under a mere sensible
relation of the imagination and understanding mutually harmonizing
with one another in the represented form of the object, in which case
the subsumption may easily prove fallacious.) But this in no way
detracts from the legitimacy of the claim of the judgement to count
upon universal agreement—a claim which amounts to no more than
this: the correctness of the principle of judging validly for everyone
upon subjective grounds. For as to the diﬃculty and uncertainty concerning the correctness of the subsumption under that principle, it no
more casts a doubt upon the legitimacy of the claim to this validity on
9 In order to be justiﬁed in claiming universal agreement for an aesthetic judgement
merely resting on subjective grounds it is suﬃcient to assume: (1) that the subjective
conditions of this faculty of aesthetic judgement are identical in all human beings in what
concerns the relation of the cognitive faculties, there brought into action, with a view to
a cognition in general. This must be true, as otherwise human beings would be incapable
of communicating their representations or even their knowledge; (2) that the judgement
has paid regard merely to this relation (consequently merely to the formal condition of the
faculty of judgement), and is pure, i.e. is free from confusion either with concepts of the
object or sensations as determining grounds. If any mistake is made in this latter point
this only touches the incorrect application to a particular case of the right which a law
gives us, and does not do away with the right generally.

Analytic of the Sublime

121

the part of an aesthetic judgement generally, or, therefore, upon the
principle itself, than the mistakes (though not so often or easily
incurred) to which the subsumption of the logical judgement under its
principle is similarly liable, can render the latter principle, which is
objective, open to doubt. But if the question were: How is it possible
to assume a priori that nature is a sum of objects of taste? the problem
would then have reference to teleology, because it would have to be
regarded as an end of nature belonging essentially to its concept that it
should exhibit forms that are purposive for our judgement. But the
correctness of this assumption may still be seriously questioned, while
the actual existence of beauties of nature is clear to experience.

§ 39
The communicability of a sensation
Sensation, as the real in perception, where referred to knowledge,
is called bodily sensation and its speciﬁc quality may be represented
as completely communicable to others in a like mode, provided we
assume that everyone has a like sense to our own. This, however, is
an absolutely inadmissible presupposition in the case of a bodily
sensation. Thus a person who is without a sense of smell cannot have
a sensation of this kind communicated to him, and, even if he does
not suﬀer from this deﬁciency, we still cannot be certain that he gets
precisely the same sensation from a ﬂower that we get from it. But
still more divergent must we consider individuals to be in respect of
the agreeableness or disagreeableness derived from the sensation of one
and the same object of the senses, and it is absolutely out of the question to require that pleasure in such objects should be acknowledged
by everyone. Pleasure of this kind, since it enters into the mind
through the senses—our rôle, therefore, being a passive one—may
be called the pleasure of enjoyment.
On the other hand delight in an action on the score of its moral
character is not a pleasure of enjoyment, but one of self-activity and
its correspondence with the idea of what it is meant to be. But this
feeling, which is called the moral feeling, requires concepts, and is
the presentation of a purposiveness, not free, but according to law.
It, therefore, admits of communication only by means of reason and,
if the pleasure is to be of the same kind for everyone, by means of
very determinate practical concepts of reason.

292

122

293

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

The pleasure in the sublime in nature, as one of contemplation
subtly involving reason, lays claim also to universal participation,
but still it presupposes another feeling, that, namely, of our supersensible vocation, which feeling, however obscure it may be, has a
moral foundation. But there is absolutely no authority for my presupposing that others will pay attention to this, and take a delight in
beholding the uncouth dimensions of nature (one that in truth
cannot be ascribed to the sight of it, which is terrifying rather than
otherwise). Nevertheless, having regard to the fact that attention
ought to be paid upon every appropriate occasion to this moral
predisposition, we may still demand that delight from everyone; but
we can do so only through the moral law, which, in its turn, rests
upon concepts of reason.
The pleasure in the beautiful is, on the other hand, neither a pleasure of enjoyment nor of an activity according to law, nor yet one of
a contemplation involving subtle reasoning in accordance with ideas,
but rather of mere reﬂection. Without any guiding-line of end or
principle this pleasure attends the ordinary apprehension of an
object by means of the imagination, as the faculty of intuition, but
with a reference to the understanding as faculty of concepts, and
through the operation of a process of judgement which has also to be
invoked in order to obtain the commonest experience. In the latter
case, however, its functions are directed to perceiving an empirical
objective concept, whereas in the former (in the aesthetic mode of
judging) merely to perceiving the adequacy of the representation for
engaging both faculties of knowledge in their freedom in an harmonious (subjectively-purposive) employment, i.e. to feeling with
pleasure the subjective bearings of the representation. This pleasure
must of necessity depend for everyone upon the same conditions,
seeing that they are the subjective conditions of the possibility of a
cognition in general, and the proportion of these cognitive faculties,
which is requisite for taste is requisite also for ordinary sound understanding, the presence of which we are entitled to presuppose in
everyone. And, for this reason also, one who judges with taste
(provided he does not make a mistake as to this consciousness, and
does not take the matter for the form, or charm for beauty), can
impute the subjective purposiveness, i.e. his delight in the object, to
everyone else, and suppose his feeling universally communicable, and
that, too, without the mediation of concepts.

Analytic of the Sublime

123

§ 40
Taste as a kind of sensus communis
The name of ‘sense’ is often given to judgement where what attracts
attention is not so much its reﬂective act as merely its result. So we
speak of a sense of truth, of a sense of propriety, or of justice, and
so forth. And yet, of course, we know, or at least ought well enough
to know, that an empirical sense cannot be the true abode of these
concepts, not to speak of its being competent, even in the slightest
degree, to pronounce universal rules. On the contrary, we recognize that
a representation of this kind, whether it be of truth, propriety, beauty,
or justice, could never enter our thoughts were we not able to
raise ourselves above the level of the senses to that of higher faculties
of cognition. Common human understanding which, as mere sound
(not yet cultivated) understanding, is looked upon as the least we
can expect from anyone claiming the name of a human being,
has therefore the doubtful honour of having the name of common
sense (sensus communis) bestowed upon it; and bestowed, too, in an
acceptation of the word common (not merely in our own language,
where it actually has a double meaning, but also in many others)
which makes it amount to what is vulgar—what is everywhere to be
met with—a quality which by no means confers credit or distinction
upon its possessor.
However, by the name sensus communis is to be understood the idea
of a public sense, i.e. a faculty of judging which in its reﬂective act takes
account (a priori) of the mode of representation of everyone else, in
order, as it were, to weigh its judgement with the collective reason of
mankind, and thereby avoid the illusion arising from subjective and
personal conditions which could readily be taken for objective, an illusion that would exert a prejudicial inﬂuence upon its judgement.
This is accomplished by weighing the judgement, not so much with
actual, as rather with the merely possible, judgements of others, and
by putting ourselves in the position of everyone else, as the result of
a mere abstraction from the limitations which contingently aﬀect our
own judging. This, in turn, is eﬀected by so far as possible leaving out
the element of matter, i.e. sensation, in our general state of representational activity, and conﬁning attention to the formal peculiarities
of our representation or general state of representational activity.

294

124

295

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

Now it may seem that this operation of reﬂection is too artiﬁcial to be
attributed to the faculty which we call common sense. But this is an
appearance due only to its expression in abstract formulae. In itself
nothing is more natural than to abstract from charm and emotion where
one is looking for a judgement intended to serve as a universal rule.
While the following maxims of common human understanding do
not properly come in here as constituent parts of the critique of taste,
they may still serve to elucidate its fundamental propositions. They
are these: (1) to think for oneself; (2) to think from the standpoint of
everyone else; (3) always to think consistently. The ﬁrst is the maxim
of unprejudiced thought, the second that of broadened thought, the
third that of consistent thought. The ﬁrst is the maxim of a never-passive
reason. To be given to such passivity, consequently to heteronomy of
reason, is called prejudice; and the greatest of all prejudices is that of
fancying nature not to be subject to rules which the understanding
by virtue of its own essential law lays at its basis, i.e. superstition.
Emancipation from superstition is called enlightenment;10 for although
this term applies also to emancipation from prejudices generally, still
superstition deserves pre-eminently (in sensu eminenti) to be called a
prejudice. For the condition of blindness into which superstition
places us, and which it even demands from us as an obligation, makes
the need of being led by others, and consequently the passive state of
the reason, all too evident. As to the second maxim belonging to our
habits of thought, we have become accustomed to calling a man
narrow (narrow, as opposed to being of broadened mind) whose talents
fall short of what is required for employment upon work of any magnitude (especially that involving intensity). But the question here is
not one of the faculty of cognition, but of the mental habit of making
a purposive use of it. This, however small the range and degree to
which a person’s natural endowments extend, still indicates an individual of broadened mind: if he detaches himself from the subjective
personal conditions of his judgement, which cramp the minds of so
10
We readily see that enlightenment, while easy, no doubt, in thesi, in hypothesi is
diﬃcult and slow of realization. For not to be passive with one’s reason, but always to be
self-legislative is doubtless quite an easy matter for one who only desires to live up to his
essential end, and does not seek to know what is beyond his understanding. But as the
tendency in the latter direction is hardly avoidable, and others are always coming and
promising with full assurance that they are able to satisfy one’s curiosity, it must be very
diﬃcult to preserve or restore in the mind (and particularly in the public mind) that
merely negative attitude (which constitutes enlightenment proper).

Analytic of the Sublime

125

many others, and reﬂects upon his own judgement from a universal
standpoint (which he can only determine by shifting his ground to the
standpoint of others). The third maxim—that, namely, of consistent
thought—is the hardest of attainment, and is only attainable by the
union of both the former, and after constant attention to them has
made one at home in their observance. We may say: the ﬁrst of these
is the maxim of understanding, the second that of judgement, the
third that of reason.
I resume the thread of the discussion interrupted by the above
digression, and I say that taste can with more justice be called a sensus
communis than can sound understanding; and that the aesthetic,
rather than the intellectual, judgement can bear the name of a public
sense,11 i.e. taking it that we are prepared to use the word ‘sense’ of
an eﬀect that mere reﬂection has upon the mind; for then by sense we
mean the feeling of pleasure. We might even deﬁne taste as the faculty of judging what makes our feeling in a given representation universally communicable without the mediation of a concept.
The aptitude of human beings for communicating their thoughts
requires, also, a relation between the imagination and the understanding, in order to connect intuitions with concepts, and concepts,
in turn, with intuitions, which both unite in cognition. But there the
agreement of both mental powers is according to law, and under the
constraint of determinate concepts. Only when the imagination in its
freedom stirs the understanding, and the understanding apart from
concepts sets the imagination into regular play, does the representation communicate itself not as thought, but as an internal feeling of
a purposive state of the mind.
Taste is, therefore, the faculty of judging a priori the communicability of the feelings that, without the mediation of a concept, are
connected with a given representation.
Supposing, now, that we could assume that the mere universal
communicability of our feeling must of itself carry with it an interest
for us (an assumption, however, which we are not entitled to draw as
a conclusion from the character of a merely reﬂective judgement), we
should then be in a position to explain how the feeling in the judgement of taste comes to be expected from everyone as a sort of duty.
11
Taste may be designated a sensus communis aestheticus, common human understanding
a sensus communis logicus.

296

126

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

§ 41
The empirical interest in the beautiful

297

Abundant proof has been given above to show that the judgement of
taste by which something is declared beautiful must have no interest
as its determining ground. But it does not follow from this that after it
has once been posited as a pure aesthetic judgement, an interest
cannot then enter into combination with it. This combination, however, can never be anything but indirect. Taste must, that is to say,
ﬁrst of all be represented in conjunction with something else, if the
delight attending the mere reﬂection upon an object is to admit of
any further connection with a pleasure in the existence of the object
(as that wherein all interest consists). For the saying, a posse ad esse
non valet consequentia,* which is applied to cognitive judgements,
holds good here in the case of aesthetic judgements. Now this
‘something else’ may be something empirical, such as an inclination
proper to the nature of human beings, or it may be something intellectual, as a property of the will whereby it admits of rational determination a priori. Both of these involve a delight in the existence of the
object, and so can lay the foundation for an interest in what has already
pleased of itself and without regard to any interest whatsoever.
The empirical interest in the beautiful exists only in society. And
if we admit that the impulse to society is natural to mankind, and that
the suitability for and the propensity towards it, i.e. sociability, is a
property essential to the requirements of human beings as creatures
intended for society, and one, therefore, that belongs to humanity,
it is inevitable that we should also look upon taste in the light of a
faculty for judging whatever enables us to communicate even our
feeling to everyone else, and hence as a means of promoting that upon
which the natural inclination of everyone is set.
With no one to take into account but himself, an individual
abandoned on a desert island would not adorn either himself or his
hut, nor would he look for ﬂowers, and still less plant them, with the
object of providing himself with personal adornments. Only in society
does it occur to him to be not merely a human being, but a human
being reﬁned in his own way (the beginning of civilization)—for that is
how we judge of one who has the bent and turn for communicating his
pleasure to others, and who is not quite satisﬁed with an object unless
his feeling of delight in it can be shared in communion with others.

Analytic of the Sublime

127

Further, a regard to universal communicability is a thing which everyone expects and requires from everyone else, just as if it were part of an
original contract dictated by humanity itself. And thus, no doubt, at
ﬁrst only charms, e.g. colours for painting oneself (roucou among the
Caribs and cinnabar among the Iroquois), or ﬂowers, sea-shells, beautifully coloured feathers, then, in the course of time, also beautiful forms
(as in canoes, apparel, etc.) which convey no gratiﬁcation, i.e. delight of
enjoyment, become of moment in society and attract a considerable
interest. Eventually, when civilization has reached its height it makes
this work of communication almost the main business of reﬁned inclination, and the entire value of sensations is placed in the degree to
which they permit of universal communication. At this stage, then, even
where the pleasure which each one has in an object is but insigniﬁcant
and possesses of itself no conspicuous interest, still the idea of its universal communicability almost indeﬁnitely augments its value.
This interest, indirectly attached to the beautiful by the inclination
towards society, and, consequently, empirical, is, however, of no
importance for us here. For that to which we have alone to look is what
can have a bearing a priori, even though indirect, upon the judgement
of taste. For, if even in this form an associated interest should betray
itself, taste would then reveal a transition on the part of our faculty of
judging from the enjoyment of sense to the moral feeling. This would
not merely mean that we should be supplied with a more eﬀectual guide
for the ﬁnal employment of taste, but taste would further be presented
as a link in the chain of the human faculties a priori upon which all
legislation must depend. This much may certainly be said of the
empirical interest in objects of taste, and in taste itself, that as taste
thus pays homage to inclination, however reﬁned, such interest will
nevertheless readily fuse also with all inclinations and passions, which
in society attain to their greatest variety and highest degree, and the
interest in the beautiful, if this is made its ground, can but aﬀord a very
ambiguous transition from the agreeable to the good. We have reason,
however, to inquire whether this transition may not still in some way
be furthered by means of taste when taken in its purity.

§ 42
The intellectual interest in the beautiful
It has been with the best intentions that those who love to see in the
ultimate end of humanity, namely the morally good, the goal of all

298

128

299

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

activities to which human beings are impelled by the inner bent of
their nature, have regarded it as a mark of a good moral character to
take an interest in the beautiful generally. But they have, not without
reason, been contradicted by others who appeal to the fact of experience, that virtuosi in matters of taste, being not only often, but one
might say as a general rule, vain, capricious, and addicted to injurious passions, could perhaps more rarely than others lay claim to any
pre-eminent attachment to moral principles. And so it would seem,
not only that the feeling for the beautiful is speciﬁcally diﬀerent from
the moral feeling (which as a matter of fact is the case), but also that the
interest which we may combine with it, will hardly consort with the
moral, and certainly not on grounds of inner aﬃnity.
Now I willingly admit that the interest in the beautiful of art
(including under this heading the artiﬁcial use of natural beauties for
personal adornment, and so from vanity) gives no evidence at all of a
habit of mind attached to the morally good, or even inclined that
way. But, on the other hand, I do maintain that to take an immediate
interest in the beauty of nature (not merely to have taste in judging it) is
always a mark of a good soul; and that, where this interest is habitual,
it is at least indicative of a temper of mind favourable to the moral
feeling that it should readily associate itself with the contemplation of
nature. It must, however, be borne in mind that I mean to refer
strictly to the beautiful forms of nature, and to put to one side the
charms which she is wont so lavishly to combine with them; because,
though the interest in these is no doubt immediate, it is nevertheless
empirical.
One who alone (and without any intention of communicating his
observations to others) regards the beautiful form of a wild ﬂower, a
bird, an insect, or the like, out of admiration and love of them, and
being loath to let them escape him in nature, even at the risk of some
misadventure to himself—so far from there being any prospect of
advantage to him—such a one takes an immediate, and in fact intellectual, interest in the beauty of nature. This means that he is not
merely pleased with nature’s product in respect of its form, but is
also pleased at its existence, and is so without any charm of sense
having a share in the matter, or without his associating with it any
end whatsoever.
In this connexion, however, it is of note that were we to play a trick
on our lover of the beautiful, and plant in the ground artiﬁcial ﬂowers

Analytic of the Sublime

129

(which can be made so as to look just like natural ones), and perch
artfully carved birds on the branches of trees, and he were to ﬁnd out
how he had been deceived, the immediate interest which these things
previously had for him would at once vanish—though, perhaps, a
diﬀerent interest might intervene in its stead, that, namely, of vanity
in decorating his room with them for the eyes of others. The fact is
that our intuition and reﬂection must have as their concomitant the
thought that the beauty in question is nature’s handiwork; and this is
the sole basis of the immediate interest that is taken in it. Failing this
we are either left with a bare judgement of taste devoid of all interest
whatever, or else only with one that is combined with an interest that
is mediate, involving, namely, a reference to society; and this latter
aﬀords no reliable indication of morally good habits of thought.
The advantage which natural beauty enjoys over that of art, even
where it is excelled by the latter in point of form, in yet being alone
able to awaken an immediate interest, accords with the reﬁned and
well-grounded habits of thought of all those who have cultivated
their moral feeling. If a person with taste enough to judge of works
of ﬁne art with the greatest correctness and reﬁnement readily quits
the room in which he meets with those beauties that minister to
vanity or, at least, social joys, and betakes himself to the beautiful in
nature, so that he may there ﬁnd as it were a feast for his spirit in a
train of thought which he can never completely evolve, we will then
regard this his choice even with veneration, and give him credit for a
beautiful soul, to which no connoisseur or art collector can lay claim
on the score of the interest which his objects have for him.—Here,
now, are two kinds of objects which in the judgement of mere taste
could scarcely contend with one another for a superiority. What then,
is the distinction that makes us hold them in such diﬀerent esteem?
We have a faculty of judgement which is merely aesthetic—a
faculty of judging of forms without the aid of concepts, and of
ﬁnding, in the mere judging of them, a delight that we at the same
time make into a rule for everyone, without this judgement being
founded on an interest, or yet producing one.—On the other hand
we have also a faculty of intellectual judgement for the mere forms of
practical maxims (so far as they are of themselves qualiﬁed for universal legislation)—a faculty of determining an a priori delight,
which we make into a law for everyone, without our judgement being
founded on any interest, though here it produces one. The pleasure or

300

130

301

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

displeasure in the former judgement is called that of taste; the latter
is called that of the moral feeling.
But, now, reason is further interested in ideas (for which in our
moral feeling it brings about an immediate interest) having also
objective reality. That is to say, it is of interest to reason that nature
should at least show a trace or give a hint that it contains in itself
some ground or other for assuming a uniform accordance of its
products with our wholly disinterested delight (a delight which we
cognize a priori as a law for everyone without being able to ground it
upon proofs). That being so, reason must take an interest in every
manifestation on the part of nature of some such accordance. Hence
the mind cannot reﬂect on the beauty of nature without at the same
time ﬁnding its interest engaged. But this interest is akin to the
moral. One, then, who takes such an interest in the beautiful in
nature can only do so in so far as he has previously set his interest
deep in the foundations of the morally good. On these grounds we
have reason for presuming the presence of at least the germ of a good
moral disposition in the case of someone to whom the beauty of
nature is a matter of immediate interest.
It will be said that this interpretation of aesthetic judgements on
the basis of kinship with our moral feeling has far too studied an
appearance to be accepted as the true reading of the cypher in which
nature speaks to us ﬁguratively through its beautiful forms. But, ﬁrst
of all, this immediate interest in the beauty of nature is not in fact
common. It is peculiar to those whose habits of thought are already
trained to the good or else are eminently susceptible of such training;
and under these circumstances the analogy in which the pure judgement of taste that, without relying upon any interest, gives us a feeling of delight, and at the same time represents it a priori as proper to
humanity in general, stands to the moral judgement that does just
the same from concepts, is one which, without any clear, subtle, and
deliberate reﬂection, conduces to a like immediate interest being
taken in the objects of the former judgement as in those of the
latter—with this one diﬀerence, that the interest in the ﬁrst case is
free, while in the latter it is one founded on objective laws. In addition to this there is our admiration of nature which in her beautiful
products displays herself as art, not as mere matter of chance, but, as
it were, designedly, according to a law-directed arrangement, and as
purposiveness apart from any purpose. As we never meet with such an

Analytic of the Sublime

131

end outside ourselves, we naturally look for it in ourselves, and, in fact,
in that which constitutes the ultimate end of our existence—namely
in our moral vocation. (The inquiry into the ground of the possibility
of such a natural purposiveness will, however, ﬁrst come under
discussion in the analysis of teleology.)
The fact that the delight in beautiful art does not, in the pure
judgement of taste, involve an immediate interest, as does that in
beautiful nature, may be readily explained. For the former is either
such an imitation of the latter as goes the length of deceiving us, in
which case it acts upon us in the character of a natural beauty, which
we take it to be; or else it is an intentional art obviously directed to
our delight. In the latter case, however, the delight in the product
would, it is true, be brought about immediately by taste, but there
would be nothing but a mediate interest in the cause that lay
beneath—an interest, namely, in an art only capable of interesting
by its end, and never in itself. It will, perhaps, be said that this is also
the case where an object of nature only interests by its beauty so far
as a moral idea is brought into partnership therewith. But it is not the
object that is of immediate interest, but rather the inherent character
of the beauty qualifying it for such a partnership—a character,
therefore, that inwardly belongs to the character of beauty.
The charms in natural beauty, which are to be found blended, as
it were, so frequently with beauty of form, belong either to the
modiﬁcations of light (in colouring) or of sound (in tones). For these
are the only sensations which permit not merely of a feeling of the
senses, but also of reﬂection upon the form of these modiﬁcations of
the senses, and so embody as it were a language in which nature
addresses us and which seems to possess a higher meaning. Thus the
white colour of the lily seems to dispose the mind to ideas of innocence, and the other seven colours, following the series from the red
to the violet, similarly to ideas of (1) sublimity, (2) courage, (3) candour,
(4) amiability, (5) modesty, (6) constancy, (7) tenderness. The bird’s
song tells of joyousness and contentment with its existence.
At least so we interpret nature—whether such be its purpose or not.
But it is the indispensable requisite of the interest which we here take
in beauty, that the beauty should be that of nature, and it vanishes
completely as soon as we are conscious of having been deceived, and
that it is only the work of art—so completely that even taste can then
no longer ﬁnd in it anything beautiful nor sight anything attractive.

302

132

303

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

What do poets set more store on than the nightingale’s bewitching
and beautiful note, in a lonely thicket on a still summer evening by
the soft light of the moon? And yet we have instances of how, where
no such songster was to be found, a jovial host has played a trick on
the guests with him on a visit to enjoy the country air, and has done
so to their huge satisfaction, by hiding in a thicket a rogue of a youth
who (with a reed or rush in his mouth) knew how to reproduce this
note so as to hit oﬀ nature to perfection. But the instant one realizes
that it is all a fraud no one will long endure listening to this song that
before was regarded as so attractive. And it is just the same with the
song of any other bird. It must be nature, or be mistaken by us for
nature, to enable us to take an immediate interest in the beautiful as
such; and this is all the more so if we may even call upon others to
take a similar interest. And such a demand we do in fact make, since
we regard as coarse and low the habits of thought of those who have
no feeling for beautiful nature (for this is the word we use for susceptibility to an interest in the contemplation of beautiful nature), and
who devote themselves to the merely sensuous enjoyments found in
eating and drinking.

§ 43
Art in general
(1) Art is distinguished from nature as making (facere) is from acting
or operating in general (agere), and the product or the result of the
former is distinguished from that of the latter as work (opus) from
eﬀect (eﬀectus).
By right it is only production through freedom, i.e. through an act
of will that places reason at the basis of its action, that should be
termed art.* For, although we are pleased to call what bees produce
(their regularly constructed cells) a work of art, we only do so on the
strength of an analogy with art; that is to say, as soon as we call to
mind that no rational deliberation forms the basis of their labour, we
say at once that it is a product of their nature (of instinct), and it is
only to their creator that we ascribe it as art.
If, as sometimes happens, in a search through a bog, we light on a
piece of hewn wood, we do not say it is a product of nature but of art.
Its producing cause had an end in view to which the object owes its
form. Apart from such cases, we recognize an art in everything

Analytic of the Sublime

133

formed in such a way that its actuality must have been preceded by a
representation of the thing in its cause (as even in the case of the bees),
although the eﬀect could not have been thought by the cause. But
where anything is called absolutely a work of art, to distinguish it
from a natural product, then some work of man is always understood.
(2) Art, as human skill, is distinguished also from science (as ability from knowledge), as a practical from a theoretical faculty, as technic from theory (as the art of surveying from geometry). For this
reason, also, what one can do the moment one only knows what is to
be done, hence without anything more than suﬃcient knowledge of
the desired result, is not called art. To art that alone belongs for
which the possession of the most complete knowledge does not
involve one’s having then and there the skill to do it. Camper describes
very exactly* how the best shoe must be made, but he, doubtless, was
not able to turn one out himself.12
(3) Art is further distinguished from handicraft. The ﬁrst is called
free, the other may be called renumerative art. We look on the former
as something which could only prove purposive (be a success) as
play, i.e. an occupation which is agreeable on its own account; but on
the second as labour, i.e. a business, which on its own account is disagreeable (drudgery), and is only attractive by means of what it
results in (e.g. the pay), and which is consequently capable of being
a compulsory imposition. Whether in the list of arts and crafts we are
to rank watchmakers as artists, and smiths on the contrary as craftsmen, requires a standpoint diﬀerent from that here adopted—one,
that is to say, taking account of the proportion of the talents which
the business undertaken in either case must necessarily involve.
Whether, also, among the so-called seven free arts some may not
have been included which should be reckoned as sciences, and many,
too, that resemble handicraft, is a matter I will not discuss here. It is
not amiss, however, to remind the reader of this: that in all free arts
something of a compulsory character is still required, or, as it is
called, a mechanism, without which the spirit, which in art must be
free, and which alone gives life to the work, would be bodyless and
12 In my part of the country, if you set the common man a problem like that of
Columbus and his egg, he says, ‘There is no art in that, it is only science’: i.e. you can
do it if you know how; and he says just the same of all the would-be arts of jugglers. To
that of the tight-rope dancer, on the other hand, he has not the least compunction in
giving the name of art.

304

134

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

evanescent (e.g. in the poetic art there must be correctness and wealth
of language, likewise prosody and metre). For not a few leaders of a
newer school believe that the best way to promote a free art is to
sweep away all restraint, and convert it from labour into mere play.

§ 44
Fine art

305

There is no science of the beautiful, but only a critique. Nor, again,
is there such a thing as beautiful science, but only beautiful art.*
For a science of the beautiful would have to determine scientiﬁcally,
i.e. by means of proofs, whether a thing was to be considered beautiful or not; and the judgement upon beauty, consequently, would, if
belonging to science, fail to be a judgement of taste. As for a beautiful
science—a science which, as such, is to be beautiful, is a nonsense.
For if, treating it as a science, we were to ask for reasons and proofs,
we would be put oﬀ with elegant phrases (bons mots). What has given
rise to the current expression beautiful sciences is, doubtless, no more
than this, that common observation has, quite accurately, noted the
fact that for ﬁne art, in the fulness of its perfection, a large store of
knowledge is required, as, for example, knowledge of ancient languages, acquaintance with classical authors, history, antiquarian
learning, and so forth. Hence these historical sciences, owing to the
fact that they form the necessary preparation and groundwork for
ﬁne art, and partly also owing to the fact that they are taken to comprise even the knowledge of the products of ﬁne art (rhetoric and
poetry), have by a confusion of words, actually acquired the name of
beautiful sciences.
Where art, merely seeking to actualize a possible object to the
cognition of which it is adequate, performs whatever acts are required
for that purpose, then it is mechanical. But should the feeling of
pleasure be what it has immediately in view it is then termed aesthetic
art. As such it may be either agreeable or ﬁne art. The description
‘agreeable art’ applies where the end of the art is that the pleasure
should accompany the representations considered as mere sensations,
the description ‘ﬁne art’ where it is to accompany them considered as
modes of cognition.
Agreeable arts are those which have mere enjoyment for their object.
Such are all the charms that can gratify a dinner party: entertaining

Analytic of the Sublime

135

narrative, the art of engaging the whole table in unrestrained and
sprightly conversation, or with jest and laughter inducing a certain
air of gaiety. Here, as the saying goes, there may be much chattering
over the glasses, without a person wishing to be brought to book
for all he utters, because it is only given out for the entertainment of
the moment, and not as a lasting matter to be made the subject of
reﬂection or repetition. (Of the same sort is also the art of arranging
the table for enjoyment, or, at large banquets, the music of the
orchestra—a quaint idea intended to act on the mind merely as an
agreeable noise fostering a genial spirit, which, without anyone paying
the smallest attention to the composition, promotes the free ﬂow
of conversation between guest and guest.) In addition must be
included play of every kind which is attended with no further interest than that of making the time pass by unheeded.
Fine art, on the other hand, is a mode of representation which is
intrinsically purposive, and which, although devoid of an end, has
the eﬀect of advancing the culture of the mental powers in the interests of social communication.
The universal communicability of a pleasure involves in its very
concept that the pleasure is not one of enjoyment arising out of mere
sensation, but must be one of reﬂection. Hence aesthetic art, as art
which is beautiful, is one having for its standard the reﬂective judgement and not bodily sensation.

§ 45
Fine art is an art, so far as it has at the same time the appearance
of being nature
A product of ﬁne art must be recognized to be art and not nature.
Nevertheless the purposiveness in its form must appear just as free
from the constraint of arbitrary rules as if it were a product of mere
nature. Upon this feeling of freedom in the play of our cognitive
faculties—which play has at the same time to be purposive—rests
that pleasure which alone is universally communicable without being
based on concepts. Nature proved beautiful when it wore the appearance of art; and art can only be termed beautiful, where we are conscious of its being art, while yet it has the appearance of nature.
For, whether we are dealing with beauty of nature or beauty of art,
we may make the universal statement: that is beautiful which pleases

306

136

307

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

in the mere judging of it (not in sensation or by means of a concept).
Now art has always got a deﬁnite intention of producing something.
Were this ‘something’, however, to be mere sensation (something
merely subjective), intended to be accompanied with pleasure, then
such product would, in our judging of it, only please through the
agency of the feeling of the senses. On the other hand, if the intention were one directed to the production of a deﬁnite object, then,
supposing this were attained by art, the object would only please by
means of a concept. But in both cases the art would please, not in the
mere judging of it, i.e. not as ﬁne art, but rather as mechanical art.
Hence the purposiveness in the product of ﬁne art, intentional
though it be, must not have the appearance of being intentional; i.e.
we must be able to look upon ﬁne art as nature, although we recognize
it to be art. But the way in which a product of art seems like nature,
is by the presence of perfect exactness in the agreement with rules
prescribing how alone the product can be what it is intended to be,
but with an absence of laboured eﬀect (without academic form betraying itself), i.e. without a trace appearing of the artist having always
had the rule present to him and of its having fettered his mental
powers.

§ 46
Fine art is the art of genius
Genius is the talent (natural endowment) which gives the rule to art.
Since talent, as an innate productive faculty of the artist, belongs
itself to nature, we may put it this way: Genius is the innate mental
aptitude (ingenium) through which nature gives the rule to art.
Whatever may be the merits of this deﬁnition, and whether it is
merely arbitrary, or whether it is adequate or not to the concept usually
associated with the word genius (a point which the following sections
have to clear up), it may still be shown at the outset that, according
to this acceptation of the word, ﬁne arts must necessarily be regarded
as arts of genius.
For every art presupposes rules which are laid down as the foundation which ﬁrst enables a product, if it is to be called one of art, to
be represented as possible. The concept of ﬁne art, however, does
not permit of the judgement upon the beauty of its product being
derived from any rule that has a concept for its determining ground,

Analytic of the Sublime

137

and that depends, consequently, on a concept of the way in which the
product is possible. Consequently ﬁne art cannot of its own self
excogitate the rule according to which it is to realize its product. But
since, for all that, a product can never be called art unless there is a
preceding rule, it follows that nature in the individual (and by virtue
of the harmony of his faculties) must give the rule to art, i.e. ﬁne art
is only possible as a product of genius.
From this it may be seen that genius (1) is a talent for producing
that for which no deﬁnite rule can be given: and not an aptitude in
the way of cleverness for what can be learned according to some
rule; and that consequently originality must be its primary property.
(2) Since there may also be original nonsense, its products must at
the same time be models, i.e. be exemplary; and, consequently,
though not themselves derived from imitation, they must serve that
purpose for others, i.e. as a standard or rule of judging. (3) It cannot
indicate scientiﬁcally how it brings about its product, but rather
gives the rule as nature. Hence, where an author owes a product to
his genius, he does not himself know how the ideas for it have entered
into his head, nor has he it in his power to invent the like at pleasure,
or methodically, and communicate the same to others in such precepts as would enable them to produce similar products. (Hence,
presumably, our word Genie is derived from genius, as the peculiar
guardian and guiding spirit bestowed upon a human being at birth,
by the inspiration of which those original ideas were obtained.)
(4) Nature prescribes the rule through genius not to science but to
art, and this also only in so far as it is to be ﬁne art.

§ 47
Elucidation and confirmation of the above explanation of genius
everyone is agreed on the point of the complete opposition between
genius and the spirit of imitation. Now since learning is nothing but
imitation, the greatest ability, or aptness as a pupil (capacity), is still,
as such, not equivalent to genius. Even if someone weaves his own
thoughts or fancies, instead of merely taking in what others have
thought, and even though he go so far as to bring fresh gains to
art and science, this does not aﬀord a valid reason for calling such
an intelligent, and often very intelligent, individual, a genius, in
contradistinction to one who goes by the name of a block-head, because

308

138

309

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

he can never do more than merely learn and follow a lead. For what
is accomplished in this way is something that could have been learned.
Hence it all lies in the natural path of investigation and reﬂection
according to rules, and so is not speciﬁcally distinguishable from what
may be acquired as the result of diligence backed up by imitation. So
all that Newton has set forth in his immortal work* on the Principles
of Natural Philosophy may well be learned, however great a mind it
took to ﬁnd it all out, but we cannot learn to write in a true poetic
vein, no matter how complete all the precepts of the poetic art may
be, or however excellent its models. The reason is that all the steps
that Newton had to take from the ﬁrst elements of geometry to his
greatest and most profound discoveries were such as he could make
intuitively evident and plain to follow, not only for himself but for
everyone else. On the other hand no Homer or Wieland* can show
how his ideas, so rich at once in fantasy and in thought, enter and
assemble themselves in his brain, for the good reason that he does not
himself know, and so cannot teach others. In matters of science,
therefore, the greatest inventor diﬀers only in degree from the most
laborious imitator and apprentice, whereas he diﬀers speciﬁcally
from one endowed by nature for ﬁne art. No disparagement, however, of those great men, to whom the human race is so deeply
indebted, is involved in this comparison of them with those who on
the score of their talent for ﬁne art are so favoured by nature. The
talent for science is formed for the continued advances of greater
perfection in knowledge, with all its dependent practical advantages,
as also for imparting the same to others. Hence scientists can boast a
considerable advantage over those who merit the honour of being
called geniuses, since genius reaches a point at which art must
come to a halt, as there is a limit imposed upon it which it cannot
transcend. This limit has in all probability been long since attained.
In addition, such skill cannot be communicated, but requires to be
bestowed directly from the hand of nature upon each individual, and
so with him it dies, awaiting the day when nature once again endows
another in the same way—one who needs no more than an example
to set the talent of which he is conscious at work on similar lines.
Seeing, then, that the natural endowment of art (as ﬁne art) must
furnish the rule, what kind of rule must this be? It cannot be one set
down in a formula and serving as a precept—for then the judgement
upon the beautiful would be determinable according to concepts.

Analytic of the Sublime

139

Rather must the rule be gathered from the execution, i.e. from the
product, which others may use to put their own talent to the test, so
as to let it serve as a model, not for imitation, but for following. The
possibility of this is diﬃcult to explain. The artist’s ideas arouse comparable ideas on the part of his pupil, presuming nature to have
endowed him with a comparable proportion of the mental powers.
For this reason the models of ﬁne art are the only means of handing
down this art to posterity. This is something which cannot be done
by mere descriptions (especially not in the ﬁeld of the arts of speech),
and in these arts, furthermore, only those models can become classical
of which the ancient, dead languages, preserved as learned, are the
medium.
Despite the marked diﬀerence that distinguishes mechanical art,
as an art merely depending upon diligence and learning, from ﬁne
art, as that of genius, there is still no ﬁne art in which something
mechanical, capable of being at once comprehended and followed in
obedience to rules, and consequently something academic does not
constitute the essential condition of the art. For the thought of something as end must be present, or else its product would not be
ascribed to an art at all, but would be a mere product of chance. But
the realization of an end necessitates determinate rules which we
cannot venture to dispense with. Now, seeing that originality of
talent is one (though not the sole) essential factor that goes to make
up the character of genius, shallow minds fancy that the best evidence they can give of their being full-blown geniuses is by emancipating themselves from all academic constraint of rules, in the belief
that one cuts a ﬁner ﬁgure on the back of an ill-tempered than of a
trained horse. Genius can do no more than furnish rich material for
products of ﬁne art; its elaboration and its form require a talent academically trained, so that it may be employed in such a way as to
stand the test of judgement. But, for a person to hold forth and pass
sentence like a genius in matters that fall to the province of the most
patient rational investigation, is ridiculous in the extreme. One is at
a loss to know whether to laugh more at the impostor who envelops
himself in such a cloud—in which we are given fuller scope to our
imagination at the expense of all use of our judgement,—or at the
simple-minded public which imagines that its inability clearly to
cognize and comprehend this masterpiece of penetration is due to its
being confronted by new truths en masse, in comparison with which,

310

140

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

detail, due to carefully weighed exposition and an academic examination of fundamental principles, seems to it only the work of a tyro.
311

312

§ 48
The relation of genius to taste
For judging beautiful objects, as such, what is required is taste; but
for ﬁne art, i.e. the production of such objects, one needs genius.
If we consider genius as the talent for ﬁne art (which the proper
signiﬁcation of the word imports), and if we would analyse it from
this point of view into the faculties which must concur to constitute
such a talent, it is imperative at the outset accurately to determine the
diﬀerence between beauty of nature, which it only requires taste to
judge, and beauty of art, which requires genius for its possibility (a
possibility to which regard must also be paid in judging such an object).
A beauty of nature is a beautiful thing; beauty of art is a beautiful
representation of a thing.
To enable me to judge a beauty of nature, as such, I do not need
to be previously possessed of a concept of what sort of a thing the
object is intended to be, i.e. I am not obliged to know its material
purposiveness (the end), but, rather, in judging it apart from any
knowledge of the end, the mere form pleases on its own account. If,
however, the object is presented as a product of art, and is as such to
be declared beautiful, then, seeing that art always presupposes an
end in the cause (and its causality), a concept of what the thing is
intended to be must already be provided. And, since the agreement
of the manifold in a thing with an inner character belonging to
it as its end constitutes the perfection of the thing, it follows that in
judging beauty of art the perfection of the thing must be also taken
into account—a matter which in judging a beauty of nature, as beautiful, is quite irrelevant.—It is true that in forming a judgement,
especially of animate objects of nature, e.g. of a human being or a
horse, objective purposiveness is also commonly taken into account
with a view to judgement upon their beauty; but then the judgement
also ceases to be purely aesthetic, i.e. a mere judgement of taste.
Nature is no longer judged as it appears like art, but rather in so far
as it actually is art, though superhuman art; and the teleological
judgement serves as basis and condition of the aesthetic, and one

Analytic of the Sublime

141

which the latter must regard. In such a case, where one says, for
example, ‘that is a beautiful woman,’ what one in fact thinks is only
this, that in her form nature excellently portrays the ends present in
the female ﬁgure. For one has to extend one’s view beyond the mere
form to a concept, to enable the object to be thought in such manner
by means of an aesthetic judgement that is logically conditioned.
Where ﬁne art manifests its superiority is in the beautiful descriptions it gives of things that in nature would be ugly or displeasing.*
The Furies, diseases, devastations of war, and the like, can (as evils)
be very beautifully described, and even represented in pictures. One
kind of ugliness alone is incapable of being represented conformably
to nature without destroying all aesthetic delight, and consequently
artistic beauty, namely, that which excites disgust. For, as in this strange
sensation, which depends purely on the imagination, the object is
represented as insisting, as it were, upon our enjoying it, while we
violently resist it, the artiﬁcial representation of the object is no
longer distinguishable from the nature of the object itself in our sensation, and so it cannot possibly be regarded as beautiful. The art of
sculpture, again, since in its products art is almost confused with
nature, has excluded from its creations the direct representation of
ugly objects, and, instead, only sanctions, for example, the representation of death (in a beautiful genius), or of the warlike spirit (in
Mars), by means of an allegory, or attributes which wear a pleasant
guise, and so only indirectly, through an interpretation on the part of
reason, and not for the pure aesthetic judgement.
So much for the beautiful representation of an object, which is
properly only the form of the presentation of a concept, and the
means by which the latter is universally communicated. To give this
form, however, to the product of ﬁne art, taste merely is required. By
this the artist, having practised and corrected his taste by a variety of
examples from nature or art, guides his work and, after many, and
often laborious, attempts to satisfy taste, ﬁnds the form which commends itself to him. Hence this form is not, as it were, a matter of
inspiration, or of a free swinging of the powers of the mind, but
rather of a slow and even painful process of improvement, directed
to making the form adequate to his thought without prejudice to the
freedom in the play of those powers.
Taste is, however, merely a faculty of judging, rather than a productive one; and what conforms to it is not, merely on that account,

313

142

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

a work of ﬁne art. It may belong to useful and mechanical art, or even
to science, as a product following deﬁnite rules which are capable of
being learned and which must be closely followed. But the pleasing
form imparted to the work is only the vehicle of communication and
a mode, as it were, of execution, in respect of which one remains to a
certain extent free, notwithstanding being otherwise tied down to a
deﬁnite end. So we demand that tableware, or even a moral dissertation, and, indeed, a sermon, must bear this form of ﬁne art, yet without its appearing studied. But one would not call them on this account
works of ﬁne art. A poem, a musical composition, a picture-gallery,
and so forth, would, however, be placed under this head; and so in a
would-be work of ﬁne art we may frequently recognize genius without taste, and in another taste without genius.

§ 49
The faculties of the mind which constitute genius

314

Of certain products which are expected, partly at least, to stand on
the footing of ﬁne art, we say they are devoid of spirit; and this,
although we ﬁnd nothing to censure in them as far as taste goes. A
poem may be very pretty and elegant, but is devoid of spirit. A narrative has precision and method, but is devoid of spirit. A speech on
some festive occasion may be good in substance and ornate withal,
but may be devoid of spirit. Conversation frequently is not devoid of
entertainment, but yet devoid of spirit. Even of a woman we may
well say, she is pretty, aﬀable, and reﬁned, but devoid of spirit. Now
what do we mean here by ‘spirit’?
‘Spirit’ in an aesthetic sense, signiﬁes the animating principle in
the mind. But that whereby this principle animates the soul—the
material which it employs for that purpose—is that which sets
the mental powers into a swing that is purposive, i.e. into a play
which is self-maintaining and which strengthens those powers for
such activity.
Now my proposition is that this principle is nothing else than the
faculty of presenting aesthetic ideas. But, by an aesthetic idea I mean
that representation of the imagination which evokes much thought,
yet without the possibility of any deﬁnite thought whatever, i.e. concept, being adequate to it, and which language, consequently, can
never quite fully capture or render completely intelligible.—It is

Analytic of the Sublime

143

easily seen, that an aesthetic idea is the counterpart (pendant) of a
rational idea, which, conversely, is a concept, to which no intuition
(representation of the imagination) can be adequate.
The imagination (as a productive faculty of cognition) is a powerful agent for creating, as it were, a second nature out of the material
supplied to it by actual nature. It aﬀords us entertainment where
experience proves too commonplace; and we even use it to refashion
experience, always following, no doubt, laws that are based on analogy, but still also following principles which have a higher seat in
reason (and which are every whit as natural to us as those followed
by the understanding in laying hold of empirical nature). By this
means we come to feel our freedom from the law of association
(which attaches to the empirical employment of the imagination),
with the result that the material can be borrowed by us from nature
in accordance with that law, but be worked up by us into something
else—namely, what surpasses nature.
Such representations of the imagination may be termed ideas. This
is partly because they at least strain after something lying out beyond
the conﬁnes of experience, and so seek to approximate to a presentation of rational concepts (i.e. intellectual ideas), thus giving to these
concepts the semblance of an objective reality. But, on the other hand,
there is this most important reason, that no concept can be wholly
adequate to them as internal intuitions. The poet essays the task of
giving sensible form to the rational ideas of invisible beings, the kingdom of the blessed, hell, eternity, creation, and so forth. Or, again, as
to things of which examples occur in experience, e.g. death, envy,
and all vices, as also love, fame, and the like, transgressing the limits
of experience he attempts with the aid of an imagination, which in
reaching for a maximum emulates the precedent of reason, to present
them for the senses with a completeness of which nature aﬀords no
parallel; and it is in fact precisely in the poetic art that the faculty of
aesthetic ideas can show itself to full advantage. This faculty, however, regarded solely on its own account, is properly no more than a
talent (of the imagination).
If, now, we attach to a concept a representation of the imagination
belonging to its presentation, but evoking solely on its own account
such a wealth of thought as would never admit of comprehension in
a deﬁnite concept, and, as a consequence, giving aesthetically an
unbounded expansion to the concept itself, then the imagination here

315

144

316

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

displays a creative activity, and it sets the faculty of intellectual ideas
(reason) into movement—a movement, occasioned by a representation, towards an extension of thought, that, while germane, no doubt,
to the concept of the object, exceeds what can be grasped in that
representation or clearly expressed.
Those forms which do not constitute the presentation of a given
concept itself, but which, as further representations of the imagination, express the implications connected with it, and its kinship with
other concepts, are called (aesthetic) attributes of an object, the concept
of which, as an idea of reason, cannot be adequately presented. In this
way Jupiter’s eagle, with the lightning in its claws, is an attribute of the
mighty king of heaven, and the peacock of its stately queen. They do
not, like logical attributes, represent what lies in our concepts of the sublimity and majesty of creation, but rather something else—something
that encourages the imagination to spread its ﬂight over a whole host of
kindred representations that provoke more thought than admits of
expression in a concept determined by words. They furnish an aesthetic
idea, which serves the above rational idea as a substitute for logical
presentation, but with the proper task, however, of animating the mind
by opening out for it a prospect into a ﬁeld of kindred representations
stretching beyond its ken. But it is not only in the arts of painting or
sculpture, where the name of attribute is customarily employed, that
ﬁne art acts in this way; poetry and rhetoric also derive the spirit that
animates their works wholly from the aesthetic attributes of the
objects—attributes which go hand in hand with the logical, and give
the imagination an impetus to bring more thought into play in the
matter, though in an undeveloped manner, than allows of being
brought within the embrace of a concept, or, therefore, of being
deﬁnitely formulated in language.—For the sake of brevity I must
conﬁne myself to a few examples only. When the great king expresses
himself in one of his poems* by saying:
‘Let us depart this life untroubled and without regrets, leaving the
world replete with our good deeds. Thus does the sun, his daily path
completed, still shed a gentle light across the sky. The last rays it sends
forth through the air, are its last sighs for the well-being of the world’,
he enlivens in this way his rational idea of a cosmopolitan sentiment
even at the close of life, with the help of an attribute which the imagination (in remembering all the pleasures of a beautiful summer’s day
that is over and gone—a memory of which pleasures is suggested by

Analytic of the Sublime

145

a serene evening) allies with that representation, and which stirs up a
host of sensations and further representations for which no expression
can be found. On the other hand, even an intellectual concept may serve,
conversely, as attribute for a representation of the senses, and so enliven
the latter with the idea of the supersensible; but only by the aesthetic
aspect subjectively attaching to the consciousness of the supersensible
being employed for the purpose. So, for example, a certain poet says* in
his description of a beautiful morning: ‘The sun arose, as out of virtue
rises peace.’ The consciousness of virtue, even where we put ourselves
only in thought in the position of a virtuous man, diﬀuses in the mind a
multitude of sublime and comforting feelings, and gives a boundless outlook into a happy future, such as no expression within the compass of a
deﬁnite concept completely attains.13
In a word, the aesthetic idea is a representation of the imagination,
allied with a given concept, with which, in the free employment of
imagination, such a multiplicity of partial representations are bound
up, that no expression indicating a deﬁnite concept can be found for
it—one which on that account allows a concept to be supplemented
in thought by much that is indeﬁnable in words, and the feeling of
which enlivens the cognitive faculties, and with language, as a mere
thing of the letter, combines spirit.
The mental powers whose union in a certain relation constitutes
genius are imagination and understanding. Now, since the imagination,
in its employment on behalf of cognition, is subjected to the constraint
of the understanding and the restriction of having to be conformable to
the concept belonging thereto, whereas aesthetically it is free to furnish
of its own accord, over and above that agreement with the concept, a
wealth of undeveloped material for the understanding, to which the
latter paid no regard in its concept, but which it can make use of, not so
much objectively for cognition, as subjectively for enlivening the cognitive faculties, and hence also indirectly for cognitions, it may be seen
that genius properly consists in the happy relation, which science
cannot teach nor diligence learn, enabling one to seek out ideas for a
13 Perhaps there has never been a more sublime utterance, or a thought more sublimely expressed, than the well-known inscription upon the Temple of Isis (Mother
Nature): ‘I am all that is, and that was, and that shall be, and no mortal hath raised the
veil from before my face.’ Segner made use of this idea* in a suggestive vignette on the
frontispiece of his Natural Philosophy, in order to inspire his pupil at the threshold of
that temple into which he was about to lead him, with such a holy awe as would dispose
his mind to rapt attention.

317

146

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

given concept, and, besides, to hit upon the expression for them—the
expression by means of which the subjective condition of the mind
aroused by the ideas as the concomitant of a concept may be communicated to others. This latter talent is properly that which is termed spirit.
For to get an expression for what is indeﬁnable in the mental state
accompanying a particular representation and to make it universally
communicable—whether the expression be in language or painting or
statuary—is a thing requiring a faculty for laying hold of the rapid and
transient play of the imagination, and for unifying it in a concept (which
for that very reason is original, and reveals a new rule which could not
have been inferred from any preceding principles or examples) that
admits of communication without any constraint of rules.

318

If, after this analysis, we cast a glance back upon the above deﬁnition
of what is called genius, we ﬁnd: First, that it is a talent for art—not
one for science, in which clearly known rules must take the lead and
determine the procedure. Secondly, being a talent in the line of art, it
presupposes a deﬁnite concept of the product—as its end. Hence it
presupposes understanding, but, in addition, a representation, indeterminate though it be, of the material, i.e. of the intuition, required
for the presentation of that concept, and so a relation of the imagination to the understanding. Thirdly, it displays itself, not so much in
the working out of the projected end in the presentation of a deﬁnite
concept, as rather in the portrayal, or expression of aesthetic ideas containing a wealth of material for eﬀecting that intention. Consequently
the imagination is represented by it in its freedom from all guidance
of rules, but still as purposive for the presentation of the given concept. Fourthly, and lastly, the unsought and undesigned subjective
purposiveness in the free harmonizing of the imagination with the
understanding’s conformity to law presupposes a proportion and
accord between these faculties such as cannot be brought about by
any observance of rules, whether of science or mechanical imitation,
but can only be produced by the nature of the subject.
Genius, according to these presuppositions, is the exemplary
originality of the natural endowments of a subject in the free employment of his cognitive faculties. On this showing, the product of a
genius (in respect of so much in this product as is attributable to
genius, and not to possible learning or academic instruction) is an

Analytic of the Sublime

147

example, not to be imitated (for that would mean the loss of the
element of genius, and just the very spirit of the work), but to be followed by another genius—one whom it arouses to a sense of his own
originality in putting freedom from the constraint of rules so into
force in his art, that for art itself a new rule is won—which is what
shows a talent to be exemplary. Yet, since the genius is one who is
favoured by nature—something which must be regarded as but a rare
phenomenon—for other clever minds his example gives rise to a school,
that is to say a methodical instruction according to rules, collected, so far as
the circumstances admit, from such products of genius and their peculiarities. And, to that extent, ﬁne art is for such persons a matter of imitation,
for which nature, through the medium of a genius, gave the rule.
But this imitation becomes aping when the pupil copies everything
down to the deformities which the genius only of necessity suﬀered to
remain, because they could hardly be removed without loss of force to
the idea. This courage has merit only in the case of a genius. A certain
boldness of expression, and, in general, many a deviation from the
common rule becomes him well, but in no sense is it a thing worthy of
imitation. On the contrary it remains all through intrinsically a blemish, which one is bound to try to remove, but for which the genius is,
as it were, allowed to plead a privilege, on the ground that a scrupulous carefulness would spoil what is inimitable in the impetuous
ardour of his spirit. Mannerism is another kind of aping—an aping of
peculiarity (originality) in general, for the sake of distancing oneself as
far as possible from imitators, while the talent requisite to enable one
to be at the same time exemplary is absent.—There are, in fact, two
modes (modi) in general of arranging one’s thoughts for utterance. The
one is called a manner (modus aestheticus), the other a method (modus logicus). The distinction between them is this: the former possesses no
standard other than the feeling of unity in the presentation, whereas the
latter here follows deﬁnite principles. As a consequence the former is
alone admissible for ﬁne art. It is only, however, where the manner of
carrying the idea into execution in a product of art is aimed at singularity instead of being made appropriate to the idea, that mannerism is
properly ascribed to such a product. The ostentatious (precious),
forced, and aﬀected styles, intended to mark one out from the crowd
(though spirit is wanting), resemble the behaviour of a man who, as we
say, hears himself speaking, or who stands and moves about as if he
were on a stage to be gaped at—action which invariably betrays a tyro.

319

148

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

§ 50
The combination of taste and genius in products of fine art

320

To ask whether more stress should be laid in matters of ﬁne art upon
the presence of genius or upon that of taste, is equivalent to asking
whether more turns upon imagination or upon judgement. Now,
imagination rather entitles an art to be called an inspired than a ﬁne
art. It is only in respect of judgement that the name of ﬁne art is
deserved. Hence it follows that judgement, being the indispensable
condition (conditio sine qua non), is at least what one must regard as
of capital importance in forming a judgement of art as ﬁne art. So far
as beauty is concerned, to be fertile and original in ideas is not such
an imperative requirement as it is that the imagination in its freedom
should be in accordance with the understanding’s conformity to law.
For in lawless freedom imagination, with all its wealth, produces
nothing but nonsense; the power of judgement, on the other hand, is
the faculty that makes it consonant with understanding.
Taste, like judgement in general, is the discipline (or corrective)
of genius. It severely clips its wings, and makes it seemly or polished;
but at the same time it gives it guidance, directing and controlling
its ﬂight, so that it may preserve its purposive character. It introduces a
clearness and order into the plenitude of thought, and in so doing gives
stability to the ideas, and qualiﬁes them at once for permanent and universal approval, for being followed by others, and for a continually
progressive culture. And so, where the interests of both these qualities
clash in a product, and there has to be a sacriﬁce of something, then it
should rather be on the side of genius; and judgement, which in
matters of ﬁne art bases its decision on its own proper principles, will
more readily endure an infringement of the freedom and wealth of the
imagination, than that the understanding should be compromised.
The requisites for ﬁne art are, therefore, imagination, understanding,
spirit, and taste.14
14
The ﬁrst three faculties are ﬁrst brought into union by means of the fourth. Hume,
in his history, informs the English* that although they are second in their works to no
other people in the world in respect of the evidence they aﬀord of the three ﬁrst qualities separately considered, still in what unites them they must yield to their neighbours,
the French.

Analytic of the Sublime

149

§ 51
The division of the ﬁne arts
Beauty (whether it be of nature or of art) may in general be termed
the expression of aesthetic ideas. But the proviso must be added that
with beauty in art this idea must be occasioned through a concept of
the object, whereas with beauty of nature the bare reﬂection upon a
given intuition, apart from any concept of what the object is intended
to be, is suﬃcient for awakening and communicating the idea of
which that object is regarded as the expression.
Accordingly, if we wish to make a division of the ﬁne arts, we can
choose for that purpose, tentatively at least, no more convenient principle than the analogy which art bears to the mode of expression of
which individuals avail themselves in speech, with a view to
communicating themselves to one another as completely as possible,
i.e. not merely in respect of their concepts but also in respect of
their sensations.15 —Such expression consists in word, gesture, and tone
(articulation, gesticulation, and modulation). It is the combination of
these three modes of expression which alone constitutes a complete
communication of the speaker. For thought, intuition, and sensation
are in this way conveyed to others simultaneously and in conjunction.
Hence there are only three kinds of ﬁne art: the art of speech, formative art, and the art of the play of sensations (as external sense
impressions). This division might also be arranged as a dichotomy,
so that ﬁne art would be divided into that of the expression of thoughts
or intuitions, the latter being subdivided according to the distinction
between the form and the matter (sensation). It would, however, in that
case appear too abstract, and less in line with popular conceptions.
(1) The arts of speech are rhetoric and poetry. Rhetoric is the art of
engaging a serious business of the understanding as if it were a free
play of the imagination; poetry that of conducting a free play of the
imagination as if it were a serious business of the understanding.
Thus the orator announces a serious business, and for the purpose
of entertaining his audience conducts it as if it were a mere play with
ideas. The poet promises merely an entertaining play with ideas, and
15 The reader is not to consider this scheme for a possible division of the ﬁne arts as
a deliberate theory. It is only one of the various attempts that can and ought to be made.

321

150

322

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

yet for the understanding there ensues as much as if the promotion of
its business had been his one intention. The combination and harmony
of the two faculties of cognition, those of sensibility and understanding, which, though, doubtless, indispensable to one another, do not
readily permit of being united without compulsion and reciprocal
infringement, must have the appearance of being undersigned and a
spontaneous occurrence—otherwise it is not ﬁne art. For this reason
what is studied and laboured must here be avoided. For ﬁne art must
be free art in a double sense: i.e. not only in a sense opposed to remunerated work, as not being a work the magnitude of which may be
judged, exacted, or paid for according to a deﬁnite standard, but free
also in the sense that, while the mind, no doubt, occupies itself, still
it does so without ulterior regard to any other end, and yet with a
feeling of satisfaction and stimulation (independent of reward).
The orator, therefore, gives something which he does not promise,
viz. an entertaining play of the imagination. On the other hand, there is
something in which he fails to come up to his promise, and a thing, too,
which is his avowed business, namely, the engagement of the understanding to some end. The poet’s promise, on the contrary, is a modest
one, and a mere play with ideas is all he holds out to us, but he accomplishes something worthy of being made a serious business, namely, the
using of play to provide food for the understanding, and the giving of
life to its concepts by means of the imagination. Hence the orator in
reality performs less than he promises, the poet more.
(2) The formative arts* or those for the expression of ideas in
sensuous intuition (not by means of representations of mere imagination
that are excited by words) are arts either of sensuous truth or of sensuous semblance. The ﬁrst is called plastic art, the second painting. Both
use ﬁgures in space for the expression of ideas: the former makes
ﬁgures discernible to two senses, sight and touch (though, so far as
the latter sense is concerned, without regard to beauty), the latter
makes them discernible to the former sense alone. The aesthetic idea
(archetype, original) is the fundamental basis of both in the imagination; but the ﬁgure which constitutes its expression (the ectype, the
copy) is given either in its bodily extension (the way the object itself
exists) or else in accordance with the image which it produces in the
eye (according to its appearance when projected on a ﬂat surface). Or,
whatever the archetype is, either the reference to an actual end or only
the semblance of one may be imposed upon reﬂection as its condition.

Analytic of the Sublime

151

To plastic art, as the ﬁrst kind of formative ﬁne art, belong sculpture
and architecture. The ﬁrst is that which presents concepts of things
corporeally, as they might exist in nature (though as ﬁne art it directs
its attention to aesthetic purposiveness). The second is the art of presenting concepts of things which are possible only through art, and
the determining ground of whose form is not nature but an arbitrary
end—and of presenting them both with a view to this purpose and
yet, at the same time, with aesthetic purposiveness. In architecture
the chief point is a certain use of the artistic object to which, as the
condition, the aesthetic ideas are limited. In sculpture the mere
expression of aesthetic ideas is the main intention. Thus statues of
men, gods, animals, and so forth, belong to sculpture; but temples,
splendid buildings for public concourse, or even dwelling-houses,
triumphal arches, columns, mausoleums, and the like, erected as
monuments, belong to architecture, and in fact all household furniture (the work of cabinet-makers, and so forth—things meant to be
used) may be added to the list, on the ground that adaptation of
the product to a particular use is the essential element in a work of
architecture. On the other hand, a mere piece of sculpture, made simply
to be looked at, and intended to please on its own account, is, as a
corporeal presentation, a mere imitation of nature, though one in
which regard is paid to aesthetic ideas, and in which, therefore,
sensuous truth should not go the length of losing the appearance of
being an art and a product of the power of choice.
Painting, as the second kind of formative art, which presents the sensuous semblance in artful combination with ideas, I would divide into
that of the beautiful depiction of nature, and that of the beautiful
arrangement of its products. The ﬁrst is painting proper, the second landscape gardening. For the ﬁrst gives only the semblance of bodily extension; whereas the second, while giving the latter, according to its truth,
gives only the semblance of utility and employment for ends other
than the play of the imagination in the contemplation of its forms.16
16 It seems strange that landscape gardening may be regarded as a kind of painting,
notwithstanding that it presents its forms corporeally. But, as it takes its forms bodily
from nature (the trees, shrubs, grasses, and ﬂowers taken, originally at least, from wood
and ﬁeld) it is to that extent not an art such as, let us say, plastic art. Further, the
arrangement which it makes is not conditioned by any concept of the object or of its end
(as is the case in sculpture), but by the mere free play of the imagination in the act of
contemplation. Hence it bears a degree of resemblance to simple aesthetic painting that

323

152

324

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

The latter consists in no more than decking out the ground with the
same manifold variety (grasses, ﬂowers, shrubs, and trees, and even
water, hills, and dales) as that with which nature presents it to our
view, only arranged diﬀerently and in obedience to certain ideas. The
beautiful arrangement of corporeal things, however, is also a thing for
the eye only, just like painting—the sense of touch can form no intuitable representation of such a form. In addition I would place under
the head of painting, in the wide sense, the decoration of rooms by
means of hangings, ornamental accessories, and all beautiful furniture
the sole function of which is to be looked at; and in the same way the
art of tasteful dressing (with rings, snuﬀ-boxes, etc.). For a parterre of
various ﬂowers, a room with a variety of ornaments (including even
the ladies’ attire), go to make at a festive gathering a sort of picture
which, like pictures in the true sense of the word (those which are not
intended to teach history or natural science), has no business beyond
appealing to the eye, in order to entertain the imagination in free play
with ideas, and to engage actively the aesthetic power of judgement
independently of any deﬁnite end. No matter how heterogeneous, on
the mechanical side, may be the craft involved in all this decoration,
and no matter what a variety of artists may be required, still the judgement of taste, so far as it is one upon what is beautiful in this art, is
determined in one and the same way: namely, as a judgement only
upon the forms (without regard to any end) as they present themselves to the eye, singly or in combination, according to their eﬀect
upon the imagination.—The justiﬁcation, however, of bringing
formative art (by analogy) under a common head with gesture in a
speech, lies in the fact that through these ﬁgures the spirit of the
artist furnishes a bodily expression for the substance and character of
his thought, and makes the thing itself speak, as it were, in mimic
language—a very common play of our fantasy that attributes to lifeless things a spirit suitable to their form, and that uses them as its
mouthpiece.
(3) The art of the beautiful play of sensations (sensations
that arise from external stimulation) which is a play of sensations that
has no deﬁnite theme (but by means of light and shade makes a pleasing composition of
atmosphere, land, and water).—Throughout, the reader is to weigh the above only as an
eﬀort to connect the ﬁne arts under a principle, which, in the present instance, is
intended to be that of the expression of aesthetic ideas (following the analogy of a language), and not as a positive and deliberate derivation of the connexion.

Analytic of the Sublime

153

has nevertheless to permit of universal communication, can only be
concerned with the proportion of the diﬀerent degrees of attunement
(tension) in the sense to which the sensation belongs, i.e. with its
tone. In this comprehensive sense of the word it may be divided into
the artistic play of sensations of hearing and of sight, consequently
into music and the art of colour.—It is remarkable that these two
senses, over and above that receptivity for impressions as is required
to obtain concepts of external objects by means of these impressions,
also admit of a peculiar associated sensation of which we cannot easily
determine whether it is based on sensibility or reﬂection; and that this
affectability may at times be lacking, although the sense, in other
respects, and in what concerns its employment for the cognition of
objects, is by no means deﬁcient but particularly keen. In other words,
we cannot conﬁdently assert whether a colour or a tone (sound) is
merely an agreeable sensation, or whether they are in themselves a
beautiful play of sensations, and in being judged aesthetically,
convey, as such, a delight in their form. If we consider the velocity of
the vibrations of light, or, in the second case, of the air, which in all
probability far outstrips any capacity on our part for forming an
immediate judgement in perception of the time-interval between
them, we should be led to believe that it is only the eﬀect of those
vibrating movements upon the elastic parts of our body, that can be
evident to the senses, but that the time-interval between them is not
noticed nor involved in our judgement, and that, consequently, all
that enters into combination with colours and tones is the agreeableness, and not the beauty, of their composition. But, let us consider, on
the other hand, ﬁrst, the mathematical character both of the proportion of those vibrations in music, and of our judgement upon it, and,
as is reasonable, form an estimate of colour contrasts on the analogy
of the latter. Secondly, let us consult the instances, albeit rare, of individuals who, with the best of sight, have failed to distinguish colours,
and, with the sharpest hearing, to distinguish tones, while for those
who have this ability the perception of an altered quality (not merely
of the degree of the sensation) in the case of the diﬀerent intensities
in the scale of colours or tones is deﬁnite, as is also the number of
those which may be intelligibly distinguished. Bearing all this in mind
we may feel compelled to look upon the sensations aﬀorded by both,
not as mere sense-impressions, but as the eﬀect of a judging of form
in the play of a number of sensations. The diﬀerence which the one

325

154

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

opinion or the other occasions in judging of the basis of music would,
however, only give rise to this much change in its deﬁnition, that
either it is to be interpreted, as we have done, as the beautiful play of
sensations (through hearing), or else as one of agreeable sensations.
According to the former interpretation, alone, would music be represented out and out as a ﬁne art, whereas according to the latter it
would be represented as (in part at least) an agreeable art.

§ 52
The combination of the ﬁne arts in one and the same product

326

Rhetoric may in a drama be combined with a pictorial presentation
of its subjects as well as its objects; as may poetry with music in a song;
and this again with a pictorial (theatrical) presentation in an opera;
and so may the play of sensations in a piece of music with the play of
ﬁgures in a dance, and so on. Even the presentation of the sublime, so
far as it belongs to ﬁne art, may be brought into union with beauty in
a tragedy in verse, a didactic poem or an oratorio, and in this combination ﬁne art is even more artistic. Whether it is also more beautiful
(having regard to the multiplicity of diﬀerent kinds of delight which
intersect with one another) may in some of these instances be doubted.
Still in all ﬁne art the essential element consists in the form which is
purposive for observation and for judgement. Here the pleasure is at
the same time culture, and disposes the spirit to ideas, making it thus
susceptible to such pleasure and entertainment in greater abundance.
The matter of sensation (charm or emotion) is not essential. Here the
aim is merely enjoyment, which leaves nothing behind it with regard
to the idea, and renders the spirit dull, the object in the course of time
distasteful, and the mind dissatisﬁed with itself and ill-humoured,
owing to a consciousness that in the judgement of reason its mood is
contrary to purpose.
Where ﬁne arts are not, either closely or remotely, brought into
combination with moral ideas, which alone are attended with a selfsuﬃcing delight, the above is the fate that ultimately awaits them.
They then only serve for a diversion, of which one continually feels
an increasing need in proportion as one has availed oneself of it as a
means of dispelling one’s discontented mind, with the result that one
makes oneself ever more and more unproﬁtable and dissatisﬁed with
oneself. With a view to the purpose ﬁrst named the beauties of nature

Analytic of the Sublime

155

are in general the most beneﬁcial, if one is early habituated to
observe, judge, and admire them.

§ 53
Comparison of the aesthetic worth of the ﬁne arts
Poetry (which owes its origin almost entirely to genius and is least
willing to be led by precepts or example) holds the ﬁrst rank among
all the arts. It expands the mind by giving freedom to the imagination and by oﬀering, from among the boundless multiplicity of possible forms accordant with a given concept, to whose bounds it is
restricted, that one which couples with the presentation of the concept a wealth of thought to which no verbal expression is completely
adequate, and by thus rising aesthetically to ideas. It invigorates the
mind by letting it feel its faculty—free, spontaneous, and independent of determination by nature—of regarding and judging nature as
phenomenon in the light of aspects which nature of itself does not
aﬀord us in experience, either for the senses or the understanding,
and of employing it accordingly on behalf of, and as a sort of schema
for, the supersensible. It plays with semblance, which it produces at
will, but not as an instrument of deception; for its avowed pursuit is
merely one of play, which, however, understanding may turn to good
account and employ for its own purpose.—Rhetoric, so far as this is
taken to mean the art of persuasion, i.e. the art of deluding by means
of such beautiful semblance (as ars oratoria), and not merely excellence of speech (eloquence and style), is a dialectic, which borrows
from poetry only so much as is necessary to win over people’s minds
to the side of the speaker before they have weighed the matter, and
to rob their verdict of its freedom. Hence it can be recommended
neither for the bar nor the pulpit. For where civil laws, the right of
individual persons, or the permanent instruction and determination
of people’s minds to a correct knowledge and a conscientious observance of their duty is at stake, then it is below the dignity of an
undertaking of such import to exhibit even a trace of the exuberance
of wit and imagination, and, still more, of the art of talking people
round and prejudicing them in favour of anyone. For although such
art is capable of being at times directed to ends intrinsically legitimate and praiseworthy, still it becomes reprehensible on account of the
subjective injury done in this way to maxims and dispositions, even

327

156

328

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

where objectively the action may be lawful. For it is not enough to do
what is right, but we should practise it solely on the ground of its
being right. Further, the simple lucid concept of human concerns of
this kind, backed up with lively illustrations of it, exerts of itself, in
the absence of any oﬀence against the rules of euphony of speech or
of propriety in the expression of ideas of reason (all which together
make up excellence of speech), a suﬃcient inﬂuence upon human
minds to obviate the necessity of having recourse here to the machinery of persuasion, which, being equally available for the purpose of
putting a ﬁne gloss or a cloak upon vice and error, fails to rid one
completely of the lurking suspicion that one is being artfully hoodwinked. In poetry everything is straight and above board. It shows its
hand: it desires to carry on a mere entertaining play with the imagination, and one consonant, in respect of form, with the laws of understanding; and it does not seek to steal upon and ensnare the
understanding with a sensuous presentation.17
After poetry, if we take charm and the capacity to move the mind into
account, I would give the next place to that art which comes nearer to
it than to any other art of speech, and admits of very natural union
with it, namely the art of tone. For though it speaks by means of mere
sensations without concepts, and so does not, like poetry, leave
behind it any food for thought, still it moves the mind more
diversely, and, although with transient, still with intenser eﬀect. It is
certainly, however, more a matter of enjoyment than of culture—the
play of thought incidentally excited by it being merely the eﬀect of a
more or less mechanical association—and it possesses less worth in
17 I must confess to the pure delight which I have always been aﬀorded by a beautiful
poem; whereas the reading of the best speech of a Roman forensic orator, a modern parliamentary debater, or a preacher, has invariably been mingled with an unpleasant sense
of disapproval of an insidious art that knows how, in matters of importance, to move
people like machines to a judgement that must lose all its weight with them upon calm
reﬂection. Force and elegance of speech (which together constitute rhetoric) belong to
ﬁne art; but oratory (ars oratoria), being the art of playing for one’s own purpose upon
the weaknesses of others (let this purpose be ever so good in intention or even in fact)
merits no respect whatever. Besides, both at Athens and at Rome, it only attained its
greatest height at a time when the state was hastening to its decay, and genuine patriotic
sentiment was a thing of the past. One who sees the issue clearly, and who has a command of language in its wealth and its purity, and who is possessed of an imagination
that is fertile and eﬀective in presenting his ideas, and whose heart, withal, turns with
lively sympathy to what is truly good—he is the vir bonus dicendi peritus,* the orator
without art, but of great impressiveness, as Cicero would have him, though he may not
himself always have remained faithful to this ideal.

Analytic of the Sublime

157

the judgement of reason than any other of the ﬁne arts. Hence, like
all enjoyment, it calls for constant change, and does not stand frequent repetition without inducing weariness. Its charm, which
admits of such universal communication, appears to rest on the following facts. Every expression in language has an associated tone
suited to its sense. This tone indicates, more or less, a mode in which
the speaker is aﬀected, and in turn evokes it in the hearer also, in
whom conversely it then also excites the idea which in language is
expressed with such a tone. Further, just as modulation is, as it were,
a universal language of sensations intelligible to every human being,
so the art of tone wields the full force of this language wholly on its
own account, namely, as a language of the aﬀects, and in this way,
according to the law of association, universally communicates the
aesthetic ideas that are naturally combined therewith. But, further,
inasmuch as those aesthetic ideas are not concepts or determinate
thoughts, the form of the arrangement of these sensations (harmony
and melody), taking the place of the form of a language, only serves
the purpose of giving an expression to the aesthetic idea of an integral whole of an unutterable wealth of thought in accordance with a
certain theme forming the dominant affect in the piece. This purpose
is produced by means of a proportion in the accord of the sensations
(an accord which may be brought mathematically under certain
rules, since it rests, in the case of tones, upon the numerical relation
of the vibrations of the air in the same time, so far as there is a combination of the tones simultaneously or in succession). Although this
mathematical form is not represented by means of determinate concepts, to it alone belongs the delight which the mere reﬂection upon
such a number of concomitant or consecutive sensations couples
with this their play, as the universally valid condition of its beauty,
and it is with reference to it alone that taste can lay claim to a right
to anticipate the judgement of every human being.
But mathematics, certainly, plays not the slightest part in the charm
and movement of the mind produced by music. Rather is it only the
indispensable condition (conditio sine qua non) of that proportion
of the combining as well as changing impressions which makes it
possible to grasp them all in one and prevent them from destroying
one another, and to let them, rather, conspire towards the production
of a continuous movement and enlivening of the mind by aﬀects that
are in unison with it, and thus towards a contented self-enjoyment.

329

158

330

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

If, on the other hand, we measure the worth of the ﬁne arts by the
culture they supply to the mind, and adopt for our standard the
expansion of the faculties whose conﬂuence, in judgement, is necessary for cognition, music, then, since it plays merely with sensations,
has the lowest place among the ﬁne arts (just as it has perhaps the highest among those valued at the same time for their agreeableness).
Looked at in this light it is far excelled by the formative arts. For, in
putting the imagination into a play which is at once free and adapted
to the understanding, they all the while carry on a serious business,
since they execute a product which serves the concepts of understanding as a vehicle, permanent and appealing to us on its own account, for
eﬀecting their union with sensibility, and thus for promoting, as it
were, the urbanity of the higher powers of cognition. The two kinds of
art pursue completely diﬀerent courses. Music advances from sensations to indeterminate ideas: formative art from determinate ideas to
sensations. The latter gives a lasting impression, the former one that is
only ﬂeeting. The former sensations imagination can recall and agreeably entertain itself with, while the latter either vanish entirely, or else,
if involuntarily repeated by the imagination, are more oppressive to us
than agreeable. Over and above all this, music has a certain lack of
urbanity about it. For owing chieﬂy to the character of its instruments, it scatters its inﬂuence abroad to an uncalled-for extent
(through the neighbourhood), and thus, as it were, becomes obtrusive and deprives others, outside the musical circle, of their freedom.
This is a thing that the arts that address themselves to the eye do not
do, for if one is not disposed to give admittance to their impressions,
one has only to look the other way. The case is almost on a par with
the practice of regaling oneself with a perfume that exhales its odours
far and wide. The man who pulls his perfumed handkerchief from
his pocket treats all around to it whether they like it or not, and compels them, if they want to breathe at all, to be parties to the enjoyment, and so the habit has gone out of fashion.18
Among the formative arts I would give the palm to painting: partly
because it is the art of design, and, as such, the groundwork of all the
other formative arts; partly because it can penetrate much further
18 Those who have recommended the singing of hymns at family prayers have forgotten the amount of annoyance which they give to the general public by such noisy (and,
as a rule, for that very reason, pharisaical) worship, for they compel their neighbours
either to join in the singing or else abandon their meditations.

Analytic of the Sublime

159

into the region of ideas, and in conformity with them give a greater
extension to the ﬁeld of intuition than it is open to the others to do.

§ 54
Remark
As we have often shown, there is essential distinction between what
pleases simply in the judging of it and what gratiﬁes (pleases in sensation). The latter is something which, unlike the former, we cannot
demand from everyone. Gratiﬁcation (no matter whether its cause
has its seat even in ideas) appears always to consist in a feeling of
the furtherance of the entire life of human beings and, hence, also of
their bodily well-being, i.e. their health. And so, perhaps, Epicurus was
not wide of the mark* when he said that at bottom all gratiﬁcation is
bodily sensation, and only misunderstood himself in ranking intellectual and even practical delight under the head of gratiﬁcation.
Bearing in mind the latter distinction, it is readily explicable how
even the gratiﬁcation a person feels is capable of displeasing him (like
the joy of a needy but good-natured individual on being made the
heir of an aﬀectionate but penurious father), or how deep pain
may still give pleasure to the suﬀerer (as the sorrow of a widow over
the death of her deserving husband), or how there may be pleasure
over and above gratiﬁcation (as in scientiﬁc pursuits), or how a pain
(as, for example, hatred, envy, and desire for revenge) may in addition be a source of displeasure. Here the delight or aversion depends
upon reason, and is one with approval or disapproval. Gratiﬁcation
and pain, on the other hand, can only depend upon feeling, or upon
the prospect of a possible well-being or the reverse (irrespective of
its source).
The changing free play of sensations (which do not follow any
preconceived plan) is always a source of gratiﬁcation, because it
promotes the feeling of health; and it is immaterial whether or not we
experience delight in the object of this play or even in the gratiﬁcation itself when judged in the light of reason. Also this gratiﬁcation
may amount to an aﬀect, although we take no interest in the object
itself, or none, at least, proportionate to the degree of the aﬀect. We
may divide the aforementioned play into that of games of chance, harmony, and wit. The ﬁrst stands in need of an interest, whether it be of
vanity or self-seeking, but one which falls far short of that centred in

331

160

332

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

the way in which we seek to procure it. All that the second requires is
the change of sensations, each of which has its bearing on aﬀect,
though without attaining to the degree of an aﬀect, and excites aesthetic ideas. The third springs merely from the change of the representations in the power of judgement, which, while unproductive of
any thought conveying an interest, yet enlivens the mind.
What a fund of gratiﬁcation must be aﬀorded by play, without our
having to fall back upon any consideration of interest, is a matter to
which all our evening parties bear witness—for without play they
hardly ever escape falling ﬂat. But the aﬀects of hope, fear, joy, anger,
and derision here engage in play, as every moment they change their
parts, and are so lively that, as by an internal motion, the whole vital
function of the body seems to be furthered by the process—as is
proved by a vivacity of the mind produced—although no one comes
by anything in the way of proﬁt or instruction. But as the play of
chance is not one that is beautiful, we will here lay it aside. Music, on
the contrary, and what provokes laughter are two kinds of play with
aesthetic ideas, or even with representations of the understanding, by
which, all said and done, nothing is thought. By mere force of change
they yet are able to aﬀord lively gratiﬁcation. This furnishes pretty
clear evidence that the enlivening eﬀect of both is physical, despite
its being excited by ideas of the mind, and that the feeling of health,
arising from a movement of the viscera answering to that play, makes
up that entire gratiﬁcation of an animated gathering upon the spirit
and reﬁnement of which we set such store. Not any estimate of harmony in tones or ﬂashes of wit, which, with its beauty, serves only as
a necessary vehicle, but rather the stimulated vital functions of the
body, the aﬀect stirring the viscera and the diaphragm, and, in a
word, the feeling of health (of which we are only aware upon some
such occasion) are what constitute the gratiﬁcation we experience at
being able to reach the body even through the soul and use the latter
as the physician of the former.
In music the course of this play is from bodily sensation to aesthetic
ideas (which are the objects for the aﬀects), and then from these back
again, but with gathered strength, to the body. In jest (which just as
much as the former deserves to be ranked rather as an agreeable than
a ﬁne art) the play arises from thoughts which collectively, so far as
seeking sensuous expression, engage the activity of the body. In this
presentation the understanding, missing what it expected, suddenly

Analytic of the Sublime

161

lets go its hold, with the result that the eﬀect of this slackening is felt
in the body by the oscillation of the organs. This favours the restoration of the equilibrium of the latter, and exerts a beneﬁcial inﬂuence
upon the health.
Something absurd (something in which, therefore, the understanding can of itself ﬁnd no delight) must be present in whatever is to
raise a hearty convulsive laugh. Laughter is an aﬀect arising from a
strained expectation being suddenly reduced to nothing. This very reduction, at which certainly understanding cannot rejoice, is still indirectly a source of very lively enjoyment for a moment. Its cause must
consequently lie in the inﬂuence of the representation upon the
body, and the reciprocal eﬀect of this upon the mind. This, moreover, cannot depend upon the representation being objectively an
object of gratiﬁcation, (for how can we derive gratiﬁcation from a disappointment?) but must rest solely upon the fact that the reduction
is a mere play of representations, and, as such, produces an equilibrium of the vital forces of the body.
Suppose that someone tells the following story: An Indian at an
Englishman’s table in Surat saw a bottle of ale opened, and all the
beer turned into froth and ﬂowing out. The repeated exclamations of
the Indian showed his great astonishment. ‘Well, what is so wonderful in that?’ asked the Englishman. ‘Oh, I’m not surprised myself,’
said the Indian, ‘at its getting out, but at how you ever managed to
get it all in.’ At this we laugh, and it gives us hearty pleasure. This is
not because we believe ourselves, maybe, more quick-witted than
this ignorant Indian, or because our understanding here brings to our
notice any other ground of delight. It is rather that the bubble of our
expectation was extended to the full and suddenly burst into nothing.
Or, again, take the case of the heir of a wealthy relative being minded
to make preparations for having the funeral obsequies on a most
imposing scale, but complaining that things would not go right for
him, because (as he said) ‘the more money I give my mourners to
look sad, the merrier they look’. At this we laugh outright, and the
reason lies in the fact that we had an expectation which is suddenly
reduced to nothing. We must be careful to observe that the reduction
is not one into the positive contrary of an expected object—for that
is always something, and may frequently pain us—but must be a
reduction to nothing. For where a person arouses great expectation
by recounting some tale, and at the close its untruth becomes at once

333

162

334

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

apparent to us, we are displeased at it. So it is, for instance, with the
tale of people whose hair from excess of grief is said to have turned
white in a single night. On the other hand, if a wag, wishing to cap
the story, tells with the utmost elaboration of a merchant’s grief,
who, on his return journey from India to Europe with all his wealth
in merchandise, was obliged by stress of storm to throw everything
overboard, and grieved to such an extent that in the selfsame night
his wig turned grey, we laugh and enjoy the tale. This is because we
keep for a time playing on our own mistake about an object otherwise
indiﬀerent to us, or rather on the idea we ourselves were following
out, and, beating it to and fro, just as if it were a ball eluding our
grasp, when all we intend to do is just to get it into our hands and
hold it tight. Here our gratiﬁcation is not excited by a knave or a fool
getting a rebuﬀ: for, even on its own account, the latter tale told with
an air of seriousness would of itself be enough to set a whole table
into roars of laughter; and the other matter would ordinarily not be
worth a moment’s thought.
It is noteworthy that in all such cases the joke must have something in it capable of momentarily deceiving us. Hence, when the
semblance vanishes into nothing, the mind looks back in order to try
it over again, and thus by a rapidly succeeding tension and relaxation
it is thrown to and fro and put in oscillation. Since the snapping of
what was, as it were, tightening up the string takes place suddenly
(not by a gradual loosening), the oscillation must bring about a
mental movement and a sympathetic internal movement of the body.
This continues involuntarily and produces fatigue, but in so doing it
also aﬀords recreation (the eﬀects of a commotion conducive to health).
For supposing we assume that some movement in the bodily organs
is associated sympathetically with all our thoughts, it is readily
intelligible how the sudden act above referred to, of shifting the mind
now to one standpoint and now to the other, to enable it to contemplate its object, may involve a corresponding and reciprocal straining
and slackening of the elastic parts of our viscera, which communicates
itself to the diaphragm (and resembles that felt by ticklish people), in
the course of which the lungs expel the air with rapidly succeeding
interruptions, resulting in a movement beneficial to health. This
alone, and not what goes on in the mind, is the proper cause of the
gratiﬁcation in a thought that at bottom represents nothing.—
Voltaire said that heaven has given us two things* to compensate us

Analytic of the Sublime

163

for the many miseries of life, hope and sleep. He might have added
laughter to the list—if only the means of exciting it in men of intelligence were as ready to hand, and the wit or originality of humour
which it requires were not just as rare as the talent is common for
inventing stuﬀ that breaks one’s head, as mystic speculators do, or that
breaks one’s neck, as the genius does, or that breaks one’s heart as sentimental novelists do (and moralists of the same type for that matter).
We may, therefore, as I conceive, concede Epicurus the point that
all gratiﬁcation, even when occasioned by concepts that evoke aesthetic ideas, is animal, i.e. bodily sensation. For from this admission
the spiritual feeling of respect for moral ideas, which is not one of
gratiﬁcation, but a self-esteem (an esteem for humanity within us)
that raises us above the need of gratiﬁcation, suﬀers not a whit—no
nor even the less noble feeling of taste.
In naïveté we meet with a joint product of both the above. Naïveté
is the breaking forth of the ingenuousness originally natural to
humanity, in opposition to the art of disguising oneself that has
become a second nature. We laugh at the simplicity that is as yet a
stranger to dissimulation, but we rejoice the while over the simplicity
of nature that thwarts that art. We await the commonplace manner of
artiﬁcial utterance, carefully calculated as a beautiful illusion, and lo!
nature stands before us in unsullied innocence—nature that we were
quite unprepared to meet, and that he who laid it bare had also no
intention of revealing. That the outward appearance, beautiful but
false, that usually assumes such importance in our judgement, is here,
at a stroke, turned to a nullity, that, as it were, the rogue in us is
nakedly exposed, calls forth the movement of the mind, in two successive and opposite directions, agitating the body at the same time
with wholesome motion. But that something inﬁnitely better than
any accepted code of manners, namely purity of mind (or at least the
potential for such purity), has not become wholly extinct in human
nature, infuses seriousness and reverence into this play of judgement. But since it is only a manifestation that obtrudes itself for a
moment, and the veil of a dissembling art is soon drawn over it again,
there enters into the above feelings a touch of pity. This is an emotion of tenderness, playful in its way, that thus readily admits of combination with this sort of genial laughter. And, in fact, this emotion
is as a rule associated with it, and, at the same time, tends to make
amends to the person who provides such food for our merriment for

335

164

336

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

his embarrassment at not being wise after the common manner.—
For that reason an art of being naïf is a contradiction. But it is quite
possible to give a representation of naïveté in a ﬁctitious personage,
and, rare as the art is, it is a ﬁne art. With this naïveté we must not
confuse open-hearted simplicity, which only avoids spoiling nature
by artiﬁciality, because it has no notion of the art of social life.
The humorous manner may also be ranked as a thing which in its
enlivening inﬂuence is clearly allied to the gratiﬁcation provoked by
laughter. It belongs to originality of spirit, though not to the talent
for ﬁne art. Humour, in a good sense, means the talent for being able
to put oneself at will into a certain frame of mind in which everything
is judged on lines that do not follow the beaten track (quite the
reverse in fact) and yet on lines that follow certain principles, rational
in the case of such a mental temperament. A person with whom such
variations are not a matter of choice is said to have humours;* but if a
person can assume them voluntarily, and of set purpose (on behalf of
a lively presentation drawn from a ludicrous contrast), he and his
way of speaking are termed humorous. This manner belongs, however, to agreeable rather than to ﬁne art, because the object of the
latter must always have an evident intrinsic worth about it, and thus
demands a certain seriousness in its presentation, as taste does in
judging it.

second section
Dialectic of Aesthetic Judgement

337

§ 55
For a power of judgement to be dialectical it must ﬁrst of all be rationalizing; that is to say, its judgements must lay claim to universality,19
and do so a priori, for it is in the antithesis of such judgements that
dialectic consists. Hence there is nothing dialectical in the irreconcilability of aesthetic judgements of the senses (concerning the agreeable
and disagreeable). And in so far as each person appeals merely to his own
private taste, even the conﬂict of judgements of taste does not form a
dialectic of taste—for no one is proposing to make his own judgement into a universal rule. Hence the only concept left to us of a
dialectic aﬀecting taste is one of a dialectic of the critique of taste (not
of taste itself) in respect of its principles: for, on the question of the
ground of the possibility of judgements of taste in general, mutually
conﬂicting concepts naturally and unavoidably make their appearance.
The transcendental critique of taste will, therefore, only include a
part capable of bearing the name of a dialectic of the aesthetic judgement if we ﬁnd an antinomy of the principles of this faculty which
throws doubt upon its conformity to law, and hence also upon its
inner possibility.

§ 56
Representation of the antinomy of taste
The ﬁrst commonplace concerning taste is contained in the proposition under cover of which everyone devoid of taste thinks to shelter
himself from reproach: everyone has his own taste. This is only another
way of saying that the determining ground of this judgement is merely
19 Any judgement which sets up to be universal may be termed a rationalizing judgement (iudicium ratiocinans); for in so far as it is universal it may serve as the major
premiss of a syllogism. On the other hand, only a judgement which is thought as the conclusion of a syllogism, and, therefore, as having an a priori foundation, can be called
rational (iudicium ratiocinatum).

338

166

339

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

subjective (gratiﬁcation or pain), and that the judgement has no right
to the necessary agreement of others.
Its second commonplace, to which even those resort who concede
the right of the judgement of taste to pronounce with validity for everyone, is: there is no disputing about taste. This amounts to saying that even
though the determining ground of a judgement of taste be objective, it
is not reducible to deﬁnite concepts, so that in respect of the judgement
itself no decision can be reached by proofs, although it is quite open to
us to contend upon the matter, and to contend with right. For though
contention and dispute have this point in common, that they aim at
bringing judgements into accordance out of and by means of their
mutual opposition; yet they diﬀer in the latter hoping to eﬀect this from
deﬁnite concepts, as grounds of proof, and, consequently, adopting
objective concepts as grounds of the judgement. But where this is considered impracticable, dispute is regarded as alike out of the question.
Between these two commonplaces an intermediate proposition is
readily seen to be missing. It is one which has certainly not become
proverbial, but yet it is at the back of everyone’s mind. It is that there
may be contention about taste (although not a dispute). This proposition, however, involves the contrary of the ﬁrst one. For in a matter
in which contention is to be allowed, there must be a hope of coming
to terms. Hence one must be able to reckon on grounds of judgement
that possess more than private validity and are thus not merely subjective. And yet the above principle, everyone has his own taste, is
directly opposed to this.
The principle of taste, therefore, exhibits the following antinomy:
1. Thesis. The judgement of taste is not based upon concepts; for,
if it were, it would be open to dispute (decision by means of proofs).
2. Antithesis. The judgement of taste is based on concepts; for
otherwise, despite diversity of judgement, there could be no room
even for contention in the matter (a claim to the necessary agreement
of others with this judgement).

§ 57
Solution of the antinomy of taste
There is no possibility of removing the conﬂict of the above principles,
which underlie every judgement of taste (and which are only the two
peculiarities of the judgement of taste previously set out in the

Dialectic of Aesthetic Judgement

167

Analytic) except by showing that the concept to which the object is
referred in a judgement of this kind is not taken in the same sense in
both maxims of the aesthetic judgement; that this double sense, or
point of view, in our judging, is necessary for our power of transcendental judgement; and that nevertheless the false appearance arising
from the confusion of one with the other is a natural illusion, and so
unavoidable.
The judgement of taste must have reference to some concept or
other, as otherwise it would be absolutely impossible for it to lay claim
to necessary validity for everyone. Yet it need not on that account be
provable from a concept. For a concept may be either determinable,
or else at once intrinsically undetermined and indeterminable.
A concept of the understanding, which is determinable by means
of predicates borrowed from sensible intuition and capable of corresponding to it, is of the ﬁrst kind. But of the second kind is the transcendental rational concept of the supersensible, which lies at the
basis of all that sensible intuition and is, therefore, incapable of being
further determined theoretically.
Now the judgement of taste applies to objects of the senses, but
not so as to determine a concept of them for the understanding; for it
is not a cognitive judgement. Hence it is a singular representation of
intuition referable to the feeling of pleasure, and, as such, only a private judgement. And to that extent it would be limited in its validity
to the individual judging: the object is for me an object of delight, for
others it may be otherwise:—everyone to his taste.
For all that, the judgement of taste contains beyond doubt an
enlarged reference on the part of the representation of the object (and
at the same time on the part of the subject also), which lays the foundation of an extension of judgements of this kind to necessity for
everyone. This must of necessity be founded upon some concept or
other, but such a concept as does not admit of being determined by
intuition, and aﬀords no knowledge of anything. Hence, too, it is a
concept which does not aﬀord any proof of the judgement of taste.
But the mere pure rational concept of the supersensible lying at the
basis of the object (and of the judging subject for that matter) as
object of the senses, and thus as phenomenon, is just such a concept.
For unless such a point of view were adopted there would be no
means of saving the claim of the judgement of taste to universal
validity. And if the concept forming the required basis were a concept

340

168

341

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

of understanding, though a mere confused one, as, let us say, of perfection, answering to which the sensible intuition of the beautiful might
be adduced, then it would be at least intrinsically possible to ground the
judgement of taste upon proofs, which contradicts the thesis.
All contradiction disappears, however, if I say: The judgement of
taste does depend upon a concept (of a general ground of the subjective purposiveness of nature for the power of judgement), but one
from which nothing can be cognized in respect of the object, and
nothing proved, because it is in itself indeterminable and useless for
knowledge. Yet by means of this very concept it acquires at the same
time validity for everyone (but with each individual, no doubt, as a
singular judgement immediately accompanying his intuition):
because its determining ground lies, perhaps, in the concept of what
may be regarded as the supersensible substrate of humanity.
The solution of an antinomy turns solely on the possibility of two
apparently conﬂicting propositions not being in fact contradictory,
but rather being capable of consisting together, although the explanation of the possibility of their concept transcends our faculties of
cognition. That this illusion is also natural and for human reason
unavoidable, as well as why it is so, and remains so, although upon
the solution of the apparent contradiction it no longer misleads us,
may be made intelligible from the above considerations.
For the concept, which the universal validity of a judgement must
have for its basis, is taken in the same sense in both the conﬂicting
judgements, yet two opposite predicates are asserted of it. The thesis
should therefore read: The judgement of taste is not based on determinate concepts; but the antithesis: The judgement of taste does rest
upon a concept, although an indeterminate one, (that, namely, of the
supersensible substrate of phenomena); and then there would be no
conﬂict between them.
Beyond removing this conﬂict between the claims and counterclaims of taste we can do nothing. To supply a determinate objective
principle of taste in accordance with which its judgements might be
derived, tested, and proved, is an absolute impossibility, for then it
would not be a judgement of taste. The subjective principle—that is
to say, the indeterminate idea of the supersensible within us—can
only be indicated as the unique key to the enigma of this faculty,
itself concealed from us in its sources; and there is no further means
of making it any more intelligible.

Dialectic of Aesthetic Judgement

169

The antinomy here exhibited and resolved rests upon the proper
concept of taste as a merely reﬂective aesthetic judgement, and the
two seemingly conﬂicting principles are reconciled on the ground
that they may both be true, and this is suﬃcient. If, on the other hand,
owing to the fact that the representation lying at the basis of the
judgement of taste is singular, the determining ground of taste is
taken, as by some it is, to be agreeableness, or, as others, looking to
its universal validity, would have it, the principle of perfection,
and if the deﬁnition of taste is framed accordingly, the result is an
antinomy which is absolutely irresolvable unless we show the falsity
of both propositions as contraries (not as simple contradictories).
This would force the conclusion that the concept upon which each
is grounded is self-contradictory. Thus it is evident that the removal
of the antinomy of the aesthetic judgement pursues a course similar
to that followed by the critique in the solution of the antinomies
of pure theoretical reason; and that the antinomies, both here and
in the Critique of Practical Reason, compel us, whether we like it or
not, to look beyond the horizon of the sensible, and to seek in the
supersensible the point of union of all our faculties a priori: for we are
left with no other course to bring reason into harmony with itself.

Remark 1
We ﬁnd such frequent occasion in transcendental philosophy for distinguishing ideas from concepts of the understanding that it may be
of use to introduce technical terms answering to the distinction
between them. I think that no objection will be raised to my proposing some.—Ideas, in the most comprehensive sense of the word, are
representations referred to an object according to a certain principle
(subjective or objective), in so far as they can still never become a
cognition of it. They are either referred to an intuition, in accordance
with a merely subjective principle of the harmony of the cognitive
faculties (imagination and understanding), and are then called aesthetic; or else they are referred to a concept according to an objective
principle and yet are incapable of ever furnishing a cognition of the
object, and are called rational ideas. In the latter case the concept is a
transcendent concept, and, as such, diﬀers from a concept of understanding, for which an adequately answering experience may always
be supplied, and which, on that account, is called immanent.

342

170

343

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

An aesthetic idea cannot become a cognition, because it is an intuition (of the imagination) for which an adequate concept can never be
found. A rational idea can never become a cognition, because it
involves a concept (of the supersensible), for which a commensurate
intuition can never be given.
Now the aesthetic idea might, I think, be called an inexponible
representation of the imagination, the rational idea, on the other
hand, an indemonstrable concept of reason. The production of both is
presupposed to be not altogether groundless, but rather (following
the above explanation of an idea in general) to take place in obedience
to certain principles of the cognitive faculties to which they belong
(subjective principles in the case of the former and objective in that
of the latter).
Concepts of the understanding must, as such, always be demonstrable
(if, as in anatomy, demonstration is understood in the sense merely
of presentation). In other words, the object answering to such concepts
must always be capable of being given in intuition (pure or empirical);
for only in this way can they become cognitions. The concept of magnitude may be given a priori in the intuition of space, e.g. of a straight
line, etc.; the concept of cause in impenetrability, in the impact of bodies,
etc. Consequently both may be veriﬁed by means of an empirical
intuition, i.e. the thought of them may be indicated (demonstrated,
exhibited) in an example; and this it must be possible to do: for
otherwise there would be no certainty of the thought not being
empty, i.e. having no object.
In logic the expressions demonstrable or indemonstrable are ordinarily employed only in respect of propositions. A better designation
would be to call the former, propositions only mediately, and the
latter, propositions immediately, certain. For pure philosophy, too,
has propositions of both these kinds— meaning thereby true propositions which are in the one case capable, and in the other incapable,
of proof. But, in its character of philosophy, while it can, no doubt,
prove on a priori grounds, it cannot demonstrate—unless we wish
entirely to ignore the meaning of the word which makes demonstrate
(ostendere, exhibere) equivalent to giving an accompanying presentation of the concept in intuition (be it in a proof or in a deﬁnition).
Where the intuition is a priori this is called its construction, but when
even the intuition is empirical, we have still got the illustration of the
object, by which means objective reality is assured to the concept.

Dialectic of Aesthetic Judgement

171

Thus an anatomist is said to ‘demonstrate’ the human eye when he renders the concept, of which he has previously given a discursive exposition, intuitable by means of the dissection of that organ.
It follows from the above that the rational concept of the supersensible substrate of all phenomena generally, or even of that which
must be laid at the basis of our power of choice in respect of moral
laws, i.e. the rational concept of transcendental freedom, is at once
speciﬁcally an indemonstrable concept, and a rational idea, whereas
virtue is so as a matter of degree. For nothing can be given which in
itself qualitatively answers in experience to the rational concept of the
former, while in the case of virtue no empirical product of the above
causality attains the degree that the rational idea prescribes as the rule.
Just as the imagination, in the case of a rational idea, fails with its
intuitions to attain to the given concept, so understanding, in the case
of an aesthetic idea, fails with its concepts ever to attain to the completeness of the internal intuition which imagination conjoins with a
given representation. Now since the reduction of a representation of
the imagination to concepts is equivalent to expounding it, the aesthetic idea may be called an inexponible representation of the imagination (in its free play). I shall have an opportunity hereafter of
dealing more fully with ideas of this kind. At present I conﬁne myself
to the remark, that both kinds of ideas, aesthetic ideas as well as
rational, are bound to have their principles, and that the seat of these
principles must in both cases be reason—the latter depending upon
the objective, the former upon the subjective, principles of its
employment.
Consonantly with this, genius may also be defined as the faculty
of aesthetic ideas. This serves at the same time to point out the reason
why it is nature (the nature of the subject) and not a set purpose, that
in products of genius gives the rule to art (as the production of the
beautiful). For the beautiful must not be judged according to concepts, but by the purposive manner in which the imagination is
attuned so as to accord with the faculty of concepts generally; and so
rule and precept are incapable of serving as the requisite subjective
standard for that aesthetic and unconditioned purposiveness in ﬁne
art which has to make a warranted claim to being bound to please
everyone. Rather must such a standard be sought in the element of
mere nature in the subject, which cannot be comprehended under
rules or concepts, that is to say, the supersensible substrate of all the

344

172

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

subject’s faculties (unattainable by any concept of understanding),
and consequently in that which forms the point of reference for the
harmonious accord of all our faculties of cognition—the production
of which accord is the ultimate end set by the intelligible basis of our
nature. Thus alone is it possible for a subjective and yet universally
valid principle a priori to lie at the basis of that purposiveness for
which no objective principle can be prescribed.

Remark 2

345

The following important observation here naturally presents itself:
There are three kinds of antinomies of pure reason, which, however, all
agree in forcing reason to abandon the otherwise very natural
assumption which takes the objects of the senses for things in themselves, and to regard them, instead, merely as phenomena, and to lay
at their basis an intelligible substrate (something supersensible, the
concept of which is only an idea and aﬀords no proper knowledge).
Apart from some such antinomy reason could never bring itself to
take such a step as to adopt a principle so severely restricting the ﬁeld
of its speculation, and to submit to sacriﬁces involving the complete
dissolution of so many otherwise glittering hopes. For even now that
it is recompensed for this loss by the prospect of a proportionately
wider scope of action from a practical point of view, it is not without
a pang of regret that it appears to part company with those hopes,
and to break away from the old ties.
The reason for there being three kinds of antinomies is to be found
in the fact that there are three faculties of cognition, understanding,
judgement, and reason, each of which, being a higher faculty of cognition, must have its a priori principles. For, so far as reason passes
judgement upon these principles themselves and their employment,
it inexorably requires the unconditioned for the given conditioned in
respect of them all. This can never be found unless the sensible,
instead of being regarded as inherently belonging to things in themselves, is treated as a mere phenomenon, and, as such, being made to
rest upon something supersensible (the intelligible substrate of external and internal nature) as the thing in itself. There is then (1 ) for the
cognitive faculty an antinomy of reason in respect of the theoretical
employment of understanding carried to the point of the unconditioned; (2) for the feeling of pleasure and displeasure an antinomy of
reason in respect of the aesthetic employment of judgement; (3) for

Dialectic of Aesthetic Judgement

173

the faculty of desire an antinomy in respect of the practical employment
of self-legislative reason. For all these faculties have their fundamental
a priori principles, and, following an imperative demand of reason,
must be able to judge and to determine their object unconditionally in
accordance with these principles.
As to two of the antinomies of these higher cognitive faculties,
those, namely, of their theoretical and of their practical employment,
we have already shown elsewhere both that they are inevitable, if no
cognisance is taken in such judgements of a supersensible substrate
of the given objects as phenomena, and, on the other hand, that they
can be solved the moment this is done. Now, as to the antinomy incident to the employment of judgement in conformity with the
demand of reason, and the solution of it here given, we may say that
to avoid facing it there are but the following alternatives. It is open
to us to deny that any a priori principle lies at the basis of the aesthetic judgement of taste, with the result that all claim to the necessity of a universal consensus of opinion is an idle and empty delusion,
and that a judgement of taste only deserves to be considered to this
extent correct, that it so happens that a number share the same opinion, and even this, not, in truth, because an a priori principle is
presumed to lie behind this agreement, but rather (as with the taste of
the palate) because of the contingently similar organization of the
individuals. Or else, as the alternative, we should have to suppose that
the judgement of taste is in fact a disguised judgement of reason on
the perfection discovered in a thing and the reference of the manifold
in it to an end, and that it is consequently only called aesthetic on
account of the confusion that here besets our reﬂection, although
fundamentally it is teleological. In this latter case the solution of the
antinomy with the assistance of transcendental ideas might be
declared otiose and nugatory, and the above laws of taste thus reconciled with the objects of the senses, not as mere phenomena, but even
as things in themselves. How unsatisfactory both of those alternatives alike are as a means of escape has been shown in several places
in our exposition of judgements of taste.
If, however, our deduction is at least credited with having been
worked out on correct lines, even though it may not have been
suﬃciently clear in all its details, three ideas then stand out in evidence.
Firstly, there is the supersensible in general, without further determination, as substrate of nature; secondly, this same supersensible as

346

174

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

principle of the subjective purposiveness of nature for our cognitive
faculties; thirdly, the same supersensible again, as principle of the
ends of freedom, and principle of the common accord of these ends
with freedom in the moral sphere.

§ 58
The idealism of the purposiveness of both nature and art, as the
unique principle of aesthetic judgement

347

The principle of taste may, to begin with, be placed on either of two
footings. For taste may be said invariably to judge on empirical grounds
of determination and such, therefore, as are only given a posteriori
through the senses, or else it may be allowed to judge on an a priori
ground. The former would be the empiricism of the critique of taste,
the latter its rationalism. The ﬁrst would obliterate the distinction
that marks oﬀ the object of our delight from the agreeable; the second,
supposing the judgement rested upon determinate concepts, would
obliterate its distinction from the good. In this way beauty would ﬁnd
itself utterly banished from the world, and nothing but the dignity of
a separate name, betokening, maybe, a certain blend of both the
above-named kinds of delight, would be left in its stead. But we have
shown the existence of grounds of delight which are a priori, and
which, therefore, can consist with the principle of rationalism, and
which are yet incapable of being grasped by determinate concepts.
As against the above we may say that the rationalism of the principle of taste may take the form either of the realism of purposiveness
or of its idealism. Now, as a judgement of taste is not a cognitive
judgement, and as beauty is not a property of the object considered
on its own account, the rationalism of the principle of taste can never
be placed in the fact that the purposiveness in this judgement is
regarded in thought as objective. In other words, the judgement is
not directed theoretically, nor, therefore, logically (no matter if only
in a confused estimate) to the perfection of the object, but only
aesthetically to the harmonizing of its representation in the imagination
with the essential principles of judgement generally in the subject.
For this reason the judgement of taste, and the distinction between its
realism and its idealism, can only, even on the principle of rationalism,
depend upon its subjective purposiveness interpreted in one or other
of two ways. Either such subjective purposiveness is, in the ﬁrst case,

Dialectic of Aesthetic Judgement

175

a harmony with our judgement pursued as an actual (intentional) end
of nature (or of art), or else, in the second case, it is only a supervening purposive harmony with the needs of our faculty of judgement in
its relation to nature and the forms which nature produces in accordance with particular laws, and one that is independent of an end, or
spontaneous and contingent.
The beautiful forms displayed in the organic world all plead eloquently on the side of the realism of the aesthetic purposiveness
of nature in support of the plausible assumption that beneath the
production of the beautiful there must lie an antecedent idea in the
producing cause—that is to say an end acting in the interest of our
imagination. Flowers, blossoms, even the shapes of plants as a whole,
the elegance of animal formations of all kinds, unnecessary for the
discharge of any function on their part, but chosen as it were with an
eye to our taste; and, beyond all else, the variety and harmony in the
array of colours (in the pheasant, in crustacea, in insects, down even
to the meanest ﬂowers), so pleasing and charming to the eyes, but
which, inasmuch as they touch the bare surface, and do not even here
in any way aﬀect the structure, of these creatures—a matter which
might have a necessary bearing on their internal ends—seem to be
designed entirely with a view to outward appearance: all these lend
great weight to the mode of explanation which assumes actual ends
of nature in favour of our aesthetic judgement.
On the other hand, not only does reason, with its maxims enjoining upon us in all cases to avoid, as far as possible, any unnecessary
multiplication of principles, set itself against this assumption, but we
have nature in its free formations displaying on all sides extensive
mechanical proclivity to producing forms seemingly made, as it
were, for the aesthetic employment of our judgement, without
aﬀording the least support to the supposition of a need for anything
over and above its mechanism, as mere nature, to enable them to be
purposive for our judgement without their being grounded upon any
idea. The above expression, ‘free formations’ of nature, is, however,
here used to denote such as are originally set up in a ﬂuid at rest where
the evaporation or separation of some constituent (sometimes merely
of caloric) leaves the residue on solidiﬁcation to assume a deﬁnite
shape or structure (ﬁgure or texture) which diﬀers with speciﬁc
diﬀerences of the matter, but for the same matter is invariable. Here,
however, it is taken for granted that, as the true meaning of a ﬂuid

348

176

349

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

requires, the matter in the ﬂuid is completely dissolved and not a
mere admixture of solid particles simply held there in suspension.
The formation, then, takes place by a precipitation, i.e. by a sudden
solidiﬁcation—not by a gradual transition from the ﬂuid to the solid
state, but, as it were, by a leap. This transition is termed crystallization. Freezing water oﬀers the most familiar instance of a formation
of this kind. There the process begins by straight threads of ice forming. These unite at angles of sixty degrees, whilst others similarly
attach themselves to them at every point until the whole has turned
into ice. But while this is going on the water between the threads of
ice does not keep getting gradually more viscous, but remains as
thoroughly ﬂuid as it would be at a much higher temperature,
although it is perfectly ice-cold. The matter that frees itself—that
makes its sudden escape at the moment of solidiﬁcation—is a considerable quantum of caloric. As this was merely required to preserve
ﬂuidity, its disappearance leaves the exising ice not a whit colder than
the water which but a moment before was there as ﬂuid.
There are many salts and also stones of a crystalline ﬁgure which
owe their origin in like manner to some earthy substance being dissolved in water under the inﬂuence of agencies little understood. The
drusy conﬁgurations of many minerals, of the cubical sulphide of
lead, of the red silver ore, etc., are presumably also similarly formed
in water, and by the precipitation of their particles, on their being
forced by some cause or other to relinquish this vehicle and to unite
among themselves in deﬁnite external shapes.
But, further, all substances rendered ﬂuid by heat, which have
become solid as the result of cooling, give, when broken, internal evidence of a deﬁnite texture, thus suggesting the inference that only
for the interference of their own weight or the disturbance of the air,
the exterior would also have exhibited their proper speciﬁc shape.
This has been observed in the case of some metals where the exterior
of a molten mass has hardened, but the interior remained ﬂuid, and
then, owing to the withdrawal of the still ﬂuid portion in the interior,
there has been an undisturbed precipitation of the remaining parts
on the inside. A number of such mineral crystallizations, such as spars,
hematite, aragonite, frequently present extremely beautiful shapes
such as it might take art all its time to devise; and the halo in the
grotto of Antiparos* is merely the work of water percolating through
strata of gypsum.

Dialectic of Aesthetic Judgement

177

The ﬂuid state is, to all appearance, on the whole older than the
solid, and plants as well as animal bodies are built up out of ﬂuid
nutritive matter, which quietly takes on form—in the case of the
latter, admittedly, in obedience, primarily, to a certain original predisposition according to ends (which, as will be shown in Part II,
must not be judged aesthetically, but teleologically by the principle
of realism); but still all the while, perhaps, also following the universal law of the aﬃnity of substances in the way they precipitate and
freely form themselves. In the same way, again, where an atmosphere, which is a composite of diﬀerent kinds of gas, is charged with
watery ﬂuids, and these separate from it owing to a reduction of the
temperature, they produce snow-ﬁgures of shapes diﬀering with the
actual composition of the atmosphere. These are frequently of very
artistic appearance and of extreme beauty. So without at all derogating from the teleological principle by which an organization is
judged, it is readily conceivable how with beauty of ﬂowers, of the
plumage of birds, of crustacea, both as to their shape and their colour,
we have only what may be ascribed to nature and its capacity for originating in free activity aesthetically purposive forms, independently of
any particular guiding ends, according to chemical laws, by means of
the chemical integration of the substance requisite for the organization.
But what shows plainly that the principle of the ideality of the
purposiveness in the beauty of nature is the one upon which we
ourselves invariably take our stand in our aesthetic judgements,
forbidding us to have recourse to any realism of a natural end in
favour of our faculty of representation as a principle of explanation,
is that in our general judging of beauty we seek its standard a priori
in ourselves, and, that the aesthetic faculty is itself legislative in
respect of the judgement whether anything is beautiful or not. This
could not be so on the assumption of a realism of the purposiveness
of nature; because in that case we should have to go to nature for
instruction as to what we should deem beautiful, and the judgement
of taste would be subject to empirical principles. For in such judging
the question does not turn on what nature is, or even on what it is for
us in the way of an end, but on how we receive it. For nature to have
fashioned its forms for our delight would inevitably imply an objective
purposiveness on the part of nature, instead of a subjective purposiveness resting on the play of imagination in its freedom, where it is we
who receive nature with favour, and not nature that does us a favour.

350

178

351

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

That nature aﬀords us an opportunity for perceiving the inner purposiveness in the relation of our mental powers engaged in the estimate of certain of its products, and, indeed, such a purposiveness as
arising from a supersensible basis is to be pronounced necessary and
of universal validity, is a property of nature which cannot belong to
it as its end, or rather, cannot be judged by us to be such an end. For
otherwise the judgement that would be determined by reference to
such an end would be grounded upon heteronomy, instead of being
grounded upon autonomy and being free, as befits a judgement of taste.
The principle of the ideality of purposiveness is still more clearly
apparent in ﬁne art. For the point that sensations do not enable us
to adopt an aesthetic realism of purposiveness (which would make
art merely agreeable instead of beautiful) is one which it enjoys
in common with beautiful nature. But the further point that the
delight arising from aesthetic ideas must not be made dependent
upon the successful attainment of determinate ends (as an art
mechanically directed to results), and that, consequently, even in the
case of the rationalism of the principle, an ideality of the ends and not
their reality is fundamental, is brought home to us by the fact that
ﬁne art, as such, must not be regarded as a product of understanding
and science, but of genius, and must, therefore, derive its rule from
aesthetic ideas, which are essentially diﬀerent from rational ideas of
determinate ends.
Just as the ideality of objects of the senses as phenomena is the
only way of explaining the possibility of their forms admitting of
a priori determination, so, also, the idealism of the purposiveness in
judging the beautiful in nature and in art is the only hypothesis upon
which a critique can explain the possibility of a judgement of taste
that demands a priori validity for everyone (yet without basing the
purposiveness represented in the object upon concepts).

§ 59
Beauty as the symbol of morality
Intuitions are always required to verify the reality of our concepts.
If the concepts are empirical the intuitions are called examples: if they
are pure concepts of the understanding the intuitions go by the name
of schemata. But to call for a veriﬁcation of the objective reality
of rational concepts, i.e. of ideas, and, what is more, on behalf of the

Dialectic of Aesthetic Judgement

179

theoretical cognition of such a reality, is to demand an impossibility,
because absolutely no intuition adequate to them can be given.
All hypotyposis (presentation, subiectio sub adspectum)* a rendering
in terms of sense, is twofold. Either it is schematic, as where the intuition corresponding to a concept comprehended by the understanding
is given a priori, or else it is symbolic, as where the concept is one
which only reason can think, and to which no sensuous intuition can
be adequate. In the latter case the concept is supplied with an intuition such that the procedure of judgement in dealing with it is
merely analogous to that which it observes in schematism. In other
words, what agrees with the concept is merely the rule of this procedure, and not the intuition itself. Hence the agreement is merely in
the form of reﬂection, and not in the content.
Notwithstanding the adoption of the word symbolic by modern
logicians in a sense opposed to an intuitive mode of representation, it
is a wrong use of the word and subversive of its true meaning; for the
symbolic is only a mode of the intuitive. The intuitive mode of representation is, in fact, divisible into the schematic and the symbolic. Both
are hypotyposes, i.e. presentations (exhibitiones) not mere marks. Marks
are merely designations of concepts by the aid of accompanying
sensuous signs devoid of any intrinsic connexion with the intuition of
the object. Their sole function is to aﬀord a means of reinvoking the
concepts according to the imagination’s law of association—a purely
subjective rôle. Such marks are either words or visible (algebraic or
even mimetic) signs, simply as expressions for concepts.20
All intuitions by which a priori concepts are given a foothold are,
therefore, either schemata or symbols. Schemata contain direct, symbols
indirect, presentations of the concept. Schemata eﬀect this presentation demonstratively, symbols by the aid of an analogy (for which
recourse is had even to empirical intuitions), in which analogy judgement performs a double function: ﬁrst in applying the concept to the
object of a sensuous intuition, and then, secondly, in applying the
mere rule of its reﬂection upon that intuition to quite another object,
of which the former is but the symbol. In this way a monarchical state
is represented as a living body when it is governed by constitutional
laws, but as a mere machine (like a hand-mill) when it is governed by
20 The intuitive mode of knowledge must be contrasted with the discursive mode (not
with the symbolic). The former is either schematic, by means of demonstration, or symbolic,
as a representation following a mere analogy.

352

180

353

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

an individual absolute will; but in both cases the representation is
merely symbolic. For there is certainly no likeness between a despotic
state and a hand-mill, whereas there surely is between the rules of
reﬂection upon both and their causality. Hitherto this function has
been but little analysed, worthy as it is of a deeper study. Still this is
not the place to dwell upon it. In language we have many such indirect
presentations modelled upon an analogy enabling the expression in
question to contain, not the proper schema for the concept, but
merely a symbol for reﬂection. Thus the words ground (support,
basis), to depend (to be held up from above), to ﬂow from (instead of
to follow), substance (as Locke puts it: the support of accidents), and
numberless others, are not schematic, but rather symbolic hypotyposes, and express concepts without employing a direct intuition
for the purpose, but only drawing upon an analogy with one, i.e.
transferring the reﬂection upon an object of intuition to quite a new
concept, and one with which perhaps no intuition could ever directly
correspond. Supposing the name of knowledge may be given to what
only amounts to a mere mode of representation (which is quite
permissible where this is not a principle of the theoretical determination of the object in respect of what it is in itself, but of the practical
determination of what the idea of it ought to be for us and for its
purposive employment), then all our knowledge of God is merely
symbolic; and one who takes it, with the properties of understanding,
will, and so forth, which only manifest their objective reality in beings
of this world, to be schematic, falls into anthropomorphism, just as,
if he abandons every intuitive element, he falls into Deism which
furnishes no knowledge whatsoever—not even from a practical point
of view.
Now, I say, the beautiful is the symbol of the morally good, and
only in this light (a point of view natural to everyone, and one which
everyone demands from others as a duty) does it give us pleasure with
an attendant claim to the agreement of everyone else, whereupon the
mind becomes conscious of a certain ennoblement and elevation
above mere sensibility to pleasure from impressions of the senses,
and also appraises the worth of others on the score of a like maxim of
their judgement. This is the intelligible toward which taste looks, as
we have indicated in the preceding paragraph. It is, that is to say,
what brings even our higher cognitive faculties into common accord,
and is that apart from which sheer contradiction would arise between

Dialectic of Aesthetic Judgement

181

their nature and the claims put forward by taste. In this faculty
judgement does not ﬁnd itself subjected to a heteronomy of laws of
experience as it does in the empirical judging of things—in respect
of the objects of such a pure delight it gives the law to itself, just as
reason does in respect of the faculty of desire. Here, too, both on
account of this inner possibility in the subject, and on account of the
external possibility of a nature harmonizing therewith, it ﬁnds a reference in itself to something in the subject itself and outside it, and which
is not nature, nor yet freedom, but still is connected with the ground of
the latter, i.e. the supersensible—a something in which the theoretical
faculty is combined with the practical in a shared and unknown
manner. We shall bring out a few points of this analogy, while taking
care, at the same time, not to let the points of diﬀerence escape us.
(1) The beautiful pleases immediately (but only in reﬂective intuition, not, like morality, in its concept). (2) It pleases apart from all
interest (pleasure in the morally good is no doubt necessarily bound
up with an interest, but not with one of the kind that are antecedent
to the judgement upon the delight, but with one that judgement
itself for the ﬁrst time calls into existence). (3) The freedom of the
imagination (consequently of our faculty in respect of its sensibility)
is, in judging the beautiful, represented as in accord with the understanding’s conformity to law (in moral judgements the freedom of
the will is thought as the harmony of the latter with itself according
to universal laws of reason). (4) The subjective principle of the judging of the beautiful is represented as universal, i.e. valid for every
human being but as incognizable by means of any universal concept
(the objective principle of morality is set forth as also universal, i.e.
for all individuals, and, at the same time, for all actions of the same
individual, and, besides, as cognizable by means of a universal concept). For this reason the moral judgement not only admits of
deﬁnite constitutive principles, but is only possible by adopting these
principles and their universality as the ground of its maxims.
Even common understanding tends to pay regard to this analogy;
and we frequently apply to beautiful objects of nature or of art names
that seem to rely upon the basis of moral judgement. We call buildings or trees majestic and stately, or plains laughing and joyful; even
colours are called innocent, modest, soft, because they excite sensations
containing something analogous to the consciousness of the state of
mind produced by moral judgements. Taste makes, as it were, the

354

182

Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

transition from the charm of sense to habitual moral interest possible
without too violent a leap, for it represents the imagination, even in
its freedom, as purposive with respect to the understanding, and
teaches us to ﬁnd, even in sensuous objects, a free delight apart from
any charm of sense.

§ 60
appendix
The methodology of taste

355

The division of a critique into a doctrine of elements and a doctrine
of method—a division which is introductory to science—is one
inapplicable to the critique of taste. For there neither is, nor can be,
a science of the beautiful, and the judgement of taste is not determinable by principles. For, as to the element of science in every art—
a matter which turns upon truth in the presentation of the object of
the art—while this is, no doubt, the indispensable condition (conditio sine qua non) of ﬁne art, it is not itself ﬁne art. Fine art, therefore,
has only got a manner (modus), and not a method of teaching (methodus).
The master must illustrate what the pupil is to achieve, and how
achievement is to be attained, and the proper function of the universal rules to which he ultimately reduces his treatment is rather that
of supplying a convenient text for recalling its chief moments to the
pupil’s mind, than of prescribing them to him. Yet, in all this, due
regard must be paid to a certain ideal which art must keep in view,
even though complete success constantly eludes its happiest eﬀorts.
Only by exciting the pupil’s imagination to conformity with a given
concept, by pointing out how the expression falls short of the idea to
which, as aesthetic, the concept itself fails to attain, and by means of
severe criticism, is it possible to prevent his promptly looking upon
the examples set before him as the prototypes of excellence, and as
models for him to imitate, without submission to any higher standard
or to his own critical judgement. This would result in genius being
stiﬂed, and, with it, also the freedom of the imagination in its very
conformity to law—a freedom without which a ﬁne art is not possible, nor even as much as a correct taste of one’s own for judging it.
The propaedeutic to all ﬁne art, so far as the highest degree of its
perfection is what is in view, appears to lie, not in precepts, but in the

Dialectic of Aesthetic Judgement

183

culture of the mental powers produced by a sound preparatory education in what are called the humaniora*—so called, presumably,
because humanity signiﬁes, on the one hand, the universal feeling of
sympathy, and, on the other, the faculty of being able to communicate
universally one’s inmost self—properties constituting in conjunction the beﬁtting social character of mankind,* in contradistinction to
the narrowly constricted life of animals. The age and the peoples in
which the vigorous drive towards a social life regulated by laws—that
which converts a people into an enduring community—grappled
with the huge diﬃculties presented by the trying problem of bringing freedom (and therefore equality also) into union with constraint
(more that of respect and dutiful submission than of fear). And such
must have been the age, and such the people, that ﬁrst discovered the
art of reciprocal communication of ideas between the more cultured
and cruder sections of the community, and how to bridge the
diﬀerence between the breadth and reﬁnement of the former and the
natural simplicity and originality of the latter—in this way hitting
upon that mean between higher culture and self-suﬀicing nature,
that forms for taste also, as a sense common to all mankind, that true
standard which no universal rules can supply.
Hardly will a later age dispense with those models. For nature will
ever recede farther into the background, so that eventually, without
enduring examples of it, a future age would scarcely be in a position
to form a concept of the happy union, in one and the same people, of
the law-directed constraint belonging to the highest culture, with the
force and rightness of a free nature aware of its proper worth.
However, taste is, in the ultimate analysis, a faculty that judges of
the rendering of moral ideas in terms of the senses (through the
intervention of a certain analogy in our reﬂection on both); and it is
this rendering also, and the increased receptivity, founded upon it,
for the feeling which these ideas evoke (termed moral sense), that are
the origin of that pleasure which taste declares valid for mankind in
general and not merely for the private feeling of each individual.
This makes it clear that the true propaedeutic for laying the foundations of taste is the development of moral ideas and the culture of the
moral feeling. For only when sensibility is brought into harmony with
moral feeling can genuine taste assume a deﬁnite unchangeable form.

356

This page intentionally left blank

PART II

CRITIQUE OF
TELEOLOGICAL JUDGEMENT

This page intentionally left blank

Critique of Teleological Judgement

187

§ 61
The objective purposiveness of nature
We do not need to look beyond transcendental principles to ﬁnd ample
reason for assuming a subjective purposiveness on the part of nature in
its particular laws. This is a purposiveness relative to comprehensibility—with respect to the human power of judgement—and to the possibility of uniting particular experiences into a connected system of
nature. In this system, then, we may further anticipate the possible
existence of some among the many products of nature that, as if
designed with special regard to our power of judgement, are of a form
particularly adapted to that faculty. Forms of this kind are those which
by their combination of unity and heterogeneity serve as it were to
strengthen and entertain the mental powers that enter into play in the
exercise of the faculty of judgement, and to them the name of beautiful
forms is accordingly given.
But the universal idea of nature, as the sum of objects of the senses,
gives us no reason whatever for assuming that things of nature serve
one another as means to ends, or that their very possibility is only
made fully intelligible by a causality of this sort. For since, in the case
of the beautiful forms above mentioned, the representation of the
things is something in ourselves, it can quite readily be thought even
a priori as one well-adapted and suitable for disposing our cognitive
faculties to an internally purposive harmony. But where the ends are
not ends of our own, and do not belong even to nature (which we do
not take to be an intelligent being), there is no reason at all for presuming a priori that they may or ought nevertheless to constitute a
special kind of causality or at least a quite peculiar order of nature.
What is more, the actual existence of these ends cannot be proved by
experience—save on the assumption of an antecedent process of
mental jugglery that only reads the conception of an end into the
nature of the things, and that, not deriving this conception from the
objects and what it knows of them from experience, makes use of
it more for the purpose of rendering nature intelligible to us by an
analogy to a subjective ground upon which our representations are
brought into inner connexion, than for that of cognizing nature from
objective grounds.

359

360

188

361

Critique of Teleological Judgement

Besides, objective purposiveness, as a principle upon which physical
objects are possible, is so far from attaching necessarily to the conception of nature, that it is the stock example adduced to show the contingency of nature and its form. So where the structure of a bird, for
instance, the hollow formation of its bones, the position of its wings
for producing motion and of its tail for steering, are cited, we are told
that all this is in the highest degree contingent if we simply look to
the nexus eﬀectivus in nature, and do not call in aid a special kind of
causality, namely, that of ends (nexus ﬁnalis). This means that nature,
regarded as mere mechanism, could have fashioned itself in a thousand other diﬀerent ways without lighting precisely on the unity
based on a principle like this, and that, accordingly, it is only outside
the conception of nature, and not in it, that we may hope to ﬁnd some
shadow of ground a priori for that unity.
We are right, however, in drawing upon teleological judging, at
least problematically, with regard to the investigation of nature; but
only with a view to bringing it under principles of observation and
research by analogy to the causality that looks to ends, while not pretending to explain it by this means. Thus this is an activity of reﬂective,
not of determining, judgement. Yet the conception of combinations
and forms in nature that are determined by ends is at least one
more principle for reducing its phenomena to rules in cases where the
laws of its purely mechanical causality do not carry us suﬃciently far.
For we are bringing forward a teleological ground where we endow a
concept of an object—as if that concept were to be found in nature
instead of in ourselves—with causality in respect of the object, or
rather where we represent to ourselves the possibility of the object on
the analogy of a causality of this kind—a causality such as we experience in ourselves—and so regard nature as possessed of a capacity of
its own for acting technically; whereas if we did not ascribe such a
mode of operation to nature, its causality would have to be regarded
as blind mechanism. But this is a diﬀerent thing from crediting
nature with causes acting designedly, to which it may be regarded as
subjected in following its particular laws. The latter would mean that
teleology is based, not merely on a regulative principle, directed to
the simple judging of phenomena, but is actually based on a constitutive principle available for deriving natural products from their
causes: with the result that the concept of a natural end would no
longer belong to reﬂective, but to determining, judgement. But in

Critique of Teleological Judgement

189

that case the concept would not really be specially connected with the
power of judgement, as is the concept of beauty as a formal subjective purposiveness. It would, on the contrary, be a concept of reason,
and would introduce a new causality into science—one which we are
borrowing all the time solely from ourselves and attributing to other
beings, although we do not mean to assume that they and we are similarly constituted.

362

first division
Analytic of Teleological Judgement
§ 62
Purely formal, as distinguished from material,
objective purposiveness

363

All geometrical ﬁgures drawn on a principle display a manifold
objective purposiveness which has often been admired. This purposiveness is one of convenience on the part of the ﬁgure for solving
a number of problems by a single principle, and even for solving
each one of the problems in an inﬁnite variety of ways. Here the
purposiveness is manifestly objective and intellectual, not simply
subjective and aesthetic. For it expresses the way the ﬁgure lends
itself to the production of many proposed ﬁgures, and it is cognized
through reason. Yet this purposiveness does not make the conception of the object itself possible, that is to say, we do not regard the
object as possible simply because it may be turned to such use.
In such a simple ﬁgure as the circle lies the key to the solution
of a host of problems every one of which would separately require
elaborate materials, and this solution follows, we might say, directly
as one of the inﬁnite number of excellent properties of that ﬁgure.
For instance, suppose we have to construct a triangle, being given the
base and vertical angle. The problem is indeterminate, i.e. it admits
of solution in an endless variety of ways. But the circle embraces
them all in one, as the geometrical locus of all triangles satisfying this
condition. Or two lines have to intersect one another so that the rectangle under the two parts of the one shall be equal to the rectangle
under the two parts of the other. The solution of the problem is
apparently full of diﬃculty. But all lines intersecting within a circle
whose circumference passes through their extremities are divided
directly in this ratio. The remaining curves similarly suggest to us
other useful solutions, never contemplated in the rule upon which
they are constructed. All conic sections, taken separately or compared
with one another, are, however simple their deﬁnition, fruitful in
principles for solving a host of possible problems.—It is a real joy to

Analytic of Teleological Judgement

191

see the ardour with which the older geometricians investigated these
properties of such lines, without allowing themselves to be troubled
by the question which shallow minds raise, as to the supposed use of
such knowledge. Thus they investigated the properties of the
parabola in ignorance of the law of terrestrial gravitation which
would have shown them its application to the trajectory of heavy
bodies (for the direction of their gravitation when in motion may be
regarded as parallel to the curve of a parabola). So again they investigated the properties of the ellipse without a suspicion that a gravitation was also discoverable in the celestial bodies, and without
knowing the law that governs it as the distance from the point of
attraction varies, and that makes the bodies describe this curve in free
motion. While in all these labours they were working unwittingly for
those who were to come after them, they delighted themselves with
a purposiveness which, although belonging to the nature of the
things, they were able to present completely a priori as necessary.
Plato, himself a master of this science,* was ﬁred with the idea of an
original constitution of things, for the discovery of which we could
dispense with all experience, and of a power of the mind enabling it to
derive the harmony of real things from their supersensible principle
(and with these real things he classed the properties of numbers with
which the mind plays in music). Thus inspired he transcended the
conceptions of experience and rose to ideas that seemed only explicable to him on the assumption of a community of intellect with the
original source of all real things. No wonder that he banished from
his school the man that was ignorant of geometry, since he thought
that from the pure intuition residing in the depths of the human soul
he could derive all that Anaxagoras inferred* from the objects of
experience and their purposive connexion. For it is the necessity of
that which, while appearing to be an original attribute belonging to
the essential nature of things regardless of service to us, is yet purposive, and formed as if deliberately designed for our use, that is the
source of our great admiration of nature—a source not so much
external to ourselves as seated in our reason. Surely we may pardon
this admiration if, as the result of a misapprehension, it is inclined to
rise by degrees to extravagant heights.
This intellectual purposiveness is simply formal, not real. In other
words it is a purposiveness which does not imply an underlying end,
and which, therefore, does not stand in need of teleology. As such,

364

192

365

Critique of Teleological Judgement

and although it is objective, not subjective like aesthetic purposiveness,
its possibility is readily comprehensible, though only in the abstract.
The ﬁgure of a circle is an intuition which understanding has determined according to a principle. This principle, which is arbitrarily
assumed and made a fundamental conception, is applied to space, a
form of intuition which, similarly, is only found in ourselves, and
found a priori, as a representation. It is the unity of this principle that
explains the unity of the numerous rules resulting from the construction of that conception. These rules display purposiveness from many
possible points of view, but we must not rest this purposiveness on
an end, or resort to any explanation beyond the above. This is diﬀerent
from ﬁnding order and regularity in complexes of external things
enclosed within deﬁnite bounds, as, for instance, order and regularity in the trees, ﬂower-beds, and walks in a garden, which is one that
I cannot hope to deduce a priori from any delimitation I may make of
space according to some rule out of my own head. For these are
things having real existence—things that to be cognized must be
given empirically—and not a mere representation in myself deﬁned
a priori on a principle. Hence the latter (empirical) purposiveness is
real, and, being real, is dependent on the conception of an end.
But we can also quite easily see the reason for the admiration, and,
in fact, regard it as justiﬁed, even where the purposiveness admired
is perceived in the essential nature of the things, they being things
whose concepts are such as we can construct. The various rules
whose unity, derived from a principle, excites this admiration are one
and all synthetic and do not follow from any concept of the object, as,
for instance, from the concept of a circle, but require to have this
object given in intuition. This gives the unity the appearance of
having an external source of its rules distinct from our faculty of representation, just as if it were empirical. Hence the way the object
answers to the understanding’s own peculiar need for rules appears
intrinsically contingent and, therefore, only possible by virtue of an
end expressly directed to its production. Now since this harmony,
despite all the purposiveness mentioned, is not cognized empirically,
but a priori, it is just what should bring home to us the fact that
space, by the limitation of which (by means of the imagination acting
in accordance with a concept) the object was alone possible, is not a
quality of the things outside me, but a mere mode of representation
existing in myself. Hence, where I draw a ﬁgure in accordance with a

Analytic of Teleological Judgement

193

concept, or, in other words, when I form my own representation of
what is given to me externally, be its own intrinsic nature what it
may, what really happens is that I introduce the purposiveness into that
ﬁgure or representation. I derive no empirical instruction as to the
purposiveness from what is given to me externally, and consequently
the ﬁgure is not one for which I require any special end external to
myself and residing in the object. But this reﬂection presupposes a
critical use of reason, and, therefore, it cannot be involved then and
there in the judging of the object and its properties. Hence all that
this judging immediately suggests to me is a uniﬁcation of heterogeneous rules (united even in their intrinsic diversity) in a principle
the truth of which I can cognize a priori, without requiring for that
purpose some special explanation lying beyond my conception, or, to
put it more generally, beyond my own a priori representation. Now
astonishment is a shock that the mind receives from a representation
and the rule given through it being incompatible with the principles
already grounded in the mind, and that accordingly makes one doubt
one’s own eyes or question one’s judgement; but admiration is an
astonishment that keeps continually recurring despite the disappearance of this doubt. Admiration is consequently quite a natural eﬀect
of observing the above-mentioned purposiveness in the essence of
things (as phenomena), and so far there is really nothing to be said
against it. For the agreement of the above form of sensuous intuition,
which is called space, with the faculty of concepts, namely understanding, not only leaves it inexplicable why it is this particular form
of agreement and not some other, but, in addition, produces an
expansion of the mind in which it suspects, so to speak, the existence
of something lying beyond the conﬁnes of such sensuous representations, in which, perhaps, although unknown to us, the ultimate
source of that accordance could be found. It is true that we have
also no need to know this source where we are merely concerned with
the formal purposiveness of our a priori representations; but even
the mere fact that we are compelled to look out in that direction
excites an accompanying admiration for the object which obliges us
to do so.
The name of beauty is customarily given to the properties above
referred to—both those of geometrical ﬁgures and also those of
numbers—on account of a certain purposiveness which they possess
for employment in all kinds of ways in the ﬁeld of knowledge, a

366

194

Critique of Teleological Judgement

purposiveness which the simplicity of their construction would not
lead us to expect. Thus people speak of this or that beautiful property
of the circle, brought to light in this or that manner. But it is not by
means of any aesthetic appreciation that we consider such properties
purposive. There is no judging apart from a concept, making us take
note of a purely subjective purposiveness in the free play of our cognitive faculties. On the contrary it is an intellectual judging according to concepts, in which we clearly recognize an objective
purposiveness, that is to say, adaptability for all sorts of ends, i.e. an
inﬁnite manifold of ends. Such properties should rather be termed a
relative perfection, than a beauty, of the mathematical ﬁgure. We
cannot even properly allow the expression intellectual beauty at all:
since, if we do, the word beauty must lose all deﬁnite meaning, and
the delight of the intellect all superiority over that of the senses. The
term beautiful could be better applied to a demonstration of the properties in question; since here understanding, as the faculty of concepts, and imagination, as the faculty of presenting them a priori, get
a feeling of invigoration (which, with the addition of the precision
introduced by reason, is called the elegance of the demonstration):
for in this case the delight, although grounded on concepts, is at least
subjective, whereas perfection involves an objective delight.

§ 63
The relative, as distinguished from the intrinsic,
purposiveness of nature

367

There is only one case in which experience leads our judgement to
the concept of an objective and material purposiveness, that is to say,
to the concept of an end of nature. This is where the relation in
which some cause stands to its eﬀect is under review,1 and where we
are only able to see uniformity in this relation on introducing into the
causal principle the idea of the eﬀect and making it the source of the
causality and the underlying condition on which the eﬀect is possible. Now this can be done in two ways. We may regard the eﬀect as
1 Pure mathematics can never deal with the real existence of things, but only with their
possibility, that is to say, with the possibility of an intuition answering to the concepts
of the things. Hence it cannot touch the question of cause and eﬀect, and, consequently,
all the purposiveness there observed must always be regarded simply as formal, and
never as a natural end.

Analytic of Teleological Judgement

195

being, as it stands, an art-product, or we may only regard it as what
other possible objects in nature may employ for the purposes of their
art. We may, in other words, look upon the eﬀect either as an end, or
else as a means which other causes use in the pursuit of ends. The
latter purposiveness is termed utility, where it concerns human beings,
and advantageousness where it concerns any other creatures. It is a
purely relative purposiveness. The former, on the contrary, is an intrinsic
purposiveness belonging to the thing itself as a natural object.
For example, rivers in their course carry down earth of all kinds
that is good for the growth of plants, and this they deposit sometimes
inland, sometimes at their mouths. On some coasts the high-tide carries this alluvial mud inland, or deposits it along the sea-shore. Thus
the fruitful soil is increased, especially where man helps to hinder the
ebb tide carrying the detritus oﬀ again, and the vegetable kingdom
takes root in the former abode of ﬁsh and crustaceans. Nature has in
this way itself produced most accretions to the land, and is still,
though slowly, continuing the process.—There now arises the question if this result is to be considered an end on the part of nature, since
it is fraught with beneﬁt to man. I say ‘to man’, for the beneﬁt to the
vegetable kingdom cannot be taken into account, inasmuch as against
the gain to the land there is, in turn, also as much loss to sea-life.
Or we may give an example of the advantageousness of particular
things of nature as means for other forms of life—setting out with
the assumption that these latter are ends. Thus there is no healthier
soil for pine trees than a sandy soil. Now before the primeval sea
withdrew from the land it left numerous sand tracts behind it in our
northern regions. The result was that upon this soil, generally so
unfavourable for cultivation of any kind, extensive pine forests were
able to spring up—forests which we frequently blame our ancestors
for having wantonly destroyed. Now it may be asked if this primordial deposit of sand tracts was not an end that nature had in view for
the beneﬁt of the possible pine forests that might grow on them. This
much is clear: that if the pine forests are assumed to be a natural end,
then the sand must be admitted to be an end also—though only a
relative end—and one for which, in turn, the primeval sea’s beach
and its withdrawal were means; for in the series of the mutually
subordinated members of a connection of ends each intermediate
member must be regarded as an end, though not a ﬁnal end, to which
its proximate cause stands as means. Similarly, if it is granted

368

196

369

Critique of Teleological Judgement

that cattle, sheep, horses, and the like, were to be in the world, then
there had to be grass on the earth, while alkaline plants had to grow
in the deserts if camels were to thrive. Again, these and other herbivora had to abound if wolves, tigers, and lions were to exist.
Consequently objective purposiveness based on advantageousness is
not an immanent objective purposiveness of things: as though the
sand, as simple sand, could not be conceived as the eﬀect of its cause,
the sea; unless we made this cause look to an end, and treated the
eﬀect, namely the sand, as an art-product. It is a purely relative purposiveness, and merely contingent to the thing itself to which it is
ascribed; and although among the examples cited, the various kinds
of herbs or plants, considered in their own right, are to be judged as
organized products of nature, and, therefore, as things of art, yet, in
relation to the animals that feed on them, they are to be regarded as
mere raw material.
Moreover the freedom of man’s causality enables him to adapt natural things to the purposes he has in view. These purposes are frequently foolish—as when he uses the gay-coloured feathers of birds
for adorning his clothes, and coloured earths or juices of plants for
painting himself. Sometimes they are reasonable, as when he uses the
horse for riding, and the ox or, as in Minorca, even the ass or pig
for ploughing. But we cannot here assume even a relative end of
nature—relative, that is, to such uses. For man’s reason informs him
how to adapt things to his own arbitrary whims—whims for which he
was not himself at all predestined by nature. All we can say is that if we
assume that it is intended that human beings should live on the earth,
then at least, those means without which they could not exist as animals, and even, on however low a plane, as rational animals, must also
not be absent. But in that case, those natural things that are indispensable for such existence must equally be regarded as natural ends.
From what has been said we can easily see that the only condition
on which extrinsic purposiveness, that is, the advantageousness of a
thing for other things, can be looked on as an extrinsic natural end,
is that the existence of the thing for which it is proximately or
remotely advantageous is itself, and in its own right, an end of nature.
But this is a matter that can never be decided by any mere study of
nature. Hence it follows that relative purposiveness, although, on
a certain supposition, it points to natural purposiveness, does not
warrant any absolute teleological judgement.

Analytic of Teleological Judgement

197

In cold countries the snow protects the seeds from the frost.
It facilitates communication between people—through the use of
sleighs. The Laplander ﬁnds animals in these regions, namely reindeer, to bring about this communication. The latter ﬁnd suﬃcient
food to live on in a dry moss which they have to scrape out for themselves from under the snow, yet they submit to being tamed without
diﬃculty, and readily allow themselves to be deprived of the freedom
in which they could quite well have supported themselves. For other
dwellers in these ice-bound lands the sea is rich in its supply of animals that aﬀord them fuel for heating their huts; in addition to which
there are the food and clothing that these animals provide and the
wood which the sea itself, as it were, washes in for them as material
for their homes. Now here we have a truly marvellous conﬂuence of
many relations of nature to an end—the end being the Greenlanders,
Laplanders, Samoyedes, Jakutes, and the like. But we do not see why
human beings should live in these places at all. To say, therefore,
that the facts that vapour falls from the atmosphere in the form of
snow, that the ocean has its currents that wash into these regions the
wood grown in warmer lands, and that great sea creatures containing
quantities of oil are to be found there, are due to the idea of some
beneﬁt to certain poor creatures underlying the cause that brings
together all these natural products, would be a very hazardous and
arbitrary assertion. For supposing that all this utility on the part of
nature were absent, then the capacity of the natural causes to serve
this order of existence would not be missed. On the contrary it would
seem audacious and inconsiderate on our part even to ask for such a
capacity, or demand such an end from nature—for nothing but the
greatest incompatibility between human beings could have dispersed
them into such inhospitable regions.

§ 64
The distinctive character of things considered as natural ends
A thing is possible only as an end where the causality to which
it owes its origin must not be sought in the mechanism of nature,
but in a cause whose capacity of acting is determined by concepts.
What is required in order that we may perceive that a thing is only
possible in this way is that its form is not possible on purely natural
laws—that is to say, such laws as we may cognize by means of

370

198

Critique of Teleological Judgement

unaided understanding applied to objects of the senses—but that, on
the contrary, even to know it empirically in respect of its cause
and eﬀect presupposes concepts of reason. Here we have, as far as
any empirical laws of nature go, a contingency of the form of the thing
in relation to reason. Now reason in every case insists on cognizing
the necessity of the form of a natural product, even where it only
desires to perceive the conditions involved in its production. In
the given form above mentioned, however, it cannot discover this
necessity. Hence the contingency is itself a ground for making
us look upon the origin of the thing as if, just because of that contingency, it could only be possible through reason. But the causality,
so construed, becomes the faculty of acting according to ends—that
is to say, a will; and the object, which is represented as only deriving
its possibility from such a will, will be represented as possible only
as an end.
Suppose a person was in a country that seemed to be uninhabited
and was to see a geometrical ﬁgure, say a regular hexagon, traced on
the sand. As he reﬂected, and tried to form a concept of the ﬁgure,
his reason would make him conscious, though perhaps obscurely,
that in the production of this concept there was unity of principle.
His reason would then forbid him to consider the sand, the neighbouring sea, the winds, or even animals with their footprints, as causes
familiar to him, or any other irrational cause, as the ground of the
possibility of such a form. For the contingency of coincidence with a
concept like this, which is only possible in reason, would appear to
him so inﬁnitely great that there might just as well be no law of
nature at all in the case. Hence it would seem that the cause of the
production of such an eﬀect could not be contained in the mere
mechanical operation of nature, but that, on the contrary, a concept
of such an object, as a concept that only reason can give and compare
the object with, must likewise be what alone contains that causality.
On these grounds it would appear to him that this eﬀect was one that
might without reservation be regarded as an end, though not as a natural end. In other words he would regard it as a product of art—
vestigium hominis video.*
But where a thing is recognized to be a product of nature, then
something more is required—unless, perhaps, our very judging
involves a contradiction—if, despite its being such a product, we
are yet to judge it as an end, and, consequently, as a natural end.

Analytic of Teleological Judgement

199

As a provisional statement I would say that a thing exists as a natural
end if it is (though in a double sense) both cause and eﬀect of itself. For
this involves a kind of causality that we cannot associate with the
mere concept of a nature unless we make that nature rest on an
underlying end, but which can then, though incomprehensible, be
thought without contradiction. Before analysing the component
factors of this idea of a natural end, let us ﬁrst illustrate its meaning
by an example.
A tree produces, in the ﬁrst place, another tree, according to a
familiar law of nature. But the tree which it produces is of the same
genus. Hence, in its genus, it produces itself. In the genus, now as
eﬀect, now as cause, continually generated from itself and likewise
generating itself, it preserves itself generically.
Secondly, a tree produces itself even as an individual. It is true that
we only call this kind of eﬀect growth; but growth is here to be
understood in a sense that makes it entirely diﬀerent from any increase
according to mechanical laws, and renders it equivalent, though
under another name, to generation. The plant ﬁrst prepares the
matter that it assimilates and bestows upon it a speciﬁcally distinctive quality which the mechanism of nature outside it cannot supply,
and it develops itself by means of a material which, in its composite
character, is its own product. For, although in respect of the constituents that it derives from nature outside, it must be regarded as
only an educt, yet in the separation and recombination of this raw
material we ﬁnd an original capacity of selection and construction on
the part of natural beings of this kind such as inﬁnitely outdistances
all the eﬀorts of art, when the latter attempts to reconstitute those
products of the vegetable kingdom out of the elements which it
obtains through their analysis, or else out of the material which
nature supplies for their nourishment.
Thirdly, a part of a tree also generates itself in such a way that the
preservation of one part is reciprocally dependent on the preservation of the other parts. An eye taken from the leaf of one tree and
grafted onto the branch of another produces in the alien stock a
growth of its own species, and similarly a scion grafted on the body of
a diﬀerent tree. Hence even in the case of the same tree each branch
or leaf may be regarded as engrafted or inoculated into it, and, consequently, as a tree with a separate existence of its own, and only
attaching itself to another and living parasitically on it. At the same

371

372

200

Critique of Teleological Judgement

time the leaves are certainly products of the tree, but they also maintain it in turn; for repeated defoliation would kill it, and its growth is
dependent upon the action of the leaves on the trunk. The way
nature comes, in these forms of life, to her own aid in the case of
injury, where the lack of one part necessary for the maintenance of
the neighbouring parts is made good by the rest; the miscarriages or
malformations in growth, where, on account of some chance defect
or obstacle, certain parts adopt a completely new formation, so as to
preserve the existing growth, and thus produce an anomalous form:
these are matters which I only desire to mention here in passing,
although they are among the most wonderful properties of the forms
of organic life.

§ 65
Things considered as natural ends are organisms
Where a thing is a product of nature and yet, so regarded, has to be
cognized as possible only as a natural end, it must, from its character
as set out in the preceding section, stand to itself reciprocally in the
relation of cause and eﬀect. This is, however, a somewhat inexact and
indeterminate expression that needs derivation from a determinate
concept.
In so far as the causal connexion is thought merely by means of
understanding it is a nexus constituting a series, namely of causes
and eﬀects, that is invariably progressive. The things that as eﬀects
presuppose others as their causes cannot themselves in turn be also
causes of the latter. This causal connexion is termed that of eﬃcient
causes (nexus eﬀectivus). On the other hand, however, we are also able
to think a causal connexion according to a rational concept, that of
ends, which, if regarded as a series, would involve regressive as well
as progressive dependency. It would be one in which the thing that
for the moment is designated eﬀect deserves none the less, if we take
the series regressively, to be called the cause of the thing of which it
was said to be the eﬀect. In the domain of practical matters, namely
in art, we readily ﬁnd examples of a nexus of this kind. Thus a house
is certainly the cause of the money that is received as rent, but yet,
conversely, the representation of this possible income was the cause
of the building of the house. A causal nexus of this kind is termed
that of ﬁnal causes (nexus ﬁnalis). The former might, perhaps, more

Analytic of Teleological Judgement

201

appropriately be called the nexus of real, and the latter the nexus of
ideal causes, because with this use of terms it would be understood
at once that there cannot be more than these two kinds of causality.
Now the ﬁrst requisite of a thing, considered as a natural end, is
that its parts, both as to their existence and form, are only possible by
their relation to the whole. For the thing is itself an end, and is,
therefore, grasped under a concept or an idea that must determine
a priori all that is to be contained in it. But so far as the possibility of
a thing is only thought in this way, it is simply a work of art. It is the
product, in other words, of an intelligent cause, distinct from the
matter, or parts, of the thing, and of one whose causality, in bringing
together and combining the parts, is determined by its idea of a
whole made possible through that idea, and consequently, not by
external nature.
But if a thing is a product of nature, and in this character is
notwithstanding to contain intrinsically and in its inner possibility a
relation to ends, in other words, is to be possible only as a natural end
and independently of the causality of the concepts of external
rational agents, then this second requisite is involved, namely, that the
parts of the thing combine of themselves into the unity of a whole by
being reciprocally cause and eﬀect of their form. For this is the only
way in which it is possible that the idea of the whole may conversely,
or reciprocally, determine in its turn the form and combination of all
the parts, not as cause—for that would make it an art-product—but
as the ground for the cognition of the systematic unity of the form
and combination of all the manifold contained in the given matter for
the person judging it.
What we require, therefore, in the case of a body which in its
intrinsic nature and inner possibility has to be judged as a natural
end, is as follows. Its parts must in their collective unity reciprocally
produce one another alike as to form and combination, and thus
by their own causality produce a whole, the concept of which, conversely,—in a being possessing the causality according to concepts
that is adequate for such a product—could in turn be the cause of
the whole according to a principle, so that, consequently, the nexus
of eﬃcient causes might be no less judged as an eﬀect brought about by
ﬁnal causes.
In such a natural product as this every part is thought as owing its
presence to the agency of all the remaining parts, and also as existing

373

202
374

Critique of Teleological Judgement

for the sake of the others and of the whole, that is as an instrument,
or organ. But this is not enough—for it might be an instrument of
art, and thus have no more than its general possibility referred to an
end. On the contrary the part must be an organ producing the other
parts—each, consequently, reciprocally producing the others. No
instrument of art can answer to this description, but only the instrument of that nature from whose resources the materials of every
instrument are drawn—even the materials for instruments of art.
Only under these conditions and upon these terms can such a product be an organized and self-organized being, and, as such, be called a
natural end.
In a watch one part is the instrument by which the movement of
the others is eﬀected, but one wheel is not the eﬃcient cause of the
production of the other. One part is certainly present for the sake of
another, but it does not owe its presence to the agency of that other.
For this reason, also, the producing cause of the watch and its form
is not contained in the nature of this material, but lies outside the
watch in a being that can act according to ideas of a whole which
its causality makes possible. Hence one wheel in the watch does not
produce the other, and, still less, does one watch produce other
watches, by utilizing, or organizing, foreign material; hence it does
not of itself replace parts of which it has been deprived, nor, if these
are absent in the original construction, does it make good the
deﬁciency by the addition of new parts; nor does it, so to speak,
repair its own defects. But these are all things which we are justiﬁed
in expecting from organized nature.—An organized being is, therefore, not a mere machine. For a machine has solely motive power,
whereas an organized being possesses inherent formative power, and
such, moreover, as it can impart to material devoid of it—material
which it organizes. This, therefore, is a self-propagating formative
power, which cannot be explained by the capacity of movement alone,
that is to say, by mechanism.
We do not say half enough of nature and her capacity in organized
products when we speak of this capacity as being the analogue of art.
For what that suggests to our minds is an artist—a rational being—
working from without. But nature, on the contrary, organizes itself,
and does so in each species of its organized products—following a
single pattern, certainly, as to general features, but nevertheless
admitting deviations calculated to secure self-preservation under

Analytic of Teleological Judgement

203

particular circumstances. We might perhaps come nearer to the
description of this unfathomable property if we were to call it an
analogue of life. But then either we should have to endow matter as
mere matter with a property (hylozoism) that contradicts its essential
nature; or else we should have to associate with it a foreign principle
standing in community with it (a soul). But, if such a product is to be
a natural product, then we have to adopt one or other of two courses
in order to bring in a soul. Either we must presuppose organized
matter as the instrument of such a soul, which makes organized
matter no whit more intelligible, or else we must make the soul the
artiﬁcer of this structure, in which case we must exclude the product
from (corporeal) nature. Strictly speaking, therefore, the organization of nature has nothing analogous to any causality known to us.2
Natural beauty may justly be termed the analogue of art, for it is only
ascribed to the objects in respect of reﬂection upon the outer intuition
of them and, therefore, only on account of their external form. But
intrinsic natural perfection, as possessed by things that are only possible as natural ends, and that are therefore called organisms, is
unthinkable and inexplicable on any analogy to any known physical,
or natural, agency, not even excepting—since we ourselves are part
of nature in the widest sense—the suggestion of any strictly apt analogy to human art.
The concept of a thing as intrinsically a natural end is, therefore,
not a constitutive concept either of understanding or of reason, but
yet it may be used by reﬂective judgement as a regulative concept
for guiding our investigation of objects of this kind by a remote analogy with our own causality according to ends generally, and as a basis
of reﬂection upon their supreme source. But in the latter connexion it
cannot be used to promote our knowledge either of nature or of such
original source of those objects, but must on the contrary be conﬁned
to the service of just the same practical faculty of reason in analogy
with which we considered the cause of the purposiveness in question.
2
We may, on the other hand, make use of an analogy to the above mentioned immediate physical ends to throw light on a certain union, which, however, is to be found more
often in idea than in fact. Thus in the case of a complete transformation, recently undertaken, of a great people* into a state, the word organization has frequently, and with much
propriety, been used for the constitution of the legal authorities and even of the entire
body politic. For in a whole of this kind certainly no member should be a mere means,
but should also be an end, and, seeing that he contributes to the possibility of the entire
body, should have his position and function in turn deﬁned by the idea of the whole.

375

204

376

Critique of Teleological Judgement

Organisms are, therefore, the only beings in nature that, considered in their individual existence and apart from any relation to other
things, cannot be thought possible except as ends of nature. It is
they, then, that ﬁrst aﬀord objective reality to the concept of an end
that is an end of nature and not a practical end. Thus they supply natural science with the basis for a teleology, or, in other words, a way
of judging its objects on a special principle that it would otherwise be
absolutely unjustiﬁable to introduce into that science—seeing that
we are quite unable to perceive a priori the possibility of such a kind
of causality.

§ 66
The principle on which the intrinsic purposiveness
in organisms is judged
This principle, the statement of which serves to deﬁne what is meant
by organisms, is as follows: an organized natural product is one in
which every part is reciprocally both end and means. In such a product
nothing is in vain, without an end, or to be ascribed to a blind mechanism of nature.
It is true that the occasion for adopting this principle must be
derived from experience—from such experience, namely, as is
methodically pursued and is called observation. But owing to the
universality and necessity which that principle predicates of such
purposiveness, it cannot rest merely on empirical grounds, but must
have some underlying a priori principle. This principle, however,
may be one that is merely regulative, and it may be that the ends in
question only reside in the idea of the person judging and not in any
eﬃcient cause whatever. Hence the above named principle may be
called a maxim for judging the intrinsic purposiveness of organisms.
It is common knowledge that scientists who dissect plants and
animals, seeking to investigate their structure and to see into the
reasons why and the end for which they are provided with such and
such parts, why the parts have such and such a position and interconnexion, and why the internal form is precisely what it is, adopt the
above maxim as absolutely necessary. So they say that nothing in
such forms of life is in vain, and they put the maxim on the same
footing of validity as the fundamental principle of all natural science,
that nothing happens by chance. They are, in fact, quite as unable to

Analytic of Teleological Judgement

205

free themselves from this teleological principle as from that of general physical science. For just as the abandonment of the latter would
leave them without any experience at all, so the abandonment of the
former would leave them with no clue to assist their observation of a
type of natural things that we have already come to think under the
concept of natural ends.
Indeed this concept leads reason into an order of things entirely
diﬀerent from that of a mere mechanism of nature, which mere mechanism no longer proves adequate in this domain. An idea must, it is
thought, underlie the possibility of the natural product. But this idea
is an absolute unity of the representation, whereas the material is a
plurality of things that of itself can aﬀord no deﬁnite unity of composition. Hence, if that unity of the idea is actually to serve as the
a priori determining ground of a natural law of the causality of such
a form of the composite, the end of nature must be made to extend
to everything contained in its product. For if once we lift such an
eﬀect out of the sphere of the blind mechanism of nature and relate
it as a whole to a supersensible ground of determination, we must
then estimate it out and out on this principle. We have no reason for
assuming the form of such a thing to be still partly dependent on
blind mechanism, for with such confusion of heterogeneous principles every reliable rule for judging things would disappear.
It is no doubt the case that in an animal body, for example, many
parts might be explained as accretions on simple mechanical laws (as
skin, bone, hair). Yet the cause that accumulates the appropriate
material, modiﬁes and fashions it, and deposits it in its proper place,
must always be judged teleologically. Hence, everything in the body
must be regarded as organized, and everything, also, in a certain relation to the thing is itself in turn an organ.

§ 67
The principle on which nature in general is judged
teleologically as a system of ends
We have said above that the extrinsic purposiveness of natural things
aﬀords no adequate justiﬁcation for taking them as ends of nature to
explain the reason of their existence, or for treating their contingently purposive eﬀects as ideally the grounds of their existence on
the principle of ﬁnal causes. Thus we are not entitled to consider

377

206

378

Critique of Teleological Judgement

rivers as natural ends then and there, because they facilitate communication amongst peoples in inland countries, or mountains, because
they contain the sources of the rivers and hold stores of snow for the
maintenance of their ﬂow in dry seasons, or, similarly, the slope of
the land, that carries down these waters and leaves the country dry.
For, although this conﬁguration of the earth’s surface is very necessary for the origination and sustenance of the vegetable and animal
kingdoms, yet intrinsically it contains nothing the possibility of
which should make us feel obliged to invoke causality according
to ends. The same applies to plants utilized or enjoyed by man; or
to animals, as the camel, the ox, the horse, dog, etc., which are so variously employed, sometimes as servants of man, sometimes as food
for him to live on, and mostly found quite indispensable. The external relationship of things that we have no reason to regard as ends in
their own right can only be hypothetically judged as purposive.
There is an essential distinction between judging a thing as a
natural end in virtue of its intrinsic form and regarding the real
existence of this thing as an end of nature. To maintain the latter
view we require, not merely the concept of a possible end, but a
knowledge of the ﬁnal end (scopus) of nature. This involves our referring nature to something supersensible, a reference that far transcends any teleological knowledge we have of nature; for, to ﬁnd the
end of the real existence of nature itself, we must look beyond nature.
That the origin of a simple blade of grass is only possible on the rule
of ends is, to our human faculty of judging, suﬃciently proved by its
internal form. But let us lay aside this consideration and look only to
the use to which the thing is put by other natural beings—which
means that we abandon the study of the internal organization and
look only to external purposive relations to ends. We see, then, that
the grass is required as a means of existence by cattle, and cattle,
similarly, by man. But we do not see why after all it should be necessary that human beings should in fact exist (a question that might
not be so easy to answer if we were to consider the New Hollanders
or Fuegians*). We do not then arrive in this way at any categorical
end. On the contrary all such purposive relation is made to rest on a
condition that must be displaced to an ever-retreating horizon. This
condition is the unconditional condition—the existence of a thing as
a ﬁnal end—which, as such, lies entirely outside the study of the
world on physico-teleological lines. But, then, such a thing is not a

Analytic of Teleological Judgement

207

natural end either, since it (or its entire genus) is not to be regarded
as a product of nature.
Hence it is only in so far as matter is organized that it necessarily
involves the concept of it as a natural end, because here it possesses
a form that is at once speciﬁc and a product of nature. But, brought
so far, this concept necessarily leads us to the idea of aggregate nature
as a system following the rule of ends, to which idea, again, the whole
mechanism of nature has to be subordinated on principles of reason—
at least for the purpose of testing phenomenal nature by this idea.
The principle of reason is one which it is competent for reason to use
as a merely subjective principle, that is as a maxim: everything in the
world is good for something or other; nothing in it is in vain; we are
entitled, indeed encouraged, by the example that nature aﬀords us in
its organic products, to expect nothing from it and its laws but what
is purposive when things are viewed as a whole.
It is evident that this is a principle to be applied not by the determining, but only by the reﬂective, power of judgement, that it is
regulative and not constitutive, and that all that we obtain from it is
a clue to guide us in the study of natural things. These things it leads
us to consider in relation to a ground of determination already given,
and in the light of a new uniformity, and it helps us to extend physical
science according to another principle, that, namely, of ﬁnal causes,
yet without interfering with the principle of the mechanism of physical
causality. Furthermore, this principle is altogether silent on the point
of whether anything judged according to it is, or is not, an end of
nature by design: whether, that is, the grass exists for the sake of the ox
or the sheep, and whether these and the other things of nature exist for
the sake of man. We do well to consider even things that are unpleasant to us, and that in particular connexions are counter-purposive,
from this point of view also. Thus, for example, one might say that
the vermin which plague human beings in their clothes, hair, or beds,
may, by a wise provision of nature, be an incitement towards cleanliness, which is of itself an important means for preserving health.
Or the mosquitoes and other stinging insects that make the wilds of
America so trying for the savages, may be so many goads to urge these
primitive people to drain the marshes and bring light into the dense
forests that shut out the air, and, by so doing, as well as by the tillage
of the soil, to render their abodes more sanitary. Even what appears
to man to be contrary to nature in his own internal organization

379

208

380

Critique of Teleological Judgement

aﬀords, when treated on these lines, an interesting, and sometimes
even instructive, outlook into a teleological order of things, to which
mere unaided study from a physical point of view apart from such a
principle would not lead us. Some people say that people or animals
that have a tapeworm receive it as a sort of compensation to make
good some deﬁciency in their vital organs. Now, just in the same way,
I would ask if dreams (from which our sleep is never free, although
we rarely remember what we have dreamed), may not be a regulation
of nature adapted to ends. For when all the muscular forces of the
body are relaxed dreams serve the purpose of internally stimulating
the vital organs by means of the imagination and the great activity
which it exerts (an activity that in this state generally give rise to an
aﬀect). This seems to be why imagination is usually more actively at
work in the sleep of those who have gone to bed at night with an
overﬁlled stomach, just when this stimulation is most needed.
Hence, I would suggest that without this internal stimulating force
and fatiguing unrest that makes us complain of our dreams, which in
fact, however, are probably curative, sleep, even in a sound state of
health, would amount to a complete extinction of life.
Once the teleological judging of nature, supported by the natural
ends actually presented to us in organic beings, has entitled us to
form the idea of a great system of the ends of nature, we may regard
even natural beauty from this point of view, such beauty being an
accordance of nature with the free play of our cognitive faculties as
engaged in grasping and judging its appearance. For then we may
look upon it as an objective purposiveness of nature in its entirety as
a system of which man is a member. We may regard it as a favour3
that nature has extended to us, that besides giving us what is useful
it has dispensed beauty and charms in such abundance, and for this
we may love it, just as we view it with respect because of its immensity, and feel ourselves ennobled by such contemplation—just as if
nature had erected and decorated its splendid stage with this precise
purpose in its mind.
3
In the Part on aesthetic judgement the statement was made: we could regard nature
with favour because we take a delight in its form that is altogether free (disinterested).
For in this judgement of mere taste no account is taken of any end for which these natural beauties exist: whether to excite pleasure in us, or irrespective of us as ends. But in
a teleological judgement we pay attention to this relation; and so we can regard it as a
favour of nature, that it has been disposed to promote our culture by exhibiting so many
beautiful forms.

Analytic of Teleological Judgement

209

The general drift of the present section is simply this: once we
have discovered a capacity in nature for bringing forth products that
can only be thought by us according to the concept of ﬁnal causes, we
advance a step farther. Even products which do not (either as to
themselves or the relation, however purposive, in which they stand)
make it necessarily incumbent upon us to go beyond the mechanism
of blind eﬃcient causes and seek out some other principle on which
they are possible, may nevertheless be justly judged as forming part
of a system of ends. For the idea from which we started is one which,
when we consider its foundation, already leads beyond the world of
the senses, and then the unity of the supersensible principle must be
treated, not as valid merely for certain species of natural beings, but
as similarly valid for the whole of nature as a system.

§ 68
The principle of teleology considered as an inherent
principle of natural science
The principles of a science may be inherent in that science itself, and
are then termed indigenous (principia domestica). Or they may rest on
concepts that can only be encountered outside that science, and are
foreign principles (peregrina). Sciences containing the latter principles rest their doctrines on auxiliary propositions (lemmata), that is,
they obtain some concept or other, and with this concept some basis
for a regular procedure, that is borrowed from another science.
Every science is a system in its own right; and it is not suﬃcient
that in it we construct according to principles, and so proceed technically, but we must also set to work architectonically with it as a separate and independent building. We must treat it as a self-subsisting
whole, and not as a wing or section of another building—although we
may subsequently make a passage to or fro from one part to another.
Hence if we supplement natural science by introducing the concept of God into its context for the purpose of rendering the purposiveness of nature explicable, and if, having done so, we turn round
and use this purposiveness in order to prove that there is a God, then
both natural science and theology are deprived of all intrinsic substance. This deceptive crossing and re-crossing from one side to the
other involves both in uncertainty, because their boundaries are thus
allowed to overlap.

381

210

382

Critique of Teleological Judgement

The expression, an end of nature, is of itself suﬃcient to obviate
this confusion and prevent our confounding natural science or the
occasion it aﬀords for a teleological judging of its objects with the
contemplation of God, and hence with a theological demonstration. It
is not to be regarded as a matter of no consequence that the above
expression should be confused with that of a divine end in the ordering of nature, or that the latter should even be passed oﬀ as the more
appropriate and the one more becoming to a pious soul, on the
ground that, say what we will, it must eventually come back to our
deriving these purposive forms in nature from a wise Author of the
universe. On the contrary we must scrupulously and modestly
restrict ourselves to the term that expresses just as much as we know,
and no more—namely, an end of nature. For before we arrive at the
question of the cause of nature itself, we ﬁnd in nature and in the
course of its generative processes examples of such products produced in nature according to known empirical laws. It is according to
these laws that natural science must judge its objects, and, consequently, it must seek within itself for this causality according to the
rule of ends. Therefore this science must not overleap its bounds for
the purpose of claiming for itself, as an indigenous principle, one to
whose concept no experience can be adequate, and upon which we
are not authorized to venture until after natural science has been
brought to completion.
Natural qualities that are demonstrable a priori, and so reveal their
possibility on universal principles without any aid from experience,
may involve a technical purposiveness. Yet, being absolutely necessary,
they cannot be credited to natural teleology at all. Natural teleology
forms part of physics, and is a method applicable to the solution of
the problems of physics. Arithmetical and geometrical analogies,
also universal mechanical laws, however strange and worthy of our
admiration the union in a single principle of a variety of rules apparently quite disconnected may seem, have no claim on that account to
rank as teleological grounds of explanation in physics. They may
deserve to be brought under review in the universal theory of the
purposiveness of the things of nature in general, but, if so, this is a
theory that would have to be assigned to another science, namely
metaphysics. It would not form an inherent principle of natural science:
whereas in the case of the empirical laws of the natural ends which
organisms present it is not only permissible, but even unavoidable, to

Analytic of Teleological Judgement

211

use the teleological mode of judging as a principle of natural science in
respect of a peculiar class of its objects.
For the purpose of keeping strictly within its own bounds physics
entirely ignores the question whether natural ends are ends designedly
or undesignedly. To deal with that question would be to meddle in the
aﬀairs of others—namely, in what is the business of metaphysics.
Suﬃce it that there are objects whose one and only explanation is on
natural laws that we are unable to conceive otherwise than by adopting the idea of ends as principle, objects which, in their intrinsic
form, and with nothing more in view than their internal relations, are
cognizable in this way alone. It is true that in teleology we speak of
nature as if its purposiveness were a thing of design. But to avoid all
suspicion of presuming in the slightest to mix up with our sources of
knowledge something that has no place in physics at all, namely a
supernatural cause, we refer to design in such a way that, in the same
breath, we attribute this design to nature, that is to matter. Here no
room is left for misinterpretation, since, obviously, no one would
ascribe design, in the proper sense of the term, to a lifeless material.
Hence our real intention is to indicate that the word design, as here
used, only signiﬁes a principle of reﬂective, and not of determining,
judgement, and consequently is not meant to introduce any special
ground of causality, but only to assist the employment of reason by
supplementing investigation on mechanical laws by the addition of
another method of investigation, so as to make up for the inadequacy
of the former even as a method of empirical research that has for its
object all particular laws of nature. Therefore, when teleology is
applied to physics, we speak with perfect justice of the wisdom, the
economy, the forethought, the beneﬁcence of nature. But in so doing
we do not convert nature into an intelligent being, for that would be
absurd; but neither do we dare to think of placing another being, one
that is intelligent, above nature as its architect, for that would be
presumptuous.4 On the contrary our only intention is to designate in
this way a kind of natural causality on an analogy with our own
4
The German word vermessen (presumptuous) is a good word* and full of meaning.
A judgement in which we forget to take stock of the extent of our powers of understanding may sometimes sound very modest, while yet it presumes a great deal, and is really
very presumptuous. Of this type are the majority of those by which we purport to exalt
divine wisdom by furnishing the works of creation and preservation with designs that are
really intended to do honour to the individual wisdom of our own subtle intellects.

383

212

384

Critique of Teleological Judgement

causality in the technical employment of reason, for the purpose of
keeping in view the rule upon which certain natural products are to
be investigated.
But why, then, is it that teleology does not usually form a special
part of theoretical natural science, but is relegated to theology by way
of a propaedeutic or transition? This is done in order to keep the
study of the mechanical aspect of nature in close connexion to what we
are able so to subject to our observation or experiment that we could
ourselves produce it like nature, or at least produce it according to
similar laws. For we have complete insight only into what we can
make and accomplish according to our concepts. But to eﬀect by
means of art a presentation similar to organization, as an intrinsic end
of nature, inﬁnitely surpasses all our powers. And as for such extrinsic arrangements of nature as are considered purposive (e.g. winds,
rains, etc.), physics certainly studies their mechanism, but it is quite
unable to exhibit their relation to ends so far as this relation purports
to be a condition necessarily attaching to a cause. For this necessity
in the nexus does not touch the constitution of things, but turns
wholly on the combination of our concepts.

second division
Dialectic of Teleological Judgement
§ 69
What is an antinomy of judgement?
Determining judgement does not possess any principles of its own
upon which concepts of objects are grounded. It is not autonomous; for
it merely subsumes under given laws, or concepts, as principles. Just
for this reason it is not exposed to any danger from inherent antinomy and does not run the risk of a conﬂict of its principles. Thus the
transcendental power of judgement, which was shown to contain the
conditions of subsumption under categories, was not independently
nomothetic. It only speciﬁed the conditions of sensuous intuition upon
which reality, that is, application, can be ascribed to a given concept
as a law of the understanding. In the discharge of this oﬃce it could
never fall into a state of internal disunion, at least in the matter of
principles.
But the reﬂective power of judgement has to subsume under a law
that is not yet given. It has, therefore, in fact only a principle of
reﬂection upon objects for which we are objectively at a complete loss
for a law, or concept of the object, suﬃcient to serve as a principle
covering the particular cases as they come before us. Now as there is
no permissible employment of the cognitive faculties apart from
principles, reﬂective judgement must in such cases be a principle to
itself. As this principle is not objective and is unable to introduce any
basis of cognition of the object suﬃcient for the required purpose
of subsumption, it must serve as a mere subjective principle for the
employment of our cognitive faculties in a purposive manner, namely,
for reﬂecting upon objects of a particular kind. Reﬂective judgement
has, therefore, its maxims applicable to such cases—maxims that are
in fact necessary for obtaining a knowledge of the natural laws to be
found in experience, and which are directed to assist us in arriving at
concepts, be these even concepts of reason, wherever such concepts
are absolutely required for the mere purpose of coming to know nature
in its empirical laws.—Between these necessary maxims of reﬂective

385

386

214

Critique of Teleological Judgement

judgement a conﬂict may arise, and consequently an antinomy. This
aﬀords the basis of a dialectic; and if each of the mutually conﬂicting
maxims has its foundation in the nature of our cognitive faculties,
this dialectic may be called a natural dialectic, and it constitutes an
unavoidable illusion which it is the duty of critical philosophy to
expose and to resolve lest it should deceive us.

§ 70
Exposition of this Antinomy

387

In dealing with nature as the sum of objects of outer sense, reason is
able to rely upon laws some of which are prescribed by understanding itself a priori to nature, while others are capable of indeﬁnite
extension by means of the empirical determinations occurring in
experience. For the application of the laws prescribed a priori by
understanding, that is, of the universal laws of material nature in general, judgement does not need any special principle of reﬂection; for
there it is determining, an objective principle being furnished to it by
understanding. But in respect of the particular laws with which we
can become acquainted through experience alone, there is such a wide
scope for diversity and heterogeneity that judgement must be a principle to itself, even for the mere purpose of searching for a law and seeking one out in the phenomena of nature. For it needs such a principle
as a guiding thread, if it is even to hope for a consistent body of empirical knowledge based on a thorough-going lawfulness of nature—that
is a unity of nature in its empirical laws. Now from the fact of this
contingent unity of particular laws it may come to pass that judgement
acts upon two maxims in its reﬂection, one of which it receives a priori
from mere understanding, but the other of which is prompted by particular experiences that bring reason into play to conduct a judging
of corporeal nature and its laws according to a particular principle.
What happens then is that these two diﬀerent maxims seem to all
appearance incompatible with one another, and a dialectic arises that
throws judgement into confusion as to the principle of its reﬂection.
The ﬁrst maxim of such reﬂection is the thesis: All production of
material things and their forms must be judged as possible on mere
mechanical laws.
The second maxim is the antithesis: Some products of material nature
cannot be judged as possible on mere mechanical laws (that is, for

Dialectic of Teleological Judgement

215

judging them quite a diﬀerent law of causality is required, namely,
that of ﬁnal causes).
If now these regulative principles of investigation were converted
into constitutive principles of the possibility of the objects themselves, they would read thus:
Thesis: All production of material things is possible on mere
mechanical laws.
Antithesis: Some production of such things is not possible on mere
mechanical laws.
In this latter form, as objective principles for determining judgement, they would contradict one another, so that one of the pair
would necessarily be false. But that would then be an antinomy certainly, though not one of judgement, but rather a conﬂict in the legislation of reason. But reason is unable to prove either one or the other
of these principles: seeing that we can have no a priori determining
principle of the possibility of things on mere empirical laws of nature.
On the other hand, looking to the maxims of reﬂective judgement
as ﬁrst set out, we see that they do not in fact contain any contradiction at all. For if I say: I must judge the possibility of all events in
material nature, and, consequently, also all forms considered as its
products, on mere mechanical laws, I do not thereby assert that they
are solely possible in this way, that is, to the exclusion of every other
kind of causality. On the contrary this assertion is only intended to
indicate that I ought at all times to reﬂect upon these things according
to the principle of the simple mechanism of nature, and, consequently,
push my investigation with it as far as I can, because unless I make it
the basis of research there can be no knowledge of nature in the true
sense of the term at all. Now this does not stand in the way of the
second maxim when a proper occasion for its employment presents
itself—that is to say, in the case of some natural forms (and, at their
instance, in the case of nature as a whole), we may, in our reﬂection
upon them, follow the trail of a principle which is radically diﬀerent
from explanation by the mechanism of nature, namely the principle
of ﬁnal causes. For reﬂection according to the ﬁrst maxim is not in
this way superseded. On the contrary we are directed to pursue it as
far as we can. Further it is not asserted that those forms were not
possible on the mechanism of nature. It is only maintained that human
reason, adhering to this maxim and proceeding on these lines, could
never discover any basis for what constitutes the speciﬁc character of

388

216

Critique of Teleological Judgement

a natural end, whatever additions it might make in this way to its
knowledge of natural laws. This leaves it an open question, whether in
the unknown inner ground of nature itself the physico-mechanical and
the purposive connections present in the same things may not cohere
in a single principle; it being only our reason that is not in a position to
unite them in such a principle, so that our judgement, consequently,
remains reﬂective, not determining, that is, acts on a subjective
ground, and not according to an objective principle of the possibility
of things in their inherent nature, and, accordingly, is compelled to
conceive a diﬀerent principle from that of the mechanism of nature
as a ground of the possibility of certain forms in nature.

§ 71
Introduction to the solution of the above antinomy

389

We are wholly unable to prove the impossibility of the production of
organized natural products in accordance with the simple mechanism
of nature. For we cannot see into the ﬁrst and inner ground of the
inﬁnite multiplicity of the particular laws of nature, which, being only
known empirically, are for us contingent, and so we are absolutely incapable of reaching the intrinsic and all-suﬃcient principle of the possibility of a nature—a principle which lies in the supersensible. But may
not the productive capacity of nature be just as adequate for what we
judge to be formed or connected according to the idea of ends as it is
for what we believe merely calls for consideration of nature as a mechanism? Or may it be that in fact things are genuine natural ends (as we
must necessarily judge them to be), and as such founded upon an original causality of a completely diﬀerent kind, which cannot be contained
in material nature or its intelligible substrate, namely, the causality of
an architectonic understanding? What has been said shows that these
are questions upon which our reason, very narrowly restricted in
respect of the concept of causality if this concept has to be speciﬁed
a priori, can give absolutely no information.—But that, relatively
to our cognitive faculties, the mere mechanism of nature is also unable
to furnish any explanation of the production of organisms, is a matter
just as indubitably certain. For reﬂective judgement, therefore, this is a
perfectly sound principle: that for the clearly manifest nexus of things
according to ﬁnal causes, we must think a causality distinct from
mechanism, namely a world-cause acting according to ends, that is, an

Dialectic of Teleological Judgement

217

intelligent cause—however rash and undemonstrable a principle this
might be for determining judgement. In the ﬁrst case the principle is a
simple maxim of judgement. The concept of causality which it involves
is a mere idea to which we in no way undertake to concede reality, but
only make use of it to guide a reﬂection that still leaves the door open
for any available mechanical explanation, and that never strays from the
sensible world. In the second case the principle would be an objective
principle. Reason would prescribe it and judgement would have to be
subject to it and determine itself accordingly. But in that case reﬂection
wanders from the world of the senses into transcendent regions, and
possibly gets led astray.
All semblance of an antinomy between the maxims of the strictly
physical, or mechanical, mode of explanation and the teleological, or
technical, rests, therefore, on our confusing a principle of reﬂective
with one of determining judgement. The autonomy of the former,
which is valid merely subjectively for the use of our reason in respect
of particular empirical laws, is mistaken for the heteronomy of the
second, which has to conform to the laws, either universal or particular, given by the understanding.

§ 72
The various kinds of systems dealing with the
purposiveness of nature
No one has ever yet questioned the correctness of the principle that
when judging certain things in nature, namely organisms and their
possibility, we must look to the concept of ﬁnal causes. Such a
principle is admittedly necessary even where we require no more
than a guiding-thread for the purpose of becoming acquainted with
the character of these things by means of observation, without presuming to investigate their ﬁrst origin. Hence the question can only
be, whether this principle is merely subjectively valid, that is, a mere
maxim of judgement, or is an objective principle of nature. On the
latter alternative there would belong to nature another type of causality beyond its mechanism and its simple dynamical laws, namely, the
causality of ﬁnal causes, under which natural causes (dynamical
forces) would stand only as intermediate causes.
Now this speculative question or problem might well be left without
any answer or solution. For, if we content ourselves with speculation

390

218

391

Critique of Teleological Judgement

within the bounds of the mere knowledge of nature, the above maxims
are ample for its study as far as human powers extend, and for
probing its deepest secrets. So it must be that reason harbours some
presentiment, or that nature, so to speak, gives us a hint. With the help
of this concept of ﬁnal causes, might we not be able to take a step, we
are prompted to think, beyond and above nature, and connect it to
the supreme point in the series of causes? Why not relinquish the
investigation of nature (although we have not advanced so very far
with it) or, at least, lay it temporarily aside, and try ﬁrst to discover
whither that stranger in natural science, the concept of natural ends,
would lead us?
Now at this point, certainly, the undisputed maxim above mentioned would inevitably introduce a problem that opens up a wide
ﬁeld for controversy. For it may be alleged that the nexus of natural
ends proves the existence of a special kind of causality for nature. Or
it may be contended that this nexus, considered in its true nature and
on objective principles, is, on the contrary, identical with the mechanism of nature, or rests on one and the same ground, though in the
case of many natural products this ground often lies too deeply buried
for our investigation. Hence, as is contended, we have recourse to a
subjective principle, namely art, or causality according to ideas, in order
to introduce it, on an analogy, as the basis of nature—an expedient
that in fact proves successful in many cases, in some certainly seems
to fail, but in no case entitles us to introduce into natural science a
kind of agency diﬀerent from causality on mere mechanical laws of
nature.—Now, in giving to the procedure, or causal operation of
nature, the name of technic, on account of the suggestion of an end
which we ﬁnd in its products, we propose to divide this technic into
such as is designed (technica intentionalis) and such as is undesigned
(technica naturalis). The former is intended to convey that nature’s
capacity for production by ﬁnal causes must be considered a special
kind of causality; the latter that this capacity is at bottom identical
with natural mechanism, and that the contingent coincidence with
our concepts of art and their rules is a mere subjective condition of
our judging this capacity, and is thus erroneously interpreted as a
special kind of natural generation.
To speak now of the systems that oﬀer an explanation of nature on
the point of ﬁnal causes, one cannot fail to perceive that they all,
without exception, controvert one another dogmatically. In other

Dialectic of Teleological Judgement

219

words they conﬂict concerning objective principles of the possibility
of things, whether this possibility be one due to causes acting
designedly or merely undesignedly. They do not contest the subjective maxim of mere judgement upon the cause of the purposive products in question. In the latter case disparate principles might very
well be reconciled, whereas, in the former, contradictorily opposed
principles annul one another and are mutually inconsistent.
The systems in respect of the technic of nature, that is, of nature’s
power of production on the rule of ends, are of two kinds: that of the
idealism and that of the realism of natural ends. The former maintains
that all purposiveness on the part of nature is undesigned; the latter,
that some purposiveness, namely that of organized beings, is designed.
From the latter the hypothetical consequence may be inferred, that
the technic of nature is also designed in what concerns all its other
products relatively to nature in its entirety, that is, is an end.
1. The idealism of purposiveness (I am here all along referring to
objective purposiveness) is either that of the accidentality or fatality
of the determination of nature in the purposive form of its products.
The former principle ﬁxes on the relation of matter to the physical
basis of its form, namely dynamical laws; the latter on its relation to
the hyperphysical basis of matter and nature as a whole. The system
of accidentality, which is attributed to Epicurus or Democritus,* is,
in its literal interpretation, so manifestly absurd that it need not
detain us. On the other hand, the system of fatality, of which
Spinoza is the accredited author,* although it is to all appearances
much older, rests upon something supersensible, into which our
insight, accordingly, is unable to penetrate. It is not so easy to refute:
the reason being that its conception of the original being is quite
unintelligible. But this much is clear, that on this system the purposive connexion in the world must be regarded as undesigned. For,
while it is derived from an original being, it is not derived from its
intelligence, and consequently not from any design on its part, but
from the necessity of the nature of this being and the unity of the
world ﬂowing from that nature. Hence it is clear, too, that the fatalism of purposiveness is also an idealism of purposiveness.
2. The realism of the purposiveness of nature is also either physical
or hyperphysical. The former bases natural ends on the analogue of a
faculty acting designedly, that is, on the life of matter—this life being
either inherent in it or else bestowed upon it by an inner animating

392

220

Critique of Teleological Judgement

principle or world-soul. This is called hylozoism.* The latter derives
such ends from the original source of the universe. This source it
regards as an intelligent Being producing with design—or essentially
and fundamentally living. It is theism.5

§ 73
None of the above systems does what it professes to do

393

What is the aim and object of all the above systems? It is to explain
our teleological judgements about nature. To do so they adopt one or
other of two courses. One side denies their truth, and consequently
describes them as an idealism of nature (represented as art). The
other side recognizes their truth, and promises to demonstrate the
possibility of a nature according to the idea of ﬁnal causes.
1. The systems that contend for the idealism of the ﬁnal causes in
nature fall into two classes. One class does certainly concede to the
principle of these causes a causality according to dynamical laws (to
which causality the natural things owe their purposive existence).
But it denies to it intentionality—that is, it denies that this causality
is determined designedly to this its purposive production, or, in
other words, that an end is the cause. This is the explanation adopted
by Epicurus. It completely denies and abolishes the distinction
between a technic of nature and its mere mechanism. Blind chance is
accepted as the explanation, not only of the agreement of the generated
products with our concepts, and, consequently, of the technic of
nature, but even of the determination of the causes of this development
on dynamical laws, and, consequently, of its mechanism. Hence nothing is explained, not even the illusion in our teleological judgements, so
that the alleged idealism in them is left altogether unsubstantiated.
Spinoza, as the representative of the other class, seeks to release us
from any inquiry into the ground of the possibility of ends of nature,
and to deprive this idea of all reality, by refusing to allow that such
5 We see from this how, as in most speculative matters of pure reason, the schools of
philosophy have, in the way of dogmatic assertions, usually attempted every possible
solution of the problem before them. Thus in the case of the purposiveness of nature, at
one time a lifeless matter, or again a lifeless God, at another, a living matter, or else a living
God, have been tried. Nothing is left to us except, if needs be, to break away from all these
objective assertions, and weigh our judgement critically in its mere relation to our cognitive
faculties. By so doing we may procure for their principle a validity which, if not dogmatic,
is yet that of a maxim, and ample for the reliable employment of our reason.

Dialectic of Teleological Judgement

221

ends are to be regarded as products at all. They are, rather, accidents
inhering in an original being. This being, he says, is the substrate of
the natural things, and, as such, he does not ascribe to it causality in
respect of them, but simply subsistence. Thanks, then, to the unconditional necessity both of this being and of all the things of nature, as
its inherent accidents, he assures to the natural forms, it is true, that
unity of ground necessary for all purposiveness, but he does so at the
expense of their contingency, apart from which no unity of end is
thinkable. In eliminating this unity he eliminates all trace of design,
and leaves the original ground of the things of nature divested of all
intelligence.
But Spinozism does not eﬀect what it intends. It intends to furnish
an explanation of the purposive connection of natural things, which
it does not deny, and it refers us simply to the unity of the subject in
which they all inhere. But suppose we grant it this kind of existence
for the beings of the world, such ontological unity is not then and
there a unity of end and does not make it in any way intelligible. The
latter is, in fact, quite a special kind of unity. It does not follow from
the interconnexion of things in one subject, or of the beings of the world
in an original being. On the contrary, it implies emphatically some
relation to a cause possessed of intelligence. Even if all the things
were to be united in one simple subject, yet such unity would never
exhibit a purposive relation unless these things were understood to
be, ﬁrst, inner eﬀects of the substance as a cause, and, secondly, eﬀects
of it as cause by virtue of its intelligence. Apart from these formal conditions all unity is mere necessity of nature, and, when it is ascribed
nevertheless to things that we represent as outside one another, blind
necessity. But if what the scholastics call the transcendental perfection of things, in relation to their own proper essence—a perfection
according to which all things have inherent in them all the requisites
for being the thing they are and not any other thing—is to be termed
a natural purposiveness, we then get a childish playing with words in
the place of concepts. For if all things must be thought as ends, then
to be a thing and to be an end are identical, so that, all said and done,
there is nothing that specially deserves to be represented as an end.
This makes it evident that by resolving our concept of natural
purposiveness into the consciousness of our own inherence in an allembracing, though at the same time simple, being, and by seeking
the form of purposiveness in the unity of that being, Spinoza must

394

222

395

Critique of Teleological Judgement

have intended to maintain the idealism of the purposiveness and not
its realism. But even this he was unable to accomplish, for the mere
representation of the unity of the substrate can never produce the
idea of purposiveness, even if it is undesigned.
2. Those who not merely maintain the realism of natural ends, but
purport even to explain it, think they can detect a special type of
causality, namely that of causes operating intentionally. Or, at least,
they think they are able to perceive the possibility of such causality—
for unless they did they could not set about trying to explain it.
For even the most daring hypothesis must rely at least on the
possibility of its assumed foundation being certain, and the concept of
this foundation must be capable of being assured its objective reality.
But the possibility of a living matter is quite inconceivable. The
very conception of it involves self-contradiction, since lifelessness,
inertia, constitutes the essential characteristic of matter. Then if the
possibility of a matter endowed with life and of the whole of nature
conceived as an animal is invoked in support of the hypothesis of a
purposiveness of nature in the macrocosm, it can only be used with
the utmost reserve in so far as it is manifested empirically in the
organization of nature in the microcosm. Its possibility can in no way
be perceived a priori. Hence there must be a vicious circle in the
explanation, if the purposiveness of nature in organized beings is
sought to be derived from the life of matter and if this life in turn
is only to be known in organized beings, so that no concept of its
possibility can be formed apart from such experience. Hence hylozoism
does not perform what it promises.
Finally theism is equally incapable of substantiating dogmatically
the possibility of natural ends as a key to teleology. Yet the source of
its explanation of them has this advantage over all others, that by
attributing an intelligence to the original Being it adopts the best
mode of rescuing the purposiveness of nature from idealism, and
introduces an intentional causality for its production.
For theism would ﬁrst have to succeed in proving to the satisfaction of determining judgement that the unity of end in matter is an
impossible result of the mere mechanism of nature. Otherwise it is
not entitled deﬁnitely to locate its ground beyond and above nature.
But the farthest we can get is this. The ﬁrst and inner ground of this
very mechanism being beyond our ken, the constitution and limits of
our cognitive faculties are such as to preclude us from in any way

Dialectic of Teleological Judgement

223

looking to matter with a view to ﬁnding in it a principle of determinate purposive relations. We are left, on the contrary, with no alternative way of judging nature’s products as natural ends other than that
which resorts to a supreme Intelligence as the cause of the world. But
this is not a ground for determining judgement, but only for
reﬂective judgement, and it is absolutely incapable of authorizing us
to make any objective assertion.

§ 74
The impossibility of treating the concept of a technic of nature
dogmatically springs from the inexplicability of a natural end
Even though a concept is to be placed under an empirical condition
we deal dogmatically with it, if we regard it as contained under
another concept of the object—this concept forming a principle of
reason—and determine it in accordance with the latter. But we deal
merely critically with the concept if we only regard it in relation to
our cognitive faculties and, consequently, to the subjective conditions of thinking it, without undertaking to decide anything as to its
object. Hence the dogmatic treatment of a concept is treatment
which is authoritative for determining judgement: the critical treatment is such as is authoritative merely for reﬂective judgement.
Now the concept of a thing as a natural end is one that subsumes
nature under a causality that is only thinkable by the aid of reason,
and so subsumes it for the purpose of letting us judge on this principle of what is given of the object in experience. But in order to
make use of this concept dogmatically for determining judgement we
should have ﬁrst to be assured of its objective reality, as otherwise we
could not subsume any natural thing under it. The concept of a thing
as a natural end is, however, certainly one that is empirically conditioned, that is, is one only possible under certain conditions given in
experience. Yet it is not one to be abstracted from these conditions,
but, on the contrary, it is only possible on a rational principle in the
judging of the object. Being such a principle, we have no insight into
its objective reality, that is to say, we cannot perceive that an object
answering to it is possible. We cannot establish it dogmatically;
and we do not know whether it is a merely conjectured and objectively
empty concept (conceptus ratiocinans), or whether it is a rational
concept, supplying a basis of knowledge and confirmed by reason

396

224

397

Critique of Teleological Judgement

(conceptus ratiocinatus). Hence it cannot be treated dogmatically on
behalf of determining judgement. In other words, it is not only
impossible to decide whether or not things of nature, considered as
natural ends, require for their production a causality of a quite peculiar
kind, namely an intentional causality, but the very question is quite
out of order. For the concept of a natural end is altogether unprovable by reason in respect of its objective reality, which means that it
is not constitutive for determining judgement, but merely regulative
for reﬂective judgement.
That this concept is not provable is clear from the following considerations. Being a concept of a natural product, it involves natural
necessity. Yet it also involves in one and the same thing, considered
as an end, an accompanying contingency in the form of the object
in respect of mere laws of nature. Hence, if it is to escape selfcontradiction, besides containing a basis of the possibility of the
thing in nature it must further contain a basis of the possibility of this
nature itself and of its reference to something that is not an empirically
cognizable nature, namely to something supersensible, and, therefore,
to what is not cognizable by us at all. Otherwise in judging of its possibility, we should not have to judge it in the light of a kind of causality diﬀerent from that of natural mechanism. Accordingly the
concept of a thing as a natural end is transcendent for determining
judgement if its object is viewed by reason—although for reﬂective
judgement it may be immanent in respect of objects of experience.
Objective reality, therefore, cannot be procured for it on behalf of
determining judgement. Hence we can understand how it is that all
systems that are ever devised with a view to the dogmatic treatment
of the concept of natural ends or of nature as a whole that owes its
consistency and coherence to ﬁnal causes, fail to decide anything
whatever either by their objective aﬃrmations or by their objective
denials. For, if things are subsumed under a concept that is merely
problematic, the synthetic predicates attached to this concept—as,
for example, in the present case, whether the natural end which we
suppose for the production of the thing is designed or undesigned—
must yield judgements about the object of a similar problematic
character, whether they be aﬃrmative or negative, since one does not
know whether one is judging about what is something or nothing. The
concept of a causality through ends, that is, ends of art, has certainly
objective reality, just as that of a causality according to the mechanism

Dialectic of Teleological Judgement

225

of nature has. But the conception of a causality of nature following
the rule of ends, and still more of such a Being as is utterly incapable
of being given to us in experience—a Being regarded as the original
source of nature—while it may no doubt be thought without selfcontradiction, is nevertheless useless for the purpose of dogmatic
deﬁnitive assertions. For, since it is incapable of being extracted from
experience, and besides is unnecessary for its possibility, there is
nothing that can give any guarantee of its objective reality. But even if
this could be assured, how can I reckon among products of nature things
that are deﬁnitely posited as products of divine art, when it was the
very incapacity of nature to produce such things according to its own
laws that necessitated the appeal to a cause distinct from nature?

§ 75
The concept of an objective purposiveness of nature is a critical
principle of reason for the use of reﬂective judgement
But then it is one thing to say: The production of certain things of
nature, or even of nature as a whole, is only possible through the agency
of a cause that pursues designs in determining itself to action. It is an
entirely diﬀerent thing to say: By the peculiar constitution of my cognitive faculties the only way I can judge of the possibility of those things
and of their production is by conceiving for that purpose a cause
working designedly, and, consequently, a being whose productivity
is analogous to the causality of an understanding. In the former case
I desire to ascertain something about the object, and I am bound to
prove the objective reality of a concept I have assumed. In the latter
case it is only the employment of my cognitive faculties that is determined by reason in accordance with their peculiar character and the
essential conditions imposed both by their range and their limitations. The ﬁrst principle is, therefore, an objective principle intended
for determining judgement. The second is a subjective principle for
the use merely of reﬂective judgement, of which it is, consequently,
a maxim that reason prescribes.
In fact, if we desire to pursue the investigation of nature with diligent
observation, if only in its organized products, we cannot avoid the
necessity of ascribing the concept of design to nature. We have in this
concept, therefore, a maxim absolutely necessary for the empirical
employment of our reason. But once such a guide for the study of

398

226

399

Critique of Teleological Judgement

nature has been adopted, and its application veriﬁed, it is obvious
that we must at least try this maxim of judgement also on nature as
a whole, because many of its laws might be discoverable in the light of
this maxim which otherwise, with the limitations of our insight into its
mechanism, would remain hidden from us. But in respect of the latter
employment, useful as this maxim of judgement is, it is not indispensable. For nature as a whole is not given to us as organized—in the very
strict sense above assigned to the word. On the other hand, in respect
of those natural products that can only be judged as designedly formed
in the way they are, and not otherwise, the above maxim of reﬂective
judgement is essentially necessary, if for no other purpose, to obtain an
empirical knowledge of their intrinsic character. For the very notion
that they are organized things is itself impossible unless we associate
with it the notion of a production by design.
Now where the possibility of the real existence or form of a thing
is represented to the mind as subject to the condition of an end, there
is bound up indissolubly with the concept of the thing the concept of
its contingency in accordance with natural laws. For this reason
those natural things which we consider to be only possible as ends
constitute the foremost proof of the contingency of the universe.
Alike for the popular understanding and for the philosopher they
are, too, the only valid argument for its dependence upon and its
origin from an extramundane Being, and from one, moreover, that
the above purposive form shows to be intelligent. Thus they indicate
that teleology must look to a theology for a complete answer to its
inquiries.
But suppose teleology brought to the highest pitch of perfection,
what would it all prove in the end? Does it prove, for example, that
such an intelligent Being really exists? No; it proves no more than
this, that by the constitution of our cognitive faculties, and, therefore, in bringing experience into touch with the highest principles of
reason, we are absolutely incapable of forming any concept of the
possibility of such a world unless we think a highest cause operating
designedly. We are unable, therefore, objectively to substantiate the
proposition: There is an intelligent original Being. On the contrary,
we can only do so subjectively for the employment of our power of
judgement in its reﬂection on the ends in nature, which are incapable
of being thought on any other principle than that of the intentional
causality of a highest cause.

Dialectic of Teleological Judgement

227

Should we desire to establish the major premiss dogmatically from
teleological grounds, we should become entangled in inextricable
diﬃculties. For then these reasonings would have to be supported by
the thesis: The organized beings in the world are not possible otherwise than by virtue of a cause operating designedly. But are we to say
that because we can only push forward our investigation into the
causal nexus of these things and recognize the conformity to law
which it displays by following the idea of ends, we are also entitled to
presume that for every thinking and knowing being the same holds
true as a necessary condition, and as one, therefore, attaching to the
object instead of merely to the subject, that is, to our own selves? For
this is the inevitable position that we should have to be prepared to
take up. But we could not succeed in carrying such a point. For,
strictly speaking, we do not observe the ends in nature as designed.
We only read this concept into the facts as a guide to judgement in its
reﬂection upon the products of nature. Hence these ends are not
given to us by the object. It is even impossible for us a priori to
warrant the eligibility of such a concept if it is taken to possess objective reality. We can get absolutely nothing, therefore, out of the
thesis beyond a proposition resting only on subjective conditions,
that is to say the conditions of reﬂective judgement adapted to our
cognitive faculties. If this proposition were to be expressed in objective terms and as valid dogmatically, it would read: There is a God.
But all that is permissible for us human beings is the narrow formula:
We cannot conceive or render intelligible to ourselves the purposiveness that must be introduced as the basis even of our knowledge of
the intrinsic possibility of many natural things, except by representing
it, and, in general, the world, as the product of an intelligent cause—in
short, of a God.
Now supposing that this proposition, founded as it is upon an
indispensably necessary maxim of our power of judgement, is perfectly satisfactory from every human point of view and for any use to
which we can put our reason, whether speculative or practical, I
should like to know what loss we suﬀer from our inability to prove its
validity for higher beings also—that is to say, to substantiate it on pure
objective grounds, which unfortunately are beyond our reach. It is, I
mean, quite certain that we can never get a suﬃcient knowledge of
organized beings and their inner possibility, much less get an explanation of them, by looking merely to mechanical principles of nature.

400

228

401

Critique of Teleological Judgement

Indeed, so certain is it, that we may conﬁdently assert that it is
absurd for human beings even to entertain any thought of so doing
or to hope that maybe another Newton may some day arise, to make
intelligible to us even the genesis of but a blade of grass from natural
laws that no design has ordered. Such insight we must absolutely
deny to mankind. But, then, are we to think that a source of the possibility of organized beings amply suﬃcient to explain their origin
without having recourse to a design, could never be found buried
among the secrets even of nature, were we able to penetrate to the
principle upon which it speciﬁes its familiar universal laws? This, in
its turn, would be a presumptuous judgement on our part. For how
do we expect to get any knowledge on the point? Probabilities drop
entirely out of count in a case like this, where the question turns on
judgements of pure reason. On the question, therefore, whether or
not any being acting designedly stands behind what we properly
term natural ends, as a world cause, and consequently, as Author of
the world, we can pass no objective judgement whatever, whether it
be aﬃrmative or negative. This much alone is certain, that if we
ought, for all that, to form our judgement on what our own proper
nature permits us to see, that is, subject to the conditions and restrictions of our reason, we are utterly unable to ascribe the possibility of
such natural ends to any other source than an intelligent Being. This
alone squares with the maxim of our reﬂective judgement, and,
therefore, with a subjective ground that is nevertheless ineradicably
bound to the human race.

§ 76
Remark
The following consideration is one that justly merits detailed elaboration in transcendental philosophy, but it can only be introduced here
as an explanatory digression, and not as a step in the main argument.
Reason is a faculty of principles, and the unconditioned is the ultimate goal at which it aims. The understanding, on the other hand, is
at its disposal, but always only under a certain condition that must be
given. But, without concepts of the understanding, to which objective reality must be given, reason can pass no objective (synthetic)
judgements whatever. As theoretical reason it is absolutely devoid of
any constitutive principles of its own. Its principles, on the contrary,

Dialectic of Teleological Judgement

229

are merely regulative. It will readily be perceived that once reason
advances beyond the reach of the understanding it becomes extravagant. It displays itself in ideas—that have certainly a foundation as
regulative principles—but not in objectively valid concepts. The
understanding, however, unable to keep pace with it and yet requisite in order to give validity in respect of objects, restricts the validity
of these ideas to the judging subject, though to the subject in a comprehensive sense, as inclusive of all who belong to the human race. In
other words it limits their validity to the terms of this condition:
From the nature of our human faculty of knowledge, or, to speak in
the broadest terms, even according to any concept that we are able to
form for ourselves of the capacity of a ﬁnite intelligent being in general, it must be conceived to be so and cannot be conceived otherwise—terms which involve no assertion that the foundation of such a
judgement lies in the object. We shall submit some examples which,
while they certainly possess too great importance and are also too full
of diﬃculty to be here forced at once on the reader as propositions that
have been proved, may yet oﬀer some food for reﬂection, and may elucidate the matters upon which our attention is here specially engaged.
Human understanding cannot avoid the necessity of drawing a
distinction between the possibility and the actuality of things. The
reason for this lies in our own selves and the nature of our cognitive
faculties. For were it not that two entirely heterogeneous factors, the
understanding for concepts and sensuous intuition for the corresponding objects, are required for the exercise of these faculties, there
would be no such distinction between the possible and the actual.
This means that if our understanding were intuitive it would have no
objects but such as are actual. Concepts, which are merely directed
to the possibility of an object, and sensuous intuitions, which give us
something and yet do not thereby let us cognize it as an object, would
both cease to exist. Now the whole distinction which we draw
between the merely possible and the actual rests upon the fact that
possibility signiﬁes the position of the representation of a thing relatively to our concept, and, in general, to our capacity of thinking,
whereas actuality signiﬁes the positing of the thing in its intrinsic
existence apart from this concept. Accordingly the distinction of
possible from actual things is one that is merely valid subjectively
for human understanding. It arises from the fact that even if something does not exist, we may yet always give it a place in our thoughts,

402

230

403

Critique of Teleological Judgement

or if there is something of which we have no concept we may
nevertheless imagine it given. To say, therefore, that things may be
possible without being actual, that from mere possibility, therefore,
no conclusion whatever as to actuality can be drawn, is to state propositions that hold true for human reason, without such validity proving that this distinction lies in the things themselves. That this
inference is not to be drawn from the propositions stated, and that,
consequently, while these are certainly valid even of objects, so far as
our cognitive faculties in their subjection to sensuous conditions are
also occupied with objects of the senses, they are not valid of things
generally, is apparent when we look to the demands of reason. For
reason never withdraws its challenge to us to adopt something or
other existing with unconditioned necessity—a primal ground—in
which there is no longer to be any diﬀerence between possibility and
actuality, and our understanding has absolutely no concept to answer
to this idea—that is, it can discover no way of representing to itself
any such thing or of forming any notion of its mode of existence. For
if understanding thinks it—let it think it how it will—then the thing
is represented merely as possible. If it is conscious of it as given in
intuition, then it is actual, and no thought of any possibility enters
into the case. Hence the concept of an absolutely necessary being,
while doubtless an indispensable idea of reason, is for human understanding an unattainable problematic concept. Nevertheless it is valid
for the employment of our cognitive faculties according to their peculiar structure; consequently not so for the object nor, as that would
mean, for every knowing being. For I cannot take for granted that
thought and intuition are two distinct conditions subject to which
every being exercises its cognitive faculties, and, therefore, that things
have a possibility and actuality. An understanding into whose mode of
cognition* this distinction did not enter would express itself by saying:
All objects that I know are, that is, exist; and the possibility of some
that did not exist, in other words, their contingency supposing them to
exist, and, therefore, the necessity that would be placed in contradistinction to this contingency, would never enter into the imagination of
such a being. But what makes it so hard for our understanding with
its concepts to rival reason is simply this, that the very thing that
reason regards as constitutive of the object and adopts as its principle
is for understanding, in its human form, extravagant, that is, impossible under the subjective conditions of its knowledge.—In this state

Dialectic of Teleological Judgement

231

of aﬀairs, then, this maxim always holds true, that once the knowledge of objects exceeds the capacity of the understanding we must
always conceive them according to the subjective conditions necessarily attaching to our human nature in the exercise of its faculties.
And if—as must needs be the case with extravagant concepts—
judgements passed in this manner cannot be constitutive principles
determining the character of the object, we shall yet be left with regulative principles whose function is immanent and reliable, and which
are adapted to the human point of view.
We have seen that in the theoretical study of nature reason must
assume the idea of an unconditioned necessity of the original ground
of nature. Similarly in the practical sphere it must presuppose its
own causality as unconditioned (in respect of nature), in other words,
its freedom, since it is conscious of its own moral command. Now
here the objective necessity of action as duty is, however, regarded as
opposed to that which it would have as an event if its source lay in
nature instead of in freedom or rational causality. So the action, with
its absolute necessity of the moral order, is looked on as physically
wholly contingent—that is, we recognize that what ought necessarily
to happen, frequently does not happen. Hence it is clear that it only
springs from the subjective character of our practical faculty that the
moral laws must be represented as commands, and the actions conformable to them as duties, and that reason expresses this necessity
not as an ‘is’ (an event) but as an ‘ought to be’ (as obligation). This
would not occur if reason and its causality were considered as independent of sensibility, that is, as free from the subjective condition
of its application to objects in nature, and as being, consequently,
a cause in an intelligible world perfectly harmonizing with the
moral law. For in such a world there would be no diﬀerence between
obligation and act, or between a practical law as to what is possible
through our agency and a theoretical law as to what we make actual.
However, although an intelligible world in which everything is actual
by reason of the simple fact that, being something good, it is possible, is for us an extravagant concept—as is also freedom itself, the
formal condition of that world—yet it has its proper function. For
while, in this respect, it is useless for the purpose of any constitutive
principle determining an object and its objective reality, it yet serves
as a universal regulative principle. This is due to the constitution of
our partly sensuous nature and capacity, which makes it valid for us

404

232

Critique of Teleological Judgement

and, so far as we can imagine from the constitution of our reason,
for all intelligent beings that are in any way bound to this sensible
world. But this principle does not objectively determine the nature
of freedom as a form of causality: it converts, and converts with no
less validity than if it did so determine the nature of that freedom,
the rule of actions according to that idea into a command for
everyone.
Similarly, as to the case before us, we may admit that we should
ﬁnd no distinction between the mechanism and the technic of nature,
that is, its purposive connections, were it not for the character of our
understanding. Our understanding must move from the universal to
the particular. In respect of the particular, therefore, judgement can
recognize no purposiveness, or, consequently, pass any determinate
judgements, unless it is possessed of a universal law under which it
can subsume that particular. But the particular by its very nature
contains something contingent in respect of the universal. Yet reason
demands that there shall also be unity in the synthesis of the particular laws of nature, and, consequently, conformity to law—and a
derivation a priori of the particular from the universal laws in point
of their contingent content is not possible by any deﬁning of the concept of the object. Now the above conformity to law on the part of
the contingent is termed purposiveness. Hence it follows that the
concept of a purposiveness of nature in its products, while it does not
touch the determination of objects, is a necessary concept for the
human power of judgement, in respect of nature. It is, therefore, a
subjective principle of reason for the use of judgement, and one
which, taken as regulative and not as constitutive, is as necessarily
valid for our human judgement as if it were an objective principle.
405

§ 77
The peculiarity of human understanding that makes the
concept of a natural end possible for us
In the foregoing Remark we have noted peculiarities belonging to
our faculty of cognition—even to our higher faculty of cognition—
which we are easily misled into treating as objective predicates to be
transferred to the things themselves. But these peculiarities relate to
ideas to which no commensurate object can be given in experience,
and which thus could only serve as regulative principles in the

Dialectic of Teleological Judgement

233

pursuit of experience. The concept of a natural end stands, no doubt,
on the same footing as regards the source of the possibility of a predicate like this—a source which can only be ideal. But the result attributable to this source, namely the product itself, is nevertheless given
in nature, and the concept of a causality of nature, regarded as a
being acting according to ends, seems to convert the idea of a natural end into a constitutive teleological principle. Herein lies a point
of diﬀerence between this and all other ideas.
But this diﬀerence lies in the fact that the idea in question is a
principle of reason for the use, not of understanding, but of judgement, and is, consequently, a principle solely for the application of
an understanding in the abstract to possible objects of experience.
Moreover, this application only aﬀects a ﬁeld where the judgement
passed cannot be determining but simply reﬂective. Consequently,
while the object may certainly be given in experience, it cannot even
be judged determinately—to say nothing of being judged with complete adequacy—in accordance with the idea, but can only be made
an object of reﬂection.
The diﬀerence turns, therefore, on a peculiarity of our (human)
understanding relative to our power of judgement in reﬂecting on
things in nature. But, if that is the case, then we must have here an
underlying idea of a possible understanding diﬀerent from the
human. (And there was a similar implication in the Critique of Pure
Reason.* We were bound to have present to our minds the thought of
another possible form of intuition, if ours was to be deemed one of a
special kind, one, namely, for which objects were only to rank as phenomena.) Were this not so it could not be said that certain natural
products must, from the particular constitution of our understanding, be considered by us—if we are to conceive the possibility of their
production—as having been produced designedly and as ends, yet
without this statement involving any demand that there should, as a
matter of fact, be a particular cause present in which the representation of an end acts as determining ground, or, therefore, without
involving any assertion as to the powers of an understanding diﬀerent
from the human. This is to say, the statement does not deny that a
superhuman understanding may be able to discover the source of the
possibility of such natural products even in the mechanism of nature,
that is, in the mechanism of a causal nexus for which an understanding is not positively assumed as cause.

406

234

407

Critique of Teleological Judgement

Hence what we are here concerned with is the relation which our
understanding bears to the power of judgement. We have, in fact, to
examine this relation with a view to ﬁnding a certain element of contingency in the constitution of our understanding, so as to note it as
a peculiarity of our own in contradistinction to other possible kinds
of understanding.
This contingency turns up quite naturally in the particular which
judgement has to bring under the universal supplied by the concepts
of the understanding. For the particular is not determined by the universal of our (human) understanding. Though diﬀerent things may
agree in a common characteristic, the variety of forms in which they
may be presented to our perception is contingent. Our understanding is a faculty of concepts. This means that it is a discursive understanding for which the character and variety to be found in the
particular given to it in nature and capable of being brought under its
concepts must certainly be contingent. But now intuition is also a
factor in knowledge, and a faculty of complete spontaneity of intuition
would be a cognitive faculty distinct from sensibility and wholly independent of it. Hence it would be an understanding in the widest sense
of the term. Thus we are also able to imagine an intuitive understanding—negatively, or simply as not discursive—which does not move,
as ours does with its concepts, from the universal to the particular and
so to the individual. Such an understanding would not experience the
above contingency in the way nature and understanding accord in
natural products subject to particular laws. But it is just this contingency that makes it so diﬃcult for our understanding to reduce the
multiplicity of nature to the unity of knowledge. Our understanding
can only accomplish this task through the harmonizing of the features
of nature with our faculty of concepts—a most contingent accord.
But an intuitive understanding has no such work to perform.
Accordingly our understanding is peculiarly circumstanced in
respect of the power of judgement. For in cognition by means of the
understanding the particular is not determined by the universal.
Therefore the particular cannot be derived from the universal alone.
Yet in the multiplicity of nature, and through the medium of concepts and laws, this particular has to accord with the universal in
order to be capable of being subsumed under it. But under the circumstances mentioned this accord must be very contingent and must
exist without any determinate principle to guide our judgement.

Dialectic of Teleological Judgement

235

Nevertheless we are able at least to conceive the possibility of such
an accord of the things in nature with the power of judgement—an
accord which we represent as contingent, and, consequently, as only
possible by means of an end directed to its production. But, to do so,
we must at the same time imagine an understanding diﬀerent from
our own, relative to which—and, what is more, without starting to
attribute an end to it—we may represent the above accord of natural
laws with our power of judgement, which for our understanding is
only thinkable when ends are introduced as a middle term eﬀecting
the connexion, as necessary.
It is, in fact, a distinctive characteristic of our understanding, that
in its cognition—as, for instance, of the cause of a product—it
moves from the analytic universal to the particular, or, in other
words, from concepts to given empirical intuitions. In this process,
therefore, it determines nothing in respect of the multiplicity of the
particular. On the contrary, understanding must wait for the subsumption of the empirical intuition—supposing that the object is a
natural product—under the concept, to furnish this determination
for the faculty of judgement. But now we are also able to form a
notion of an understanding which, not being discursive like ours, but
intuitive, moves from the synthetic universal, or intuition of a whole
as a whole, to the particular—that is to say, from the whole to the
parts. To render possible a deﬁnite form of the whole a contingency
in the synthesis of the parts is not implied by such an understanding
or its representation of the whole. But that is what our understanding requires. It must advance from the parts as the universally conceived principles to diﬀerent possible forms to be subsumed under
the latter as consequences. Its structure is such that we can only
regard a real whole in nature as the eﬀect of the concurrent dynamical forces of the parts. How then may we avoid having to represent
the possibility of the whole as dependent upon the parts in a manner
conformable to our discursive understanding? May we follow what
the standard of the intuitive or archetypal understanding prescribes,
and represent the possibility of the parts as both in their form and
synthesis dependent upon the whole? But the very peculiarity of our
understanding in question prevents this being done in such a way
that the whole contains the source of the possibility of the nexus
of the parts. This would be self-contradictory in knowledge of the
discursive type. But the representation of a whole may contain the

408

236

Critique of Teleological Judgement

source of the possibility of the form of that whole and of the nexus of
the parts which that form involves. But, now, the whole would in that
case be an eﬀect or product the representation of which is looked on as
the cause of its possibility. But the product of a cause whose determining ground is merely the representation of its eﬀect is termed an end.
Hence it follows that it is simply a consequence ﬂowing from the particular character of our understanding that we should represent
products of nature as possible according to a diﬀerent type of causality from that of the physical laws of matter, that is, as only possible
according to ends and ﬁnal causes. In the same way we explain the
fact that this principle does not touch the question of how such
things themselves, even considered as phenomena, are possible on
this mode of production, but only concerns the judging of them that
is possible to our understanding. On this view we see at the same time
why it is that in natural science we are far from being satisﬁed with an
explanation of natural products by means of a causality according to
ends. For in such an explanation all we ask for is a judging of natural generation as adapted to our critical faculty, or reﬂective judgement, instead of one adapted to the things themselves on behalf of
determining judgement. Here it is also quite unnecessary to prove
that an intellectus archetypus like this is possible. It is suﬃcient to
show that we are led to this idea of an intellectus archetypus by contrasting with it our discursive understanding that has need of images
(intellectus ectypus) and noting the contingent character of a faculty of
this form, and that this idea involves nothing self-contradictory.
Now where we consider a material whole and regard it as in point
of form a product resulting from the parts and their powers and
capacities of self-integration (including as parts any foreign material
introduced by the co-operative action of the original parts), what we
represent to ourselves in this way is a mechanical generation of the
whole. But from this view of the generation of a whole we can elicit
no concept of a whole as end—a whole whose intrinsic possibility
emphatically presupposes the idea of a whole as that upon which the
very nature and action of the parts depend. Yet this is the representation which we must form of an organized body. But, as has just
been shown, we are not to conclude from this that the mechanical
generation of an organized body is impossible. For that would
amount to saying that it is impossible, or, in other words, selfcontradictory, for any understanding to form a representation of such

Dialectic of Teleological Judgement

237

a unity in the conjunction of the manifold without also making the
idea of this unity its producing cause, that is, without representing
the production as designed. At the same time this is the conclusion
that we should in fact have to draw were we entitled to look on material beings as things in themselves. For in that case the unity constituting the basis of the possibility of natural formations would only be
the unity of space. But space is not a real ground of the generation of
things. It is only their formal condition—although from the fact that
no part in it can be determined except in relation to the whole (the
representation of which, therefore, underlies the possibility of the
parts) it has some resemblance to the real ground of which we are in
search. But then it is at least possible to regard the material world as
a mere phenomenon, and to think something which is not a phenomenon, namely a thing in itself, as its substrate. And this we may rest
upon a corresponding intellectual intuition, albeit it is not the intuition that we possess. In this way a supersensible real ground,
although for us unknowable, would be procured for nature, and for
the nature of which we ourselves form part. Everything, therefore,
which is necessary in this nature as an object of the senses we should
judge according to mechanical laws. But the accord and unity of the
particular laws and of their resulting subordinate forms, which we
must deem contingent in respect of mechanical laws—these things
which exist in nature as an object of reason, and, indeed, nature in its
entirety as a system, we should also consider in the light of teleological laws. Thus we should estimate nature on two kinds of principles.
The mechanical mode of explanation would not be excluded by the
teleological as if the two principles contradicted one another.
Further, this gives us an insight into what we might doubtless
have easily conjectured independently, but which we should have
found it diﬃcult to assert or prove with certainty. It shows us that
while the principle of a mechanical derivation of natural products
displaying purposiveness is consistent with the teleological principle,
it in no way enables us to dispense with it. We may apply to a thing
which we have to judge as a natural end, that is, to an organized
being, all the laws of mechanical generation known or yet to be discovered, we may even hope to make good progress in such
researches, but we can never get rid of the appeal to a completely
diﬀerent source of generation for the possibility of a product of this
kind, namely that of a causality by ends. It is utterly impossible for

409

238

410

Critique of Teleological Judgement

human reason, or for any ﬁnite reason qualitatively resembling ours,
however much it may surpass it in degree, to hope to understand the
generation even of a blade of grass from mere mechanical causes. For
if judgement ﬁnds the teleological nexus of causes and eﬀects quite
indispensable for the possibility of an object like this, be it only for
the purpose of studying it under the guidance of experience, and if a
ground involving relation to ends and adequate for external objects as
phenomena altogether eludes us, so that we are compelled, although
this ground lies in nature, to look for it in the supersensible substrate
of nature, all possible insight into which is, however, cut oﬀ from us:
it is absolutely impossible for us to obtain any explanation at the hand
of nature itself to account for any synthesis displaying purposiveness.
So by the constitution of our human faculty of knowledge it becomes
necessary to look for the supreme source of this purposiveness in an
original understanding as the cause of the world.

§ 78
The union of the principle of the universal mechanism of matter
with the teleological principle in the technic of nature
It is of inﬁnite importance to reason to keep in view the mechanism
which nature employs in its productions, and to take due account of it
in explaining them, since no insight into the nature of things can be
attained apart from that principle. Even the concession that a supreme
Architect has directly created the forms of nature in the way they have
existed from all time, or has predetermined those which in their course
of development regularly conform to the same type, does not further
our knowledge of nature one whit. The reason is that we are wholly
ignorant of the ideas or mode of agency of such a supreme Being, in
which the principles of the possibility of the natural beings are supposed
to be contained, and so cannot explain nature in this way moving from
above downwards, that is a priori. On the other hand our explanation
would be simply tautological if, relying on the purposiveness found, as
we believe, in the forms of objects of experience, we should set out from
these forms and move from below upwards, that is a posteriori, and with
a view to explaining such purposiveness should appeal to a cause acting
in accordance with ends. We should be cheating reason with mere
words—not to mention the fact that where, by resorting to explanation

Dialectic of Teleological Judgement

239

of this kind, we get lost in the extravagant speculation beyond the reach
of natural science, reason is betrayed into poetic enthusiam, the very
thing which it is its pre-eminent calling to prevent.
On the other hand, it is an equally necessary maxim of reason not
to overlook the principle of ends in the products of nature. For
although this principle does not make the way in which such products originate any more comprehensible to us, yet it is a heuristic
principle for the investigation of the particular laws of nature. And
this remains true even though it be understood that, as we conﬁne
ourselves rigorously to the term natural ends, even where such products manifestly exhibit a designed purposive unity, we do not intend
to make any use of the principle in order to explain nature itself—
that is to say, in speaking of natural ends, pass beyond the bounds of
nature in quest of the source of the possibility of those products.
However, inasmuch as the question of this possibility must be
addressed sooner or later, it is just as necessary to conceive a special
type of causality for it—one not to be found in nature—as to allow
that the mechanical activity of natural causes has its special type. For
the receptivity for diﬀerent forms over and above those which matter
is capable of producing by virtue of such mechanism must be supplemented by a spontaneity of some cause—which cannot, therefore, be
matter—as in its absence no reason can be assigned for those forms.
Of course before reason takes this step it must exercise due caution
and not seek to explain as teleological every technic of nature—
meaning by this a formative capacity of nature which displays (as in
the case of regularly constructed bodies) purposiveness of structure
for our mere apprehension. On the contrary it must continue to
regard such technic as possible on purely mechanical principles. But
to go so far as to exclude the teleological principle, and to want to
keep always to mere mechanism, even where reason, in its investigation into the manner in which natural forms are rendered possible by
their causes, ﬁnds a purposiveness of a character whose relation to a
diﬀerent type of causality is apparent beyond all denial, is equally
unscientiﬁc. It inevitably sends reason on a fantastical and roving
expedition among powers of nature that are only cobwebs of the
brain and quite unthinkable, in just the same way as a merely teleological mode of explanation that pays no heed to the mechanism of
nature would turn reason visionary.

411

240

412

Critique of Teleological Judgement

These two principles are not capable of being applied in conjunction to one and the same thing in nature as co-ordinate truths
available for the explanation or deduction of one thing by or from
another. In other words they are not to be united in that way as dogmatic and constitutive principles aﬀording insight into nature on
behalf of determining judgement. If I suppose, for instance, that a
maggot is to be regarded as a product of the mere mechanism of
matter, that is of a new formative process which a substance brings
about by its own unaided resources when its elements are liberated
as the result of decomposition, I cannot then turn round and derive
the same product from the same substance as a causality that acts
from ends. Conversely, if I suppose that this product is a natural
end, I am precluded from relying on its mechanical generation, or
adopting such generation as a constitutive principle for judging the
product in respect of its possibility, and thus uniting the two principles. For each mode of explanation excludes the other—even supposing that objectively both grounds of the possibility of such a
product rest on a single foundation, provided this foundation was not
what we were thinking of. The principle which is to make possible
the compatibility of the above pair of principles, as principles to
be followed in judging nature, must be placed in what lies beyond
both (and consequently beyond the possible empirical representation
of nature), but in what nevertheless contains the ground of the
representation of nature. It must, in other words, be placed in the
supersensible, and to this each of the two modes of explanation must
be referred. Now the only concept we can have of the supersensible
is the indeterminate conception of a ground that makes possible the
judging of nature according to empirical laws. Beyond this we cannot
go: by no predicate can we determine this concept any further.
Hence it follows that the union of the two principles cannot rest on
one basis of explanation setting out in so many terms how a product
is possible on given laws so as to satisfy determining judgement, but
can only rest on a single basis of exposition elucidating this possibility
for reﬂective judgement. For explanation means derivation from a
principle, which must, therefore, be capable of being clearly cognized and speciﬁed. Now the principle of the mechanism of nature
and that of its causality according to ends, when applied to one and
the same product of nature, must cohere in a single higher principle

Dialectic of Teleological Judgement

241

and ﬂow from it as their common source, for if this were not so they
could not both enter consistently into the same survey of nature. But
if this principle, which is objectively common to both, and which,
therefore, justiﬁes the association of its dependent maxims of natural
research, is of such a kind that, while it can be indicated, it can never
be deﬁnitely cognized or clearly speciﬁed for employment in particular cases as they arise, then no explanation can be extracted from such
a principle. There can be no clear and deﬁnite derivation, in other
words, of the possibility of a natural product, as one possible on those
two heterogeneous principles. Now the principle common to the
mechanical derivation, on the one hand, and the teleological, on the
other, is the supersensible, which we must introduce as the basis of
nature as phenomenon. But of this we are unable from a theoretical
point of view to form the slightest positive determinate concept.
How, therefore, in the light of the supersensible as a principle, nature
in its particular laws constitutes a system for us, and one capable of
being cognized as possible both on the principle of production from
physical causes and on that of ﬁnal causes, is a matter which does not
admit of any explanation. All we can say is that if it happens that
objects of nature present themselves, whose possibility is incapable
of being conceived by us on the principle of mechanism—which
always has a claim upon a natural being—unless we rely on teleological principles, it is then to be presumed that we may conﬁdently
study natural laws on lines following both principles—according as
the possibility of the natural product is cognizable to our understanding from one or other principle—without being disturbed by
the apparent conﬂict that arises between the principles upon which
our judging of the product is formed. For we are at least assured of the
possibility of both being reconciled, even objectively, in a single principle, inasmuch as they deal with phenomena, and these presuppose
a supersensible ground.
We have seen that the principles both of nature’s mechanical operation and of its teleological or designed technique, as bearing
upon one and the same product and its possibility, may alike be subordinated to a common higher principle of nature in its particular
laws. Nevertheless, this principle being transcendent, the narrow
capacity of our understanding is such that the above subordination
does not enable us to unite the two principles in the explanation of the

413

242

414

Critique of Teleological Judgement

same natural generation, even where, as is the case with organized
substances, the intrinsic possibility of the product is only intelligible
by means of a causality according to ends. Hence we must keep to the
statement of the principle of teleology above given. So we say that by
the constitution of our human understanding no causes but those
acting by design can be adopted as grounds of the possibility of
organized beings in nature, and the mere mechanism of nature is
quite insuﬃcient to explain these its products; and we add that this
implies no desire to decide anything by that principle in respect of
the possibility of such things themselves.
This principle, we mean to say, is only a maxim of reﬂective, not
of determining judgement. Hence, it is only valid subjectively for
us, not objectively to explain the possibility of things of this kind
themselves—in which things themselves both modes of generation
might easily spring consistently from one and the same ground.
Furthermore, unless the teleologically-conceived mode of generation
were supplemented by a concept of a concomitantly presented mechanism of nature, such genesis could not be judged as a product of
nature at all. Hence, we see that the above maxim immediately
involves the necessity of a union of both principles in the judging of
things as natural ends. But this union is not to be directed to substituting one principle, either wholly or in part, in the place of the
other. For in the room of what is regarded, by us at least, as only possible by design, mechanism cannot be assumed, and in the room of
what is cognized as necessary in accordance with mechanism, such
contingency as would require an end as its determining ground cannot
be assumed. On the contrary we can only subordinate one to the other,
namely mechanism to designed technique. And on the transcendental principle of the purposiveness of nature this may readily be done.
For where ends are thought as the sources of the possibility of
certain things, means have also to be supposed. Now the law of the
eﬃcient causality of a means, considered in its own right, requires
nothing that presupposes an end, and, consequently, may be both
mechanical and yet a subordinate cause of designed eﬀects. Hence,
looking only to organic products of nature, but still more if,
impressed by the endless multitude of such products, we go on and
adopt, at least on an allowable hypothesis, the principle of design,
in the connexion of natural causes following particular laws, as a

Dialectic of Teleological Judgement

243

universal principle of reﬂective judgement in respect of the whole of
nature, namely the world, we may imagine a great and even universal interconnexion of mechanical and teleological laws in the generative processes of nature. Here we neither confuse nor transpose the
principles upon which such processes are judged. For in a teleological judgement, even if the form which the matter assumes is judged
as only possible by design, yet the matter itself, considered as to its
nature, may also be subordinated, conformably to mechanical laws,
as means to the represented end. At the same time, inasmuch as the
basis of this compatibility lies in what is neither the one nor the
other, neither mechanism nor purposive nexus, but is the supersensible substrate of nature which is hidden from our view, for our
human reason the two modes of representing the possibility of such
objects are not to be fused into one. On the contrary, we are unable
to judge their possibility otherwise than as one grounded in accordance with the nexus of ﬁnal causes upon a supreme understanding.
Thus the teleological mode of explanation is in no way prejudiced.
But now it is an open question, and for our reason must always
remain an open question, how much the mechanism of nature contributes as means to each ﬁnal design in nature. Further, having
regard to the above-mentioned intelligible principle of the possibility
of a nature in general, we may even assume that nature is possible in
all respects on both kinds of law, the physical laws and those of ﬁnal
causes, as universally consonant laws, although we are quite unable
to see how this is so. Hence, we are ignorant how far the mechanical
mode of explanation possible for us may penetrate. This much only
is certain, that no matter what progress we may succeed in making
with it, it must still always remain inadequate for things that we have
once recognized to be natural ends. Therefore, by the constitution of
our understanding we must subordinate such mechanical grounds,
one and all, to a teleological principle.
Now this is the source of a privilege and, owing to the importance
of the study of nature on the lines of the principle of mechanism for
the theoretical employment of our reason, the source also of a duty.
We may and should explain all products and events of nature, even
the most purposive, so far as lies in our power, on mechanical lines—
and it is impossible for us to assign the limits of our powers when
conﬁned to the pursuit of inquiries of this kind. But in so doing we

415

244

Critique of Teleological Judgement

must never lose sight of the fact that among such products there are
those which we cannot even subject to investigation except under the
conception of an end of reason. These, if we respect the essential
nature of our reason, we are obliged, despite those mechanical causes,
to subordinate in the last resort to a causality according to ends.

appendix
Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

416

§ 79
Whether teleology must be treated as a branch of natural science
Every science must have its deﬁnite position in the complete encyclopedia of the sciences. If it is a philosophical science its position must be
assigned to it either in the theoretical or the practical division. Further,
if its place is in the theoretical division, then the position assigned to it
must either be in natural science—which is its proper position when it
considers things capable of being objects of experience—consequently
in physics proper, psychology, or cosmology, or else in theology—as
the science of the original source of the world as the sum of all objects
of experience.
Now the question arises: What position does teleology deserve? Is it
a branch of natural science, properly so called, or of theology? A branch
of one or the other it must be; for no science can belong to the transition from one to the other, because this only signiﬁes the articulation or
the organization of the system and not a position in it.
That it does not form a constituent part of theology, although the
use that may there be made of it is most important, is evident from the
nature of the case. For its objects are the productions of nature and
their cause; and, although it points to this cause as a ground residing
beyond and above nature, namely a Divine Author, yet it does not do
so for determining judgement. It only points to this cause in the interests of reﬂective judgement engaged in surveying nature, its purpose
being to guide our judging of the things in the world by means of the
idea of such a ground, as a regulative principle, in a manner adapted
to our human understanding.
But just as little does it appear to form a part of natural science. For
this science requires determining, and not merely reﬂective, principles for the purpose of assigning objective grounds of natural eﬀects.
As a matter of fact, also, the theory of nature, or the mechanical explanation of its phenomena by eﬃcient causes, is in no way helped by
considering them in the light of the correlation of ends. The exposition

417

246

Critique of Teleological Judgement

of the ends pursued by nature in its products, so far as such ends form
a system according to teleological concepts, belongs strictly speaking
only to a description of nature that follows a particular guiding thread.
Here reason does ﬁne work, and work that is full of practical purposiveness from various points of view. But it gives no information whatever as to the origin and intrinsic possibility of these forms. Yet this is
what specially concerns the theoretical science of nature.
Teleology, therefore, in the form of a science, is not a branch of
doctrine at all, but only of critique, and of the critique of a particular
cognitive faculty, namely that of judgement. But it does contain a priori
principles, and to that extent it may, and in fact must, specify the
method by which nature has to be judged according to the principle
of ﬁnal causes. In this way the science of its methodical application
exerts at least a negative inﬂuence upon the procedure to be adopted
in the theoretical science of nature. It also in the same way aﬀects the
metaphysical bearing which this science may have on theology, when
the former is treated as a propaedeutic to the latter.

§ 80
The necessary subordination of the principle of mechanism to the
teleological principle in the explanation of a thing regarded as a
natural end

418

Our right to aim at an explanation of all natural products on simply
mechanical lines is in itself quite unrestricted. But the constitution of
our understanding, as engaged upon things in the shape of natural
ends, is such that our power of meeting all demands from the unaided
resources of mechanical explanation is not only very limited, but is
also circumscribed within clearly marked bounds. For by a principle
of judgement that adopts the above procedure alone nothing whatever can be accomplished in the way of explaining natural ends. For
this reason our judging of such products must also at all times be
subordinated to a teleological principle.
Hence there is reason, and indeed merit, in pursuing the mechanism of nature for the purpose of explaining natural products so far as
this can be done with probable success, and in fact never abandoning
this attempt on the ground that it is intrinsically impossible to encounter
the purposiveness of nature along this road, but only on the ground that
it is impossible for us as human beings. For in order to succeed along

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

247

this line of investigation we should require an intuition diﬀerent from
our sensuous intuition and a determinate knowledge of the intelligible
substrate of nature—a substrate from which we could show the reason
of the very mechanism of phenomena in their particular laws. But
this wholly surpasses our capacity.
So where it is established beyond question that the concept of
a natural end applies to things, as in the case of organized beings, if
the investigator of nature is not simply to waste his labour, he must
always in judging them accept some original organization or other as
fundamental. He must consider that this organization avails itself of the
very mechanism above mentioned for the purpose of producing other
organic forms, or for evolving new structures from those given—such
new structures, however, always issuing from and in accordance with
the end in question.
It is praiseworthy to employ a comparative anatomy and go through
the vast creation of organized natural beings in order to see if there is
not discoverable in it something resembling a system, especially with
respect to the principle of their productions. For otherwise we should
be obliged to content ourselves with the mere principle of judging—
which tells us nothing that gives any insight into the production of such
beings—and to abandon in despair all claim to insight into nature in
this ﬁeld. When we consider the agreement of so many genera of animals in a certain common schema, which apparently underlies not
only the structure of their bones, but also the arrangement of their
remaining parts, and when we ﬁnd here the wonderful simplicity of
the original plan, which has been able to produce such an immense
variety of species by the shortening of one part and the lengthening
of another, by the involution of this part and the evolution of that,
there gleams upon the mind a ray of hope, however faint, that the principle of the mechanism of nature, apart from which there can be no
natural science at all, may yet enable us to arrive at some explanation
in the case of organic life. This analogy of forms, which in all their
diﬀerences seem to be produced in accordance with a common type,
strengthens the suspicion that they have an actual kinship due to descent
from a common parent. This we might trace in the gradual approximation of one animal species to another, from that in which the principle of ends seems best authenticated, namely from man, back to the
polyp, and from this back even to mosses and lichens, and ﬁnally to
the lowest perceivable stage of nature. Here we come to crude matter;

419

248

420

Critique of Teleological Judgement

and from this, and the forces which it exerts in accordance with mechanical laws (laws resembling those by which it acts in the formation of
crystals) seems to be developed the whole technic of nature which, in
the case of organized beings, is so incomprehensible to us that we feel
obliged to imagine a diﬀerent principle for its explanation.
Here the archaeologist of nature is at liberty to go back to the traces
that remain of nature’s earliest revolutions, and, appealing to all he
knows of or can conjecture about its mechanism, to trace the genesis of
that great family of living things (for it must be pictured as a family if
there is to be any foundation for the consistently coherent aﬃnity
mentioned). He can suppose that the womb of mother earth as it ﬁrst
emerged, like a huge animal, from its chaotic state, gave birth to creatures whose form displayed less purposiveness, and that these again
bore others which adapted themselves more perfectly to their native
surroundings and their relations to each other, until this womb,
becoming rigid and ossiﬁed, restricted its birth to deﬁnite species incapable of further modiﬁcation, and the multiplicity of forms was ﬁxed as
it stood when the operation of that fruitful formative power had
ceased.—Yet, for all that, he is obliged eventually to attribute to this
universal mother an organization suitably constituted with a view to all
these forms of life, for unless he does so, the possibility of the purposive form of the products of the animal and plant kingdoms is quite
unthinkable.1 But when he does attribute all this to nature he has only
pushed the explanation a stage farther back. He cannot pretend to have
made the genesis of those two kingdoms intelligible independently of
the condition of ﬁnal causes.
1 An hypothesis of this kind may be called a daring venture on the part of reason; and
there are probably few even among the most acute scientists to whose minds it has not
sometimes occurred. For it cannot be said to be absurd, like the generatio aequivoca, which
means the generation of an organized being from crude inorganic matter. It never ceases
to be generatio univoca in the widest acceptation of the word, as it only implies the generation of something organic from something else that is also organic, although, within the
class of organic beings, diﬀering speciﬁcally from it. It would be as if we supposed that certain water animals transformed themselves by degrees into marsh animals, and from these
after some generations into land animals. In the judgement of plain reason there is nothing a priori self-contradictory in this. But experience oﬀers no example of it. On the contrary, as far as experience goes, all generation known to us is generatio homonyma. It is
not merely univoca in contradistinction to generation from an unorganized substance,
but it brings forth a product which in its very organization is of like kind with that which
produced it, and a generatio heteronyma is not met with anywhere within the range of our
experience.

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

249

Even as regards the alteration which certain individuals of the
organized genera contingently undergo, where we ﬁnd that the character thus altered is transmitted and taken up into the generative power,
we can form no other plausible judgement of it than that it is an occasional development of a purposive capacity originally present in the
species with a view to the preservation of the kind. For in the complete
inner purposiveness of an organized being, the generation of its like is
intimately associated with the condition that nothing shall be taken up
into the generative force which does not also belong, in such a system
of ends, to one of its undeveloped original capacities. Once we depart
from this principle we cannot know with certainty whether many
constituents of the form at present found in a species may not be of
equally contingent and purposeless origin, and the principle of teleology, that nothing in an organized being which is preserved in the
propagation of the species should be judged as devoid of purposiveness, would be made very unreliable and could only hold good for the
parent stock, to which our knowledge does not reach.
In reply to those who feel obliged to adopt a teleological principle of
critical judgement, that is an architectonic understanding in the case of
all such natural ends, Hume raises the objection* that one might ask
with equal justice how such an understanding is itself possible. By this
he means that one may also ask how it is possible that there should be
such a teleological coincidence in one being of the manifold faculties
and properties presupposed in the very concept of an understanding
which also possesses a productive power. But there is nothing in this
point. For the whole diﬃculty that besets the question as to the
genesis of a thing that involves ends and that is solely comprehensible by their means rests upon the demand for unity in the source of
the synthesis of the multiplicity of externally existing elements in this
product. For, if this source is laid in the understanding of a productive cause regarded as a simple substance, the above question, as a
teleological problem, is abundantly answered, whereas if the cause is
merely sought in matter, as an aggregate of many externally existing
substances, the unity of principle requisite for the intrinsically purposive form of its complex structures is wholly absent. The autocracy
of matter in productions that for our understanding are only conceivable as ends, is a word with no meaning.
This is the reason why those who look for a supreme ground of the
possibility of the objectively purposive forms of matter, and yet do

421

250

Critique of Teleological Judgement

not concede an understanding to this ground, choose nevertheless to
make the world-whole either an all-embracing substance (pantheism), or
else—what is only the preceding in more deﬁned form—a complex of
many determinations inhering in a single simple substance (Spinozism).
Their object is to derive from this substance that unity of source which
all purposiveness presupposes. And in fact, thanks to their purely ontological concept of a simple substance, they really do something to satisfy one condition of the problem—namely, that of the unity implied
in the reference to an end. But they have nothing to say on the subject of the other condition, namely the relation of the substance to its
consequence regarded as an end, this relation being what gives to
their ontological ground the more precise determination which the
problem demands. The result is that they in no way answer the entire
problem. Also for our understanding it remains absolutely unanswerable except on the following terms. First, the original source of things
must be pictured by us as a simple substance. Then its attribute, as
simple substance, in its relation to the speciﬁc character of the natural
forms whose source it is—the character, namely, of purposive unity—
must be pictured as the attribute of an intelligent substance. Lastly,
the relation of this intelligent substance to the natural forms must,
owing to the contingency which we ﬁnd in everything which we imagine to be possible only as an end, be pictured as one of causality.

§ 81
The association of mechanism with the teleological principle which
we apply to the explanation of a natural end considered as a
product of nature

422

We have seen from the preceding section that the mechanism of nature is
not suﬃcient to enable us to conceive the possibility of an organized
being, but that it must ultimately be subordinated to a cause acting by
design—or, at least, that the type of our cognitive faculty is such that
we must conceive it to be so subordinated. But just as little can the
mere teleological source of a being of this kind enable us to consider
and to judge it as at once an end and a product of nature. With that
teleological source we must further associate the mechanism of nature
as a sort of instrument of a cause acting by design and to whose ends
nature is subordinated even in its mechanical laws. The possibility

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

251

of such a union of two completely diﬀerent types of causality, namely that
of nature in its universal conformity to law and that of an idea which
restricts nature to a particular form of which nature, as nature, is in no
way the source, is something which our reason does not comprehend.
For it resides in the supersensible substrate of nature, of which we are
unable to make any deﬁnite aﬃrmation, further than that it is the selfsubsistent being of which we know merely the phenomenon. Yet, for all
that, this principle remains in full and undiminished force, that everything which we assume to form part of phenomenal nature and to be its
product must be thought as connected with nature according to
mechanical laws. For, apart from this type of causality, organized beings,
although they are ends of nature, would not be natural products.
Now supposing we adopt the teleological principle of the production
of organized beings, as indeed we cannot avoid doing, we may base
their internally purposive form either on the occasionalism or on the preestablishment of the cause. According to occasionalism the Supreme
Cause of the world would directly supply the organic formation, stamped
with the impress of its own idea, on the occasion of each impregnation,
to the commingling substances united in the generative process. On the
system of pre-establishment the Supreme Cause would only endow the
original products of its wisdom with the inherent capacity by means
of which an organized being produces another after its own kind, and
the species preserves its continuous existence, whilst the loss of individuals is ever being repaired through the agency of a nature that
simultaneously labours towards their destruction. If the occasionalism of the production of organized beings is assumed, all co-operation
of nature in the process is entirely lost, and no room is left for the
exercise of reason in judging of the possibility of products of this kind.
So we may take it for granted that no one will embrace this system
who cares anything for philosophy.
Again the system of pre-establishment may take either of two forms.
Thus it treats every organized being produced from one of its own
kind either as its educt or as its product. The system which regards the
generations as educts is termed that of individual preformation, or,
sometimes, the theory of evolution; that which regards them as products
is called the system of epigenesis. The latter may also be called the
system of generic preformation, inasmuch as it regards the productive
capacity of the parents, in respect of the inner purposive tendency

423

252

424

Critique of Teleological Judgement

that would be part of their original stock, and, therefore, the speciﬁc
form, as still having been virtualiter preformed. On this statement the
opposite theory of individual preformation might also more appropriately be called the theory of involution (or encasement).
The advocates of the theory of evolution exclude all individuals from
the formative force of nature, for the purpose of deriving them directly
from the hand of the creator. Yet they would not venture to describe
the occurrence on the lines of the hypothesis of occasionalism, so as to
make the impregnation an idle formality, which takes place whenever
a supreme intelligent cause of the world has made up his mind to form
a foetus directly with his own hand and relegate to the mother the
mere task of developing and nourishing it. They would avow adherence
to the theory of preformation; as if it were not a matter of indiﬀerence
whether a supernatural origin of such forms is allowed to take place at
the start or in the course of the world-process. They fail to see that in
fact a whole host of supernatural contrivances would be spared by acts
of creation as occasion arose, which would be required if an embryo
formed at the beginning of the world had to be preserved from the
destructive forces of nature, and had to keep safe and sound all through
the long ages till the day arrived for its development, and also that an
incalculably greater number of such preformed entities would be created than would be destined ever to develop, and that all those would
be so many creations thus rendered superﬂuous and in vain. Yet they
would like to leave nature some role in these operations, so as not to
lapse into an unmitigated hyperphysics that can dispense with all explanation on naturalistic lines. Of course they would still remain unshaken
in their hyperphysics; so much so that they would discover even in
miscarriages — which yet cannot possibly be deemed ends of
nature—a marvellous purposiveness, even if it be directed to no
better end than that of being a purposiveless purposiveness intended
to set some chance anatomist at his wit’s end, and make him fall on his
knees with admiration. However, they would be absolutely unable to
make the generation of hybrids ﬁt in with the system of preformation,
but would be compelled to allow to the seed of the male creature, to
which in other cases they had denied all but the mechanical property
of serving as the ﬁrst means of nourishment for the embryo, a further
and additional formative force directed to ends. And yet they would
not concede this force to either of the two parents when dealing with
the complete product of two creatures of the same genus.

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

253

As against this, even supposing we failed to see the enormous advantage on the side of the advocate of epigenesis in the matter of empirical
evidence in support of this theory, still reason would antecedently be
strongly prepossessed in favour of this line of explanation. For as
regards things the possibility of whose origin can only be represented
to the mind according to a causality of ends, epigenesis nonetheless
regards nature as at least itself productive in respect of the continuation
of the process, and not as merely unfolding something. Thus with the
least possible expenditure of the supernatural it entrusts to nature
the explanation of all steps subsequent to the original beginning. But
it refrains from determining anything as to this original beginning,
which is what bafﬂes all the attempts of physics, no matter what chain
of causes it adopts.
No one has rendered more valuable services in connexion with this
theory of epigenesis than Herr Hofr. Blumenbach.* This is as true of
what he has done towards establishing the correct principles of its
application—partly by setting due bounds to an overly free employment of it—as it is of his contributions to its proof. He makes organic
substance the starting-point for physical explanation of these formations. For to suppose that crude matter, obeying mechanical laws,
was originally its own architect, that life could have sprung up from the
nature of what is void of life, and matter have spontaneously adopted
the form of a self-maintaining purposiveness, he justly declares to be
contrary to reason. But at the same time he leaves to the mechanism of
nature, in its subordination to this inscrutable principle of a primordial organization, an indeterminable yet also unmistakable function.
The capacity of matter here required he terms—in contradistinction to
the simply mechanical formative force universally residing in it—in the
case of an organized body a formative impulse, standing, so to speak,
under the higher guidance and direction of the above principle.

§ 82
The teleological system in the extrinsic relations of organisms
By extrinsic purposiveness I mean the purposiveness that exists where
one thing in nature subserves another as means to an end. Now even
things which do not possess any intrinsic purposiveness, and whose
possibility does not imply any, such as earth, air, water, and the like,
may nevertheless extrinsically, that is in relation to other beings, be

425

254

426

Critique of Teleological Judgement

very well adapted to ends. But then those other beings must in all
cases be organized, that is be natural ends, for unless they are ends
the former could not be considered means. Thus water, air, and earth
cannot be regarded as means to the emergence of mountains. For
intrinsically there is nothing in mountains that calls for a source of
their possibility according to ends. Hence their cause can never be
referred to such a source and represented under the predicate of a
means subservient thereto.
Extrinsic purposiveness is an entirely diﬀerent concept from that
of intrinsic purposiveness, the latter being connected with the possibility of an object irrespective of whether its actuality is itself an end
or not. In the case of an organism we may further inquire: For what
end does it exist? But we can hardly do so in the case of things in which
we recognize the simple eﬀect of the mechanism of nature. The reason
is that in the case of organisms we have already represented to ourselves a causality according to ends—a creative understanding—to
account for their intrinsic purposiveness, and have referred this
active faculty to its determining ground, the design. One extrinsic
purposiveness is the single exception—and it is one intimately bound
up with the intrinsic purposiveness of an organization. It does not
leave open the question as to the ulterior end for which the nature so
organized must have existed, and yet it lies in the extrinsic relation
of a means to an end. This is the organization of the two sexes in their
mutual relation with a view to the propagation of their species. For
here we may always ask, just as in the case of an individual: Why was
it necessary for such a pair to exist? The answer is: In this pair we have
what ﬁrst forms an organizing whole, though not an organized whole
in a single body.
Now when it is asked to what end a thing exists, the answer may take
one or other of two forms. It may be said that its existence and generation have no relation whatever to a cause acting designedly. Its origin is
then always understood to be derived from the mechanism of nature.
Or it may be said that its existence, being that of a contingent natural
entity, has some ground or other involving design. And this is a
thought which it is diﬃcult for us to separate from the concept of
a thing that is organized. For inasmuch as we are compelled to rest
its intrinsic possibility on the causality of ﬁnal causes and an idea
underlying this causality, we cannot but think that the real existence
of this product is also an end. For where the representation of an

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

255

eﬀect is at the same time the ground determining an intelligent eﬃcient
cause to its production, the eﬀect so represented is termed an end. Here,
therefore, we may either say that the end of the real existence of a natural being of this kind is inherent in itself, that is, that it is not merely
an end, but also a ﬁnal end; or we may say that the ﬁnal end lies outside it in other natural beings, that is, that its real existence, which is
adapted to ends, is not itself a ﬁnal end, but is necessitated by its
being at the same time a means.
But if we go through the whole of nature we do not ﬁnd in it, as
nature, any being capable of laying claim to the distinction of being the
ﬁnal end of creation. In fact it may even be proved a priori, that what
might do perhaps as an ultimate end for nature, endowing it with any
conceivable qualities or properties we choose, could nevertheless in
its character of a natural thing never be a ﬁnal end.
Looking to the vegetable kingdom we might at ﬁrst be induced by
the boundless fertility with which it spreads itself abroad upon almost
every soil to think that it should be regarded as a mere product of the
mechanism which nature displays in its formations in the mineral
kingdom. But a more intimate knowledge of its indescribably wise
organization precludes us from entertaining this view, and drives us
to ask: For what purpose do these forms of life exist? Suppose we
reply: For the animal kingdom, which is thus provided with the means
of sustenance, so that it has been enabled to spread over the face of
the earth in such a manifold variety of genera. The question again
arises: For what purpose then do these herbivores exist? The answer
would be something like this: For the carnivores, which are only able
to live on what itself has animal life. At last we come down to the
question: What is the end and purpose of these and all the preceding
natural kingdoms? For man, we say, and the multifarious uses to
which his intelligence teaches him to put all these forms of life. He is
the ultimate end of creation here upon earth, because he is the one
and only being upon it that is able to form a concept of ends, and from
an aggregate of things purposively fashioned to construct by the aid
of his reason a system of ends.
We might also follow the chevalier Linné* and take the seemingly
opposite course. Thus we might say: The herbivorous animals exist
for the purpose of checking the profuse growth of the vegetable kingdom by which many species of that kingdom would be choked; the
carnivores for the purpose of setting bounds to the voracity of the

427

256

428

Critique of Teleological Judgement

herbivores; and ﬁnally man exists so that by pursuing the latter and
reducing their numbers a certain equilibrium between the productive
and destructive forces of nature may be established. So, on this view,
however much man might in a certain relation be judged as end, in a
diﬀerent relation he would in turn only rank as a means.
If we adopt the principle of an objective purposiveness in the manifold variety of the speciﬁc forms of terrestrial life and in their extrinsic
relations to one another as beings with a structure adapted to ends, it is
only rational to go on and imagine that in this extrinsic relation there is
also a certain organization and a system of the whole kingdom of
nature following ﬁnal causes. But experience seems here to give the
lie to the maxim of reason, more especially as regards an ultimate end
of nature—an end which nevertheless is necessary to the possibility of
such a system, and which we can only place in man. For, so far from
making man, regarded as one of the many animal species, an ultimate
end, nature has no more exempted him from its destructive than from
its productive forces, nor has it made the smallest exception to its subjection of everything to a mechanism of forces devoid of an end.
The ﬁrst thing that would have to be expressly appointed in a system
ordered with a view to a purposive whole of natural beings upon the
earth would be their habitat—the soil or the element upon or in which
they are intended to thrive. But a more intimate knowledge of the
nature of this basic condition of all organic production shows no
trace of any causes but those acting altogether without design, and in
fact tending towards destruction rather than calculated to promote
genesis of forms, order, and ends. Land and sea not only contain
memorials of mighty primeval disasters that have overtaken both them
and all their living forms, but their entire structure—the strata of the
land and the coastlines of the sea—has all the appearance of being
the outcome of the wild and all-subduing forces of a nature working
in a state of chaos. However wisely the conﬁguration, elevation and slope
of the land may now seem to be adapted for the reception of water from
the air, for the subterranean channels of the springs that well up
between the diverse layers of earth (suitable for various products) and
for the course of the rivers, yet a closer investigation of them shows
that they have resulted simply as the eﬀect partly of volcanic eruptions, partly of ﬂoods, or even of invasions of the ocean. And this is
not only true as regards the genesis of this conﬁguration, but more
particularly of its subsequent transformation, attended with the

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

257

disappearance of its primitive organic productions.2 If now the abode
for all these forms of life—the lap of the land and the bosom of the
deep—points to none but a wholly undesigned mechanical generation,
how can we, or what right have we to ask for or to maintain a diﬀerent
origin for these latter products? And even if man, as the most minute
examination of the remains of those devastations of nature seems, in
Camper’s judgement,* to prove, was not caught up in such revolutions, yet his dependence upon the remaining forms of terrestrial life
is such that, if a mechanism of nature whose power overrides these
others is admitted, he must be regarded as included within its scope,
although his intelligence, to a large extent at least, has been able to save
him from its work of destruction.
But this argument seems to go beyond what it was intended to
prove. For it would seem to show not merely that man could not be an
ultimate end of nature or, for the same reason, the aggregate of the
organized things of terrestrial nature be a system of ends, but that even
the products of nature previously deemed to be natural ends could
have no other origin than the mechanism of nature.
But, then, we must bear in mind the results of the solution above
given of the antinomy of the principles of the mechanical and teleological generation of organic natural beings. These principles, as we
there saw, are merely principles of reﬂective judgement in respect of
formative nature and its particular laws, the key to whose systematic
correlation is not in our possession. They tell us nothing deﬁnite as
to the origin of the things in their own intrinsic nature. They only
assert that by the constitution of our understanding and our reason
we are unable to conceive the origin in the case of beings of this kind
otherwise than in the light of ﬁnal causes. The utmost persistence
possible, even a boldness, is allowed us in our endeavours to explain
them on mechanical lines. More than that, we are even summoned by
2
If the name of natural history, now that it has once been adopted, is to continue to
be used for the description of nature, we may give the name of archaeology of nature, as
contrasted with art, to that which the former literally indicates, namely an account of the
bygone or ancient state of the earth—a matter on which, though we dare not hope for any
certainty, we have good ground for conjecture. Fossil remains would be objects for the
archaeology of nature, just as rudely cut stones, and things of that kind, would be for the
archaeology of art. For, as work is actually being done in this department, under the name
of a theory of the earth, steadily though, as we might expect, slowly, this name would not
be given to a purely imaginary study of nature, but to one to which nature itself invites
and summons us.

429

258

Critique of Teleological Judgement

reason to do so, albeit we know we can never succeed with such an
explanation—not because there is an inherent inconsistency between
the mechanical generation and an origin according to ends, but for
subjective reasons involved in the particular type and limitations of our
understanding. Lastly, we saw that the reconciliation of the two modes
of representing the possibility of nature might easily lie in the supersensible principle of nature, both external and internal. For the mode
of representation based on ﬁnal causes is only a subjective condition
of the exercise of our reason in cases where it is not seeking to know the
proper judgement to form of objects arranged merely as phenomena,
but is bent rather on referring these phenomena, principles and all,
to their supersensible substrate, for the purpose of recognizing the
possibility of certain laws of their unity, which are incapable of being
represented by the mind otherwise than by means of ends (of which
reason also possesses examples of the supersensuous type).

§ 83
The ultimate end of nature as a teleological system

430

We have shown in the preceding section that, looking to principles of
reason, there is ample ground—for reﬂective, though not of course
for determining, judgement—for letting us judge man as not merely
a natural end, such as all organized beings are, but as the being upon
this earth who is the ultimate end of nature, and the one in relation to
whom all other natural things constitute a system of ends. What now is
the end in man, and the end which, as such, is intended to be promoted
by means of his connexion with nature? If this end is something which
must be found in man himself, it must either be of such a kind that
man himself may be satisﬁed by means of nature and its beneﬁcence,
or else it is the aptitude and skill for all manner of ends for which he may
employ nature both external and internal. The former end of nature
would be the happiness of man, the latter his culture.
The conception of happiness is not one which man abstracts more
or less from his instincts and so derives from the animality within him.
It is, on the contrary, a mere idea of a state, and one to which he seeks
to make his actual state of being adequate under purely empirical
conditions—an impossible task. He projects this idea himself, and,
thanks to his understanding and its complex relations with imagination and the senses, projects it in such diﬀerent ways, and even alters

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

259

his concept so often, that even if nature were a complete slave to his free
power of choice, it would nevertheless be utterly unable to adopt any
deﬁnite, universal and ﬁxed law by which to accommodate itself to
this ﬂuctuating concept and so bring itself into accord with the end
that each individual arbitrarily sets before himself. But even if we
sought to reduce this concept to the level of the true wants of nature
in which our species is in complete and fundamental accord, or,
trying the other alternative, sought to increase to the highest level
man’s skill in accomplishing his imagined ends, nevertheless what
man means by happiness, and what in fact constitutes his peculiar
ultimate natural end, as opposed to the end of freedom, would never
be attained by him. For his own nature is not so constituted as to rest
or be satisﬁed in any possession or enjoyment whatever. Then external nature is far from having made a particular favourite of man or
from having preferred him to all other animals as the object of its
beneﬁcence. For we see that in its destructive operations—plague,
famine, ﬂood, cold, attacks from animals great and small, and all such
things—it has as little spared him as any other animal. But, besides
all this, the discord of inner natural tendencies betrays him into further misfortunes of his own invention, and reduces other members of
his species, through the oppression of lordly power, the barbarism of
wars, and the like, to such misery, while he himself does all he can to
work destruction on his race, that, even with the utmost goodwill on the
part of external nature, its end, supposing it were directed to the happiness of our species, would never be attained in a system of terrestrial
nature, because our own nature is not capable of it. Man, therefore,
is always but a link in the chain of natural ends. True, he is a principle
in respect of many ends to which nature seems to have predetermined
him, seeing that he makes himself so; but, nevertheless, he is also a
means towards the preservation of the purposiveness in the mechanism of the remaining members. As the single being upon earth that
possesses understanding, and, consequently, a capacity for setting
before himself ends of his deliberate choice, he is certainly titular
lord of nature, and, supposing we regard nature as a teleological
system, he is born to be its ultimate end. But this is always on the terms
that he has the intelligence and the will to give to it and to himself such
a reference to ends as can be self-suﬃcing independently of nature,
and, consequently, a ﬁnal end. Such an end, however, must not be
sought in nature.

431

260

432

Critique of Teleological Judgement

But, where in man, at any rate, are we to place this ultimate end of
nature? To discover this we must seek out what nature can supply for
the purpose of preparing him for what he himself must do in order to
be a ﬁnal end, and we must segregate it from all ends whose possibility rests upon conditions that man can only await at the hand of nature.
Earthly happiness is an end of the latter kind. It is understood to
mean the sum of all possible human ends attainable through nature
whether in man or external to him. In other words it is the material substance of all his earthly ends and what, if he converts it into his entire
end, renders him incapable of positing a ﬁnal end for his own existence
and of harmonizing therewith. Therefore of all his ends in nature, we
are left only with a formal, subjective condition, that, namely, of the
aptitude for setting ends before himself at all, and, independent of
nature in his power of determining ends, of employing nature as a
means in accordance with the maxims of his free ends generally. This
alone remains as what nature can eﬀect relative to the ﬁnal end that
lies outside it, and as what may therefore be regarded as its ultimate
end. The production in a rational being of an aptitude for any ends
whatever of his own choosing, consequently of the aptitude of a being
in his freedom, is culture. Hence it is only culture that can be the ultimate end which we have cause to attribute to nature in respect of the
human race. His individual happiness on earth, and, we may say, the
mere fact that he is the chief instrument for instituting order and
harmony in non-rational external nature, are ruled out.
But not every form of culture can ﬁll the oﬃce of this ultimate end
of nature. Skill is a culture that is certainly the principal subjective condition of the aptitude for the furthering of ends of all kinds, yet it is
incompetent for giving assistance to the will in its determination and
choice of its ends. But this is an essential factor, if an aptitude for ends
is to have its full meaning. This latter condition of aptitude, involving
what might be called culture by way of training (discipline), is negative. It consists in the liberation of the will from the despotism of desires
whereby, in our attachment to certain natural things, we are rendered
incapable of exercising a choice of our own. This happens when we
allow ourselves to be enchained by impulses with which nature only
provided us that they might serve as guidance to prevent our neglecting, or even impairing, the animal element in our nature, while yet we
are left free enough to tighten or slacken them, to lengthen or shorten
them, as the ends of our reason demand.

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

261

Skill can hardly be developed in the human race otherwise than by
means of inequality among human beings. For the majority, in a mechanical kind of way that calls for no special art, provide the necessities of
life for the ease and convenience of others who apply themselves to the
less necessary branches of culture in science and art. These keep the
masses in a state of oppression, with hard work and little enjoyment,
though in the course of time much of the culture of the higher classes
spreads to them also. But with the advance of this culture—the
culminating point of which, where devotion to what is superﬂuous
begins to be prejudicial to what is indispensable, is called luxury—
misfortunes increase equally on both sides. With the lower classes
they arise by force of domination from without, with the upper from
seeds of discontent within. Yet this splendid misery is connected with
the development of natural tendencies in the human race, and the end
pursued by nature itself, even if it is not our end, is thereby attained.
The formal condition under which nature can alone attain this its real
end is the existence of a constitution so regulating the mutual relations of men that the abuse of freedom by individuals striving one
against another is opposed by a lawful authority centred in a whole,
called a civil community. For it is only in such a constitution that the
greatest development of natural tendencies can take place. In addition
to this we should also need a cosmopolitan whole—had men but the
ingenuity to discover such a constitution and the wisdom voluntarily to
submit themselves to its constraint. It would be a system of all states that
are in danger of acting injuriously to one another. In its absence, and
with the obstacles that ambition, love of power, and avarice, especially
on the part of those who hold the reins of authority, put in the way
even of the possibility of such a scheme, war is inevitable. Sometimes
this results in states splitting up and resolving themselves into lesser
states, sometimes one state absorbs other smaller states and endeavours to build up a larger unit. But if on the part of men war is a
thoughtless undertaking, being stirred up by unbridled passions, it is
nevertheless a deep-seated, maybe far-seeing, attempt on the part of
supreme wisdom, if not to found, yet to prepare the way for a rule of
law governing the freedom of states, and thus bring about their unity
in a system established on a moral basis. And, in spite of the terrible
calamities which it inﬂicts on the human race, and the hardships,
perhaps even greater, imposed by the constant preparation for it in
time of peace, yet—as the prospect of the dawn of an abiding reign

433

262

434

Critique of Teleological Judgement

of national happiness keeps ever retreating farther into the distance—
it is one further spur for developing to the highest pitch all talents that
minister to culture.*
We turn now to the discipline of inclinations. In respect of these our
natural capacities are very purposively adapted to the performance of
our essential functions as an animal species, but the inclinations are
a great impediment to the development of our humanity. Yet here
again, in respect of this second requisite for culture, we see nature
striving on purposive lines to give us that education that renders us
receptive to higher ends than it can itself aﬀord. The preponderance
of evil which a taste reﬁned to the extreme of idealization, and which
even luxury in the sciences, considered as food for vanity, diﬀuses
among us as the result of the crowd of insatiable inclinations which
they beget, is indisputable. But, while that is so, we cannot fail to
recognize the end of nature—ever more and more to prevail over the
rudeness and violence of inclinations that belong more to the animal
part of our nature and are most inimical to education that would ﬁt
us for our higher vocation (inclinations towards enjoyment), and to
make way for the development of our humanity. Fine art and the sciences, if they do not make man morally better, yet, by conveying a
pleasure that admits of universal communication and by introducing
polish and reﬁnement into society, make him civilized. Thus they do
much to overcome the tyrannical propensities of the senses, and so
prepare man for a sovereignty in which reason alone shall have sway.
Meanwhile the evils visited upon us, now by nature, now by the truculent egoism of man, evoke the energies of the soul, and give it strength
and courage to submit to no such force, and at the same time allow
us to sense that in the depths of our nature there is an aptitude for
higher ends.3
3
The value of life for us, measured simply by what we enjoy (by the natural end of the
sum of all our inclinations, that is by happiness), is easy to decide. It is less than nothing.
For who would enter life afresh under the same conditions? Who would even do so according to a new, self-devised plan (which should, however, follow the course of nature), if it
also were merely directed to enjoyment? We have shown above what value life receives
from what it involves when lived according to the end with which nature is occupied in
us, and which consists in what we do, not merely what we enjoy, we being, however, in that
case always but a means to an undetermined ﬁnal end. There remains then nothing but the
worth which we ourselves assign to our life by what we not only do, but do with a view
to an end so independent of nature that the very existence of nature itself can only be an
end subject to the condition so imposed.

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

263

§ 84
The ﬁnal end of the existence of a world, that is, of creation itself
A ﬁnal end is an end that does not require any other end as condition
of its possibility.
If the simple mechanism of nature is accepted as the explanation
of its purposiveness, it is not open to us to ask: For what end do the
things in the world exist? For on such an idealistic system we have only
to reckon with the physical possibility of things,—and things that
it would be mere sophistry to imagine as ends. Whether we refer
this form of things to chance, or whether we refer it to blind necessity,
such a question would in either case be meaningless. But if we suppose
the purposive nexus in the world to be real, and assume a special type
of causality for it, namely the activity of a cause acting designedly, we
cannot then stop short at the question: What is the end for which things
in the world, namely organized beings, possess this or that form, or are
placed by nature in this or that relation to other things? On the contrary,
once we have conceived an understanding that must be regarded as the
cause of the possibility of such forms as they are actually found in
things, we must go on and seek in this understanding for an objective
ground capable of determining such productive understanding to the
production of an eﬀect of this kind. That ground is then the ﬁnal end
for which such things exist.
I have said above that the ﬁnal end is not an end which nature would
be competent to realize or produce in terms of its idea, because it is one
that is unconditioned. For in nature, as a thing of the senses, there is
nothing whose determining ground, discoverable in nature itself, is
not always in turn conditioned. This is not merely true of external or
material nature, but also of our internal or thinking nature—it being of
course understood that I am only considering what in us is strictly
nature. But a thing which by virtue of its objective characterization
is to exist necessarily as the ﬁnal end of an intelligent cause, must be
of such a kind that in the order of ends it is dependent upon no further or other condition than simply its idea.
Now we ﬁnd in the world beings of only one kind whose causality is
teleological, or directed to ends, and which at the same time are beings
of such a character that the law according to which they have to

435

264

436

Critique of Teleological Judgement

determine ends for themselves is represented by them themselves as
unconditioned and not dependent on anything in nature, but as necessary in itself. The being of this kind is man, but man regarded as
noumenon. He is the only natural creature whose peculiar objective
characterization is nevertheless such as to enable us to recognize in him
a supersensible faculty—his freedom—and to perceive both the law of
the causality and the object of freedom which that faculty is able to set
before itself as the highest end—the highest good in the world.
Now it is not open to us in the case of man, considered as a moral
agent, or similarly in the case of any rational being in the world, to ask
the further question: For what end (quem in ﬁnem) does he exist? His
existence inherently involves the highest end—the end to which, as
far as in him lies, he may subject the whole of nature, or against which at
least he must not deem himself subjected to any inﬂuence on its part.—
Now assuming that things in the world are beings that are dependent
in point of their real existence, and, as such, stand in need of a supreme
cause acting according to ends, then man is the ﬁnal end of creation. For
without man the chain of mutually subordinated ends would have no
ultimate point of reference. Only in man, and only in him as the individual being to whom the moral law applies, do we ﬁnd unconditional
legislation in respect of ends. This legislation, therefore, is what alone
qualiﬁes him to be a ﬁnal end to which entire nature is teleologically
subordinated.4
4
It would be possible for the happiness of the rational beings in the world to be an
end of nature, and, were it so, it would also be the ultimate end of nature. At least it is not
obvious a priori why nature should not be so ordered, for, so far as we can see, happiness is
an eﬀect which it would be quite possible for nature to produce by means of its mechanism.
But morality, or a causality according to ends that is subordinate to morality, is an
absolutely impossible result of natural causes. For the principle that determines such
causality to action is supersensible. In the order of ends, therefore, it is the sole principle possible which is absolutely unconditioned in respect of nature, and it is what alone
qualiﬁes the subject of such causality to be the ﬁnal end of creation, and the one to which
the whole of nature is subordinated. Happiness, on the other hand, as an appeal to the testimony of experience revealed in the preceding section, so far from being a ﬁnal end of creation, is not even an end of nature as regards man in preference to other creatures. It may
always be that individual human beings will make it their ultimate subjective end. But if
seeking for the ﬁnal end of creation, I ask: For what end was it necessary that human beings
should exist? my question then refers to an objective supreme end, such as the highest
reason would demand for their creation. If, then, to this question we reply: So that beings
may exist upon whom that supreme Cause may exercise this beneﬁcence, we then belie
the condition to which the reason of man subjects even his own inmost wish for happiness, namely, harmony with his own inner moral legislation. This proves that happiness
can only be a conditional end, and, therefore, that it is only as a moral being that man can

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

265

§ 85
Physico-Theology
Physico-Theology is the attempt* on the part of reason to infer the
supreme cause of nature and its attributes from the ends of nature—
ends which can only be known empirically. A moral theology, or ethicotheology, would be the attempt to infer that cause and its attributes
from the moral end of rational beings in nature—an end which can
be known a priori.
The former naturally precedes the latter. For if we seek to infer a
world-cause from the things in the world by teleological arguments,
we must ﬁrst of all be given ends of nature. Then for these ends
so given we must afterwards look for a ﬁnal end, and this ﬁnal end
obliges us to seek the principle of the causality of the supreme cause in
question.
Much natural research can, and indeed must, be conducted in the
light of the teleological principle without our having occasion to inquire
into the source of the possibility of the purposive activity which we
meet with in various products of nature. But should we now desire to
form also a concept of this source, we are then in the position of
having absolutely no available insight that can penetrate beyond our
mere maxim of reﬂective judgement. According to this maxim, given
but a single organized product of nature, then the structure of our
cognitive faculty is such that the only source which we can conceive
it to have is one that is a cause of nature itself—whether of nature as
a whole or even only of this particular portion of it—and that derives
from an understanding the requisite causality for such a product.
This is a critical principle which doubtless brings us no whit farther
in the explanation of natural things or their origin. Yet it discloses to
our view a prospect that extends beyond the horizon of nature and
points to our being able perhaps to determine more closely the concept of an original being that otherwise appears so unfruitful.
Now I say that no matter how far physico-teleology may be pushed,
it can never disclose to us anything about a ﬁnal end of creation; for
be the ﬁnal end of creation; while, as regards his state of being, happiness is only incident
thereto as a consequence proportionate to the measure of his harmony with that end, as
the end of his existence.

437

266

438

Critique of Teleological Judgement

it never even begins to look for a ﬁnal end. Thus it can justify, no
doubt, the concept of an intelligent world-cause as a concept which
subjectively—that is in relation to the nature of our cognitive faculty
alone—is eﬀective to explain the possibility of things that we can
render intelligible to ourselves in the light of ends. But neither from
a theoretical nor a practical point of view can it determine this concept any further. Its attempt falls short of its proposed aim of aﬀording
a basis of theology. To the last it remains nothing but a physical teleology: for the purposive connection which it recognizes is only, and
must only, be regarded as subject to natural conditions. Consequently
it can never institute an inquiry into the end for which nature itself
exists—this being an end whose source must be sought outside nature.
Yet it is upon the deﬁnite idea of this end that the deﬁnite conception
of such a supreme intelligent world-cause, and, consequently, the
possibility of a theology, depend.
Of what use are the things in the world to one another? What good
is the manifold in a thing to this thing? How are we entitled to assume
that nothing in the world is in vain, but that, provided we grant that
certain things, regarded as ends, ought to exist, everything serves
some purpose or other in nature? All these questions imply that in
respect of our judgement reason has at its command no other principle
of the possibility of the object which it is obliged to judge teleologically than that of subordinating the mechanism of nature to the
architectonic of an intelligent author of the world; and directed to all
these issues the teleological survey of the world plays its part nobly
and ﬁlls us with intense admiration. But inasmuch as the data, and,
consequently, the principles, for determining such a concept of an
intelligent world-cause, regarded as the supreme artist, are merely
empirical, they do not allow us to infer any other attributes belonging
to it than those which experience reveals to us as manifested in its
eﬀects. But as experience is unable to embrace the whole of nature as
a system, it must frequently ﬁnd support for arguments which, to all
appearances, conﬂict with that concept and with one another. Yet it
can never lift us above nature to the end of its real existence or thus
raise us to a deﬁnite concept of such a higher intelligence—even if it
were in our power empirically to survey the entire system considered
as mere nature.
If the problem which physico-theology has to solve is set to a lower
key, then its solution seems an easy matter.* Thus we may think of

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

267

an intelligent being possessing a number of superlative attributes,
without the full complement of those necessary for establishing a
nature harmonizing with the greatest possible end, and to all beings
of this description—of whom there may be one or more—we might
be extravagant enough to apply the concept of a Deity. Or, if we
let it pass as of no importance to supplement by arbitrary additions
the proofs of a theory where the grounds of proof are deﬁcient; and
if, therefore, where we have only reason to assume much perfection
(and what, then, is much for us?) we deem ourselves entitled to take
all possible perfection for granted:—then physical teleology has
important claims to the distinction of aﬀording the basis of a theology.
But what is there to lead, and, more than that, authorize us to supplement the facts of the case in this way? If we are called on to point
out what it is, we shall seek in vain for any ground of justiﬁcation in
the principles of the theoretical employment of reason. For such
employment emphatically demands that for the purpose of explaining an object of experience we are not to ascribe to it more attributes
than we ﬁnd in the empirical data for the possibility of the object.
On closer investigation we should see that underlying our procedure
is an idea of a Supreme Being, which rests on an entirely diﬀerent
employment of reason, namely its practical employment, and that it
is this idea, which exists in us a priori, that impels us to supplement the
defective representation of an original ground of the ends in nature
aﬀorded by physical teleology, and enlarge it to the concept of a
Deity. When we saw this, we should not erroneously imagine that we
had evolved this idea, and, with it, a theology by means of the theoretical employment of reason in the physical cognition of the world—
much less that we had proved its reality.
One cannot blame the ancients so very much for imagining that,
while there was great diversity among their gods, both in respect of
their power and of their purposes and dispositions, they were all, not
excepting the sovereign head of the gods himself, invariably limited
in human fashion. For on surveying the order and course of the things
in nature they certainly found ample reason for assuming something
more than mere mechanism as its cause and for conjecturing the existence of purposes on the part of certain higher causes, which they could
only conceive to be superhuman, behind the machinery of this world.
But, since they encountered both the good and evil, the purposive
and the counter-purposive, very much interspersed, at least to human

439

268

440

Critique of Teleological Judgement

eyes, and could not take the liberty of assuming, for the sake of the
arbitrary idea of an all-perfect author, that there were nevertheless
mysteriously wise and beneﬁcent ends, of which they did not see the
evidence, underlying all this apparent antagonism, their judgement on
the supreme world-cause could hardly be other than it was, so long,
that is, as they followed maxims of the mere theoretical employment
of reason with strict consistency. Others who were physicists* and in
that character desired to be theologians also, thought that they would
give full satisfaction to reason by providing for the absolute unity of
the principle of natural things, which reason demands, by means of
the idea of a being in which, as sole substance, the whole assemblage
of those natural things would be contained only as inhering modes.
While this substance would not be the cause of the world by virtue
of its intelligence, it would nevertheless be a subject in which all the
intelligence on the part of the beings in the world would reside.
Hence, although it would not be a being that produced anything
according to ends, it would be one in which all things—owing to the
unity of the subject of which they are mere determinations—must necessarily be interconnected in a purposive manner, though independently of any end or design. Thus they introduced the idealism of ﬁnal
causes, by converting the unity, so diﬃcult to deduce, of a number of
substances standing in a purposive connexion, from a causal dependence on one substance into the unity of inherence in one. Looked at
from the side of the beings that inhere, this system became pantheism,
and from the side of the sole subsisting subject, as original being, it
became, by a later development, Spinozism. Thus in the end, instead
of solving the problem of the primary source of the purposiveness of
nature, it regarded the whole question as idle, for the conception of
such purposiveness, being shorn of all reality, was reduced to a simple
misinterpretation of the universal ontological conception of a thing
in the abstract.
So we see that the conception of a Deity, such as would meet the
demands of our teleological judging of nature, can never be developed
according to mere theoretical principles of the employment of reason—
and these are the only principles upon which physico-theology relies.
For, suppose we assert that all teleology is a delusion on the part of
the power of judgement in its judging of the causal nexus of things
and take refuge in the sole principle of a mere mechanism of nature.

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

269

Then nature only appears to us to involve a universal relation to ends,
owing to the unity of the substance that contains it as no more than
the multiplicity of its modes. Or, suppose that instead of adopting
this idealism of ﬁnal causes, we wish to adhere to the principle of the
realism of this particular type of causality. Then—no matter whether
we base natural ends on a number of intelligent original beings or on a
single one—the moment we ﬁnd ourselves with nothing upon which
to ground the conception of realism but empirical principles drawn
from the actual nexus of ends in the world, on the one hand we cannot
help accepting the fact of the discordance with purposive unity of
which nature presents many examples, and on the other hand, we can
never obtain a suﬃciently determinate concept of a single intelligent
cause—so long as we keep to what mere experience entitles us to
extract—to satisfy any sort of theology whatever which will be of use
theoretically or practically.
It is true that physical teleology urges us to go in quest of a theology.
But it cannot produce one—however far we carry our investigations
of nature, or help out the nexus of ends discovered in it with ideas of
reason (which for physical problems must be theoretical). We may
pose the reasonable question: What is the use of our basing all these
arrangements on a great, and for us unfathomable, intelligence, and
supposing it to order this world according to its intentions, if nature
does not and cannot ever tell us anything as to the ﬁnal aim in view?
For apart from a ﬁnal purpose we are unable to relate all these natural ends to a common point of reference, or form an adequate teleological principle, be it for combining all the ends in a known system,
or be it for framing such a conception of the supreme Intelligence, as
cause of a nature like this, as could act as a standard for our judgement in its teleological reﬂection upon nature. I should have, it is true,
in that case an artistic intelligence for miscellaneous ends, but no wisdom
for a ﬁnal end, which nevertheless is what must, properly speaking,
contain the ground by which such intelligence is determined. I require
a ﬁnal end, and it is only pure reason that can supply this a priori for
all ends in the world are empirically conditioned and can contain
nothing that is absolutely good, but only what is good for this or that
purpose regarded as contingent. Such a ﬁnal end alone would
instruct me how I am to conceive the supreme cause of nature—what
attributes I am to assign to it, and in what degree, and how I am to

441

270

442

Critique of Teleological Judgement

conceive its relation to nature—if I am to judge nature as a teleological system. In the absence, then, of a ﬁnal end, what liberty or
what authority have I to extend at will such a very limited concept of
that original intelligence as I can base on my own poor knowledge of
the world, or my concept of the power of this original being to realize
its ideas, or of its will to do so, and so forth, and expand it to the idea
of an all-wise and inﬁnite being? Were I able to do this theoretically
it would presuppose omniscience in myself to enable me to see into
the ends of nature in their entire context, and in addition to conceive
all other possible schemes, as compared with which the present
would have to be judged on reasonable grounds to be the best. For without this perfected knowledge of the eﬀect, my reasoning can arrive
at no deﬁnite concept of the supreme cause—which is only to be
found in that of an intelligence in every respect inﬁnite, that is, in the
concept of a Deity—or establish a basis for theology.
Hence, allowing for all possible extension of physical teleology, we
may keep to the principle set out above and say that the constitution
and principles of our cognitive faculty are such that we can only conceive nature, in respect of those of its arrangements that are familiar
to us and display purposiveness, as the product of an intelligence to
which it is subjected. But whether this intelligence may also have had
a ﬁnal purpose in view in the production of nature and in its constitution as a whole, which ﬁnal purpose in that case would not reside in
nature as the sensible world, is a matter that the theoretical study of
nature can never disclose. On the contrary, however great our knowledge of nature, it remains an open question whether that supreme cause
is the original source of nature as a cause acting throughout according
to a ﬁnal end, or whether it is not rather such a source by virtue of an
intelligence that is determined by the simple necessity of its nature to
the production of certain forms (by analogy to what we call the artistic
instinct in animals). The latter version does not involve our ascribing
even wisdom to such intelligence, much less wisdom that is supreme
and conjoined with all other properties requisite for ensuring the
perfection of its product.
Hence physico-theology is a misconceived physical teleology. It is of
no use to theology except as a preparation or propaedentic, and is only
suﬃcient for this purpose when supplemented by a further principle on
which it can rely. But it is not, as its name would suggest, suﬃcient,
even as a propaedentic, if taken by itself.

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

271

§ 86
Ethico-Theology
There is a judgement which even the commonest understanding
ﬁnds irresistible when it reﬂects upon the existence of the things in
the world and the existence of the world itself. It is the verdict that all
the manifold forms of life, co-ordinated though they may be with the
greatest art and concatenated with the utmost variety of purposive
adaptations, and even the entire complex that embraces their numerous systems, incorrectly called worlds, would all exist for nothing, if
man, or rational beings of some sort, were not to be found in their
midst. Without man, in other words, the whole of creation would be
a mere wilderness, a thing in vain, and have no ﬁnal end. Yet it is not
man’s cognitive faculty, that is, theoretical reason, that forms the point
of reference which alone gives its worth to the existence of all else in
the world—as if the meaning of his presence in the world was that there
might be someone in it that could make it an object of contemplation.
For if this contemplation of the world brought to light nothing but
things without a ﬁnal end, the existence of the world could not
acquire a worth from the fact of its being known. A ﬁnal end of the
world must be presupposed as that in relation to which the contemplation of the world may itself possess a worth. Neither is it in relation
to the feeling of pleasure or the sum of such feelings that we can think
that there is a given ﬁnal end of creation, that is to say, it is not by wellbeing, not by enjoyment, whether bodily or mental, not, in a word, by
happiness, that we value that absolute worth. For the fact that man,
when he does exist, makes happiness his own ﬁnal purpose, aﬀords us
no conception of any reason why he should exist at all, or of any
worth he himself possesses, for which his existence should be made
agreeable to him. Hence man must already be presupposed to be the
ﬁnal end of creation, in order that we may have a rational ground to
explain why nature, when regarded as an absolute whole according to
principles of ends, must be in accord with the conditions of his happiness.—Accordingly it is only the faculty of desire that can give the
required point of reference—yet not that faculty which makes man
dependent upon nature (through sensuous impulses), that is, not that in
respect of which the worth of his existence is dependent upon what

443

272

444

Critique of Teleological Judgement

he receives and enjoys. On the contrary it is the worth which he alone
can give to himself, and which consists in what he does—in the
manner in which and the principles upon which he acts in the freedom
of his faculty of desire, and not as a link in the chain of nature. In other
words a good will is that whereby man’s existence can alone possess an
absolute worth, and in relation to which the existence of the world
can have a ﬁnal end.
Even the popular verdict of sound human reason, once its reﬂection
is directed to this question and pressed to consider it, is in complete
accord with the judgement that it is only as a moral being that man
can be a ﬁnal end of creation. What, it will be said, does it all avail,
that this man has so much talent, that he is even so active in its employment and thus exerts a useful inﬂuence upon social and public life, and
that he possesses, therefore, considerable worth alike in relation to his
own state of happiness and in relation to what is good for others, if he
has not a good will? Looked at from the point of view of his inner self,
he is a contemptible object; and, if creation is not to be altogether
devoid of a ﬁnal end, such a man, though as man he is part of creation,
must nevertheless, as a bad man dwelling in a world subject to moral
laws, forfeit, in accordance with those laws, his own subjective end,
that is happiness, as the sole condition under which his existence can
cohere with the ﬁnal end.
Now if we ﬁnd instances in the world of an order adapted to ends,
and if, as reason inevitably requires, we subordinate the ends which are
only conditionally ends, to one that is unconditioned and supreme,
that is to a ﬁnal end, we readily see, to begin with, that we are then
not dealing with an end of nature, included within nature taken as
existent, but with the end of the existence of nature itself, with all its
orderly adaptations included. Consequently we see the question is one
of the ultimate end of creation, and, more precisely, of the supreme condition under which alone there can be a ﬁnal end, or, in other words,
of the ground that determines a highest intelligence to the production
of the beings in the world.
It is, then, only as a moral being that we acknowledge man to be the
end of creation. Hence we have, ﬁrst of all, a reason, or at least the
primary condition, for regarding the world as a consistent whole of
interconnected ends, and as a system of ﬁnal causes. Now the structure
of our reason is such that we necessarily refer natural ends to an intelligent world-cause. Above all, then, we have one principle applicable

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

273

to this relation, enabling us to think the nature and attributes of this
ﬁrst cause considered as supreme ground in the kingdom of ends, and
to form a deﬁnite concept of it. This is what could not be done by
physical teleology, which was only able to suggest vague concepts of
such a ground—concepts which this vagueness made as useless for
practical as for theoretical employment.
With such a deﬁnite principle as this, of the causality of the original
being, we shall not have to regard it merely as an intelligence and as
legislating for nature, but as the sovereign head legislating in a moral
kingdom of ends. In relation to the highest good, which is alone
possible under his sovereignty, namely the existence of rational beings
under moral laws, we shall conceive this original being to be omniscient,
so that even our inmost dispositions—wherein lies the distinctive
moral worth in the actions of rational beings in the world—may not
be hid from him. We shall conceive him as omnipotent, so that he may
be able to adapt entire nature to this highest end; as both all-good and
just, since these two attributes, which unite to form wisdom, constitute
the conditions under which a supreme cause of the world can be the
source of the greatest good under moral laws. Similarly the other
remaining transcendental attributes, such as eternity, omnipresence,
and so forth (for goodness and justice are moral attributes), all attributes that are presupposed in relation to such a ﬁnal end, will have to
be regarded as belonging to this original being.—In this way moral
teleology supplements the deﬁciency of physical teleology, and for the
ﬁrst time establishes a theology. For physical teleology, if it is not to
borrow secretly from moral teleology, but is to proceed with strict
logical rigour, can from its own unaided resources establish nothing
but a demonology, which does not admit of any deﬁnite concept.
But the principle which, because of the moral and teleological signiﬁcance of certain beings in the world, refers the world to a supreme
cause as Deity, does not establish this relation by being simply a
completion of the physico-teleological argument, and therefore by
adopting this necessarily as its foundation. On the contrary it can rely
on its own resources, and urges attention to the ends of nature and
inquiry after the incomprehensibly great art that lies hidden behind
its forms, so as to give to the ideas produced by pure practical reason
an incidental conﬁrmation in natural ends. For the conception of
beings of the world subject to moral laws is an a priori principle upon
which man must necessarily judge himself. Furthermore, if there is

445

274

Critique of Teleological Judgement

a world-cause acting designedly and directed to an end, the moral
relation above mentioned must just as necessarily be the condition of
the possibility of a creation as is the relation determined by physical
laws—that is, supposing that such an intelligent cause has also a ﬁnal
end. This is a principle which reason regards even a priori as one that
is necessary for its teleological judging of the existence of things. The
whole question, then, is reduced to this: Have we any ground capable
of satisfying reason, speculative or practical, to justify our attributing
a ﬁnal end to the supreme cause that acts according to ends? For that,
judging by the subjective character of our reason, or even by anything
we can at all imagine of the reason of other beings, such ﬁnal end could
be nothing but man as subject to moral laws, may be taken a priori as a
matter of certainty; whereas we are wholly unable to cognize a priori
what are the ends of nature in the physical order, and above all it is
impossible to see that a nature could not exist apart from such ends.

Remark

446

Imagine a person at the moment when his mind is disposed to moral
feeling! If, amid beautiful natural surroundings, he is in calm and
serene enjoyment of his existence, he feels within him a need—a need
of being grateful for it to someone. Or, at another time, in the same
frame of mind, he may ﬁnd himself in the stress of duties which he can
only perform and will perform by submitting to a voluntary sacriﬁce;
then he feels within him a need—a need of having, in so doing, carried
out something commanded of him and obeyed a Supreme Lord. Or he
may in some thoughtless manner have diverged from the path of duty,
though not so as to have made himself answerable to others; yet
words of stern self-reproach will then fall upon an inward ear, and he
will seem to hear the voice of a judge to whom he has to render account.
In a word, he needs a moral Intelligence; because he exists for an end,
and this end demands a Being as the cause both of himself and the world
with that end in view. It is waste of labour to go burrowing behind
these feelings for motives; for they are immediately connected with
the purest moral disposition: gratitude, obedience, and humiliation—
that is, submission before a deserved chastisement—being special
modes of the mind’s attunement to duty. It is merely that the mind
inclined to give expansion to its moral disposition here voluntarily
imagines an object that is not in the world, in order, if possible, to
prove its dutifulness before such an object also. Hence it is at least

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

275

possible—and, besides, there is in our moral habits of thought a foundation for so doing—to form a representation of a pure moral need
for the existence of a being, whereby our morality gains in strength
or even obtains—at least on the side of our representation—an extension of area, that is to say, is given a new object for its exercise. In other
words, it is possible to admit a moral legislator existing apart from
the world, and to do so without regard to theoretical proof, and still
less to self-interest, but on a purely moral ground, which, while of
course only subjective, is free from all foreign inﬂuence, on the mere
recommendation of a pure practical reason that legislates for itself
alone. It may be that such a disposition of the mind is but a rare
occurrence, or, again, does not last long, but rather is ﬂeeting and of
no permanent eﬀect, or, it may be, passes away without the mind
bestowing a single thought upon such a shadowy image, and without
troubling to reduce it to clear concepts. Yet the source of this disposition is unmistakable. It is the original moral predisposition of our
nature, as a subjective principle, that will not let us be satisﬁed, in
our consideration of the world, with the purposiveness which it
derives through natural causes, but leads us to introduce into it an
underlying supreme cause governing nature according to moral
laws.— In addition to the above there is the fact that we feel ourselves urged by the moral law to strive after a universal highest end,
while yet we feel ourselves, and all nature too, incapable of its attainment. Further, it is only so far as we strive after this end that we can
judge ourselves to be in harmony with the ﬁnal end of an intelligent
world-cause—if such there be. Thus we have a pure moral ground
derived from practical reason for admitting this cause (since we may
do so without self-contradiction), if for no better reason, in order
that we may not run the risk of regarding such striving as quite idle
in its eﬀects, and of allowing it to ﬂag in consequence.
Let us restate what we intended to convey here by all these observations. While fear doubtless in the ﬁrst instance may have been able
to produce gods, that is demons, it is only reason by its moral principles that has been able to produce the concept of God—and it has
been able to do so despite the great ignorance that has usually prevailed in what concerns the teleology of nature, or the considerable
doubt that arises from the diﬃculty of reconciling by a suﬃciently
established principle the mutually conﬂicting phenomena that nature
presents. Further, the inner moral destination of man’s existence

447

276

Critique of Teleological Judgement

supplements the shortcomings of natural knowledge, by directing us
to join to the thought of the ﬁnal end of the existence of all things—an
end the principle of which only satisﬁes reason from an ethical point of
view—the thought of the supreme cause as endowed with attributes
whereby it is empowered to subject the whole of nature to that single
purpose, and make it merely instrumental thereto. In other words it
directs us to think the supreme cause as a Deity.

§ 87
The moral proof of the existence of God

448

We have a physical teleology that aﬀords evidence suﬃcient for our
theoretical reﬂective judgement to enable us to admit the existence
of an intelligent world-cause. But in ourselves, and still more in the
general concept of a rational being endowed with freedom of its
causality, we ﬁnd a moral teleology. But as our own relation to an end,
together with the law governing it, may be determined a priori, and
consequently cognized as necessary, moral teleology does not stand in
need of any intelligent cause outside ourselves to explain this intrinsic
conformity to law any more than what we consider purposive in the
geometrical properties of ﬁgures (their adaptation for all possible
kinds of employment by art) lets us look beyond to a supreme understanding that imparts this purposiveness to them. But this moral
teleology deals with us for all that as beings of the world and, therefore, as beings associated with other things in the world; and the same
moral laws enjoin us to turn our consideration to these other things in
the world, regarded either as ends, or as objects in respect of which we
ourselves are the ﬁnal end. This moral teleology, then, which deals
with the relation of our own causality to ends, or even to a ﬁnal end
that must be proposed by us in the world, as well as with the reciprocal relation subsisting between the world and that moral end and
the possibility of realizing it under external conditions—a matter
upon which no physical teleology can give us any guidance—raises a
necessary question. For we must ask: Does this moral teleology oblige
our rational judgement to go beyond the world and seek for an intelligent supreme principle in respect of the relation of nature to the
moral side of our being, so that we may form a representation of
nature as displaying purposiveness in relation also to our inner moral
legislation and its possible realization? Hence there is certainly a

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

277

moral teleology. It is as necessarily implicated with the nomothetic of
freedom on the one hand, and that of nature on the other, as with civil
legislation is implicated the question of where the executive authority is
to be sought. In fact there is here the same implication as is to be found
in everything in which reason has to assign a principle of the actuality of a certain uniform order of things that is only possible according
to ideas.—We shall begin by exhibiting how from the above moral
teleology and its relation to physical teleology reason advances to
theology. Having done so, we shall make some observations on the possibility and conclusiveness of this mode of reasoning.
If we assume the existence of certain things, or even only of certain
forms of things, to be contingent, and consequently to be only possible
by means of something else as their cause, we may then look for the
supreme source of this causality, and, therefore, for the unconditioned ground of the conditioned, either in the physical or the teleological order—that is, we may look either to the nexus eﬀectivus or to
the nexus ﬁnalis. In other words, we may ask which is the supreme
productive cause, or we may ask what is the supreme or absolutely
unconditioned end of such a cause, that is, what in general is the ﬁnal
end for which it produces these or all its products. In the latter question it is obviously taken for granted that this cause can form a representation of the end, and is consequently an intelligent being, or at
least that it must be conceived by us as acting according to the laws
of such a being.
Now, supposing we follow the teleological order, there is a fundamental principle to which even the most ordinary human intelligence
is obliged to give immediate assent. It is the principle that if there is to be
a ﬁnal end at all, which reason must assign a priori, then it can only be
man—or any rational being in the world—standing under moral laws.5
For—and this is the verdict of everyone—if the world only consisted
of lifeless beings, or even consisted partly of living, but yet non-rational
5
I say deliberately: under moral laws. It is not man in accordance with moral laws, that
is to say, human beings living in conformity with such laws, that is the ﬁnal end of creation.
For to use the latter expression would be to assert more than we know, namely, that it is in
the power of an author of the world to ensure that man should always conform to the moral
laws. But this presupposes a concept of freedom and of nature—of which latter alone
we can think an external author—that implies an insight into the supersensible substrate of nature and its identity with what is rendered possible in the world by causality
through freedom. Such insight far exceeds that of our reason. It is only of man under
moral laws that we are able to aﬃrm, without transcending the limits of our insight, that

449

278

450

Critique of Teleological Judgement

beings, the existence of such a world would have no worth whatever,
because there would exist in it no being with the least conception of
what worth is. On the other hand, if there were even rational beings,
and if nevertheless their reason were only able to set the worth of the
existence of things in the bearing which nature has upon them, that
is, in their well-being, instead of being able to procure such a worth
for themselves from original sources, that is, in their freedom, then
there would be, it is true, relative ends in the world, but no absolute
end, since the existence of rational beings of this kind would still
always remain devoid of an end. It is, however, a distinctive feature
of the moral laws that they prescribe something for reason in the form
of an end apart from any condition, and consequently in the very form
that the concept of a ﬁnal end requires. Therefore the existence of a
reason like this, that in the order of ends can be the supreme law
to itself, in other words the real existence of rational beings subject
to moral laws, can alone be regarded as the ﬁnal end of the existence
of a world. But if this is not so, then either no end whatever in the
cause underlies the existence of the world or else only ends without
a ﬁnal end.
The moral law is the formal rational condition of the employment
of our freedom, and, as such, of itself alone lays its obligation upon us,
independently of any end as its material condition. But it also deﬁnes
for us a ﬁnal end, and does so a priori, and makes it obligatory upon us
to strive towards its attainment. This end is the highest good in the
world possible through freedom.
The subjective condition under which man, and, as far as we can
at all conceive, every rational ﬁnite being also, is able under the above
his existence forms the ﬁnal end of the world. This statement also accords perfectly with
the verdict of human reason in its reﬂection upon the course of the world from a moral
standpoint. We believe that even in the case of the wicked we perceive the traces of a wise
design in things if we see that the wanton criminal does not die before he has suﬀered the
just punishment of his misdeeds. According to our conceptions of free causality, good or
bad conduct depends upon ourselves. But where we think that the supreme wisdom in the
government of the world lies, is in the fact that the occasion for the former, and the result
following from both, is ordained according to moral laws. In the latter consists, properly
speaking, the honour of God, which is therefore not inappropriately termed by theologians
the ultimate end of creation.—We should add that when we make use of the word creation,
we only take it to mean what is spoken of here, namely, the cause of the existence of a world,
or of the things in it, that is, substances. This is also what the strict meaning of the word
conveys—actuatio substantiae est creatio. Consequently it implies no assumption of a cause
that acts freely and that is therefore intelligent. The existence of such an intelligent cause
is what we are set upon proving.

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

279

law to set before himself a ﬁnal end, is happiness. Consequently the
highest possible physical good in the world, and the one to be furthered so far as in us lies as the ﬁnal end, is happiness—subject to the
objective condition that the individual harmonizes with the law of
morality, regarded as worthiness to be happy.
But by no faculty of our reason can we represent to ourselves these
two requisites for the ﬁnal end proposed to us by the moral law to be
connected by means of mere natural causes and also conformed to the
idea of the ﬁnal end in contemplation. Accordingly, if we do not
bring the causality of any other means besides nature into alliance
with our freedom, the concept of the practical necessity of such an end
through the application of our powers does not accord with the theoretical concept of the physical possibility of its realization.
Consequently we must assume a moral world-cause, that is, an
author of the world, if we are to set before ourselves a ﬁnal end in
conformity with the requirements of the moral law. And as far as it
is necessary to set such an end before us, so far, that is in the same
degree and upon the same ground, it is necessary to assume an author
of the world, or, in other words, that there is a God.6

This proof, to which we may easily give the form of logical precision, does not imply that it is as necessary to assume the existence of
God as it is to recognize the validity of the moral law, and that, consequently, one who is unable to convince himself of the former may
deem himself absolved from the obligations imposed by the latter.
No! all that must be abandoned in that case is the aim of realizing the
ﬁnal end in the world by the pursuit of the moral law (the happiness of
rational beings harmoniously associated with such pursuit, as the highest good in the world). Every rational being would still have to continue
to recognize himself as ﬁrmly bound by the precept of morality, for its
laws are formal and command unconditionally, paying no regard to
6
This moral argument is not intended to supply an objectively valid proof of the existence of God. It is not meant to demonstrate to the sceptic that there is a God, but that he
must adopt the assumption of this proposition as a maxim of his practical reason, if he wishes
to think in a manner consistent with morality.—Further, the argument is not intended to
aﬃrm that it is necessary for the purpose of morality to assume that the happiness of all
rational beings in the world is proportioned to their morality. On the contrary it is by virtue
of morality that the assumption is necessitated. Consequently it is an argument that is
suﬃcient subjectively and for moral beings.*

451

280

452

Critique of Teleological Judgement

ends (as the material content of the will). But the one requirement of
the ﬁnal end, as prescribed by practical reason to the beings of the
world, is an irresistible end planted in them by their nature as ﬁnite
beings. Reason refuses to countenance this end except as subject to the
moral law as inviolable condition, and would only have it made universal in accordance with this condition. Thus it makes the furtherance
of happiness in agreement with morality the ﬁnal end. To promote this
end—so far, in respect of happiness, as lies in our power—is commanded us by the moral law, whatever the outcome of this endeavour
may be. The fulﬁlment of duty consists in the form of the earnest will,
not in the intervening causes that contribute to success.
Suppose, then, that an individual, inﬂuenced partly by the weakness
of all the speculative arguments that are thought so much of, and partly
by the number of irregularities he ﬁnds in nature and the moral world,
becomes persuaded of the proposition: There is no God; nevertheless
in his own eyes he would be a worthless creature if he chose on that
account to regard the laws of duty as simply fanciful, invalid, and nonobligatory, and resolved boldly to transgress them. Again, let us suppose that such a man were able subsequently to convince himself of the
truth of what he had at ﬁrst doubted; he would still remain worthless if
he held to the above way of thinking. This is so, were he even to fulﬁl his
duty as punctiliously as could be desired, so far as actual actions are
concerned, but were to do so from fear or with a view to reward, and
without an inward reverence for duty. Conversely, if, as a believer in
God, he observes his duty according to his conscience, uprightly and
disinterestedly, yet if whenever, to try himself, he puts before himself
the case of his haply being able to convince himself that there is no God,
he straight away believes himself free from all moral obligation, the
state of his inner moral disposition could then only be bad.
Let us then, as we may, take the case of a righteous man, such, say,
as Spinoza, who considers himself ﬁrmly persuaded that there is no
God and—since in respect of the object of morality a similar result
ensues—no future life either. How will he judge his individual intrinsic purposiveness that is derived from the moral law which he reveres
in practice? He does not require that its pursuit should bring him any
personal beneﬁt either in this or any other world. On the contrary his
will is disinterestedly to establish only that good to which the holy
law directs all his energies. But he is circumscribed in his endeavour.
He may, it is true, expect to ﬁnd a chance concurrence now and again,

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

281

but he can never expect to ﬁnd in nature a uniform agreement—a
consistent agreement according to ﬁxed rules, answering to what his
maxims are and must be subjectively, with that end which yet he
feels himself obliged and urged to realize. Deceit, violence, and envy
will always be rife around him, although he himself is honest, peaceable, and benevolent; and the other righteous individuals that he meets
in the world, no matter how deserving they may be of happiness, will
be subjected by nature, which takes no heed of such deserts, to all
the evils of want, disease, and untimely death, just as are the other
animals on the earth. And so it will continue to be until one yawning
grave devours them all—just and unjust, there is no distinction in
the grave—and hurls them back into the abyss of the aimless chaos
of matter from which they were ﬁrst drawn—they that were able to
believe themselves the ﬁnal end of creation.—Thus the end which
this right-minded man would have, and ought to have, in view in his
pursuit of the moral law, would certainly have to be abandoned by
him as impossible. But perhaps he resolves to remain faithful to the call
of his inner moral vocation and would not willingly permit the respect
with which he is immediately inspired to obedience by the moral
law be weakened owing to the nullity of the one ideal ﬁnal end that
answers to its high demand—which could not happen without doing
injury to his moral disposition. If so he must assume the existence of
a moral author of the world, that is, of a God. As this assumption at
least involves nothing intrinsically self-contradictory he may quite
readily make it from a practical point of view, that is to say, at least
for the purpose of framing a conception of the possibility of the ﬁnal
end morally prescribed to him.

§ 88
Limitation of the validity of the moral proof
Pure reason, regarded as a practical faculty, a capacity, that is to say,
for determining the pure employment of our causality by means of
ideas, or pure rational concepts, not only possesses in its moral law a
principle which is regulative of our actions, but by virtue of that law
it furnishes at the same time an additional principle which, from a subjective point of view, is constitutive. This principle is contained in the
concept of an object which reason alone is able to think, and which is
meant to be realized in the world through our actions in conformity

453

282

454

Critique of Teleological Judgement

to that law. The idea of a ﬁnal end in the employment of freedom in
obedience to moral laws has, therefore, a reality that is subjectively
practical. We are determined a priori by reason to further what is best
for the world as far as this lies within our power. This consists in the
union of the greatest welfare of the rational beings in the world with
the supreme condition of their good, or, in other words, by the union
of universal happiness with the strictest morality. Now the possibility
of one of the factors of this ﬁnal end, namely that of happiness, is
empirically conditioned. It depends upon how nature is constituted — on whether nature harmonizes or not with this end.
It is, therefore, from a theoretical point of view problematic; whereas
the other factor, namely morality, in respect of which we are independent of the co-operation of nature, is a priori assured of its possibility and is dogmatically certain. Accordingly, the fact that we have
a ﬁnal end set before us a priori does not meet all the requirements of
the objective and theoretical reality of the concept of the ﬁnal end of
rational beings in the world. It is further requisite that creation, that
is, the world itself, should, in respect of its existence, have a ﬁnal end.
If we were able to prove a priori that it has such an end, this would
supplement the subjective reality of the ﬁnal end by a reality that is
objective. For if creation has a ﬁnal end at all we cannot conceive
it otherwise than as harmonizing necessarily with our moral faculty,
which is what alone makes the concept of an end possible. But,
now, we do ﬁnd in the world what are certainly ends. In fact physical
teleology exhibits ends in such abundance that if we let reason guide
our judgement we have after all justiﬁcation for assuming, as a principle upon which to investigate nature, that there is nothing whatever
in nature that has not got its end. Yet in nature itself we search in vain
for its own ﬁnal end. Hence, just as the idea of this ﬁnal end resides
only in reason, so it is only in rational beings that such an end itself can
and must be sought as an objective possibility. But the practical
reason of these beings does not merely assign this ﬁnal end: it also
determines this concept in respect of the conditions under which a
ﬁnal end of creation can alone be thought by us.
Now the question arises: Is it not possible to substantiate the
objective reality of the concept of a ﬁnal end in a manner that will
meet the theoretical requirements of pure reason? This cannot indeed
be done apodictically for determining judgement. Yet may it not be
done suﬃciently for the maxims of theoretical judgement in so far as

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

283

it is reﬂective? This is the least that could be demanded of speculative philosophy, which undertakes to connect the ethical end with
natural ends by means of the idea of a single end. Yet even this little
is still far more than it can ever accomplish.
Let us look at the matter from the standpoint of the principle of
theoretical reﬂective judgement. To account for the purposive products of nature are we not justiﬁed in assuming a supreme cause of
nature, whose causality in respect of the actuality of nature, or whose
act of creation, must be regarded as speciﬁcally diﬀerent from that
which is required for the mechanism of nature, or, in other words, as
the causality of an understanding? If we are, then, on the above principle, we should say that we were also suﬃciently justiﬁed in attributing to this original being, not merely ends prevalent throughout nature,
but also a ﬁnal end. This does not serve the purpose of proving the
existence of such a being, yet, at least, as was the case in the physical
teleology, it is a justiﬁcation suﬃcient to convince us that to make
the possibility of such a world intelligible to ourselves we must not
merely look to ends, but must also ascribe its existence to an underlying ﬁnal end.
But a ﬁnal end is simply a concept of our practical reason and
cannot be inferred from any data of experience for the purpose of
forming a theoretical judgement of nature, nor can it be applied to
the cognition of nature. The only possible use of this concept is for
practical reason according to moral laws; and the ﬁnal end of creation
is such a constitution of the world as harmonizes with what we can only
deﬁnitely specify according to laws, namely with the ﬁnal end of our
pure practical reason and of this, moreover, in so far as it is intended
to be practical.—Now, by virtue of the moral law which enjoins this
ﬁnal end upon us, we have reason for assuming from a practical point
of view, that is for the direction of our energies towards the realization of that end, that it is possible, or, in other words, practicable.
Consequently we are also justiﬁed in assuming a nature of things harmonizing with such a possibility—for this possibility is subject to a
condition which does not lie in our power, and without the assistance
of nature the realization of the ﬁnal end would be impossible. Hence,
we have a moral justiﬁcation for supposing that where we have a
world we have also a ﬁnal end of creation.
This does not yet bring us to the inference from moral teleology to
a theology, that is, to the existence of a moral author of the world, but

455

284

456

Critique of Teleological Judgement

only to a ﬁnal end of creation, which is deﬁned in the above manner.
Now must we, to account for this creation, that is, for the existence
of things conformable to a ﬁnal end, in the ﬁrst place admit an intelligent being, and, in the second place, not merely an intelligent
being—as had to be admitted to account for the possibility of such
things in nature as we are compelled to judge as ends—but one that
is also moral, as author of the world, and consequently a God? This
admission involves a further inference, and one of such a nature that
we see that it is intended for the power of judging by concepts of practical reason, and, being so, is drawn for reﬂective, not for determining
judgement. It is true that with us morally practical reason is essentially
diﬀerent in its principles from technically practical reason. But, while
this is so, we cannot pretend to see that the same distinction must
also hold in the case of the supreme world-cause, if it is assumed to
be an intelligence, and that a peculiar type of causality is required on
its part for the ﬁnal end, diﬀerent from that which is requisite simply
for natural ends, or, that we have, consequently, in our ﬁnal end, not
merely a moral ground for admitting a ﬁnal end of creation, as an eﬀect,
but also a moral being, as the original source of creation. But it is quite
competent for us to assert that the nature of our faculty of reason is such
that without an author and governor of the world, who is also a moral
lawgiver, we are wholly unable to render intelligible to ourselves the
possibility of a purposiveness, related to the moral law and its object,
such as exists in this ﬁnal end.
The actuality of a supreme morally legislative author is, therefore,
suﬃciently proved simply for the practical employment of our reason,
without determining anything theoretically in respect of its existence.
For reason has an end which is prescribed independently by its own
peculiar legislation. To make this end possible it requires an idea
which removes, suﬃciently for reﬂective judgement, the obstacle which
arises from our inability to carry such legislation into eﬀect when we
have a mere physical conception of the world. In that way this idea
acquires practical reality, although for speculative knowledge it fails
of every means that would procure it reality from a theoretical point of
view for explaining nature or determining its supreme cause. For theoretical reﬂective judgement an intelligent world-cause was suﬃciently
proved by physical teleology from the ends of nature. For practical
reﬂective judgement moral teleology eﬀects the same by means of the

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

285

concept of a ﬁnal end, which it is obliged to ascribe to creation from a
practical point of view. The objective reality of the idea of God,
regarded as a moral author of the world, cannot, it is true, be substantiated by means of physical ends alone. Nevertheless, when the
knowledge of those ends is associated with that of the moral end, the
maxim of pure reason which directs us to pursue unity of principles
so far as we are able to do so lends considerable importance to these
ends for the purpose of reinforcing the practical reality of that idea by
the reality which it already possesses from a theoretical point of view
for judgement.
In this connexion there are two points which it is most necessary
to note for the purpose of preventing a misunderstanding which might
easily arise. In the ﬁrst place these attributes of the supreme being can
only be thought by us on an analogy. For how are we to investigate its
nature when experience can show us nothing comparable? In the second
place, such attributes also only enable us to think a supreme being, not
to cognize it or to predicate them of it in a more or less theoretical
manner. For this could only be done on behalf of determining judgement, as a faculty of our reason in its speculative aspect, and for the
purpose of discerning the intrinsic nature of the supreme world-cause.
But the only question that concerns us here is as to what concept we
have, by the structure of our cognitive faculties, to form of this being,
and whether we have to admit its existence on account of an end, which
pure practical reason, apart from any such assumption, enjoins upon
us to realize as far as in us lies, and for which we seek likewise to procure
simply practical reality, that is to say, merely to be able to regard
an envisaged eﬀect as possible. It may well be that this concept is
extravagant for speculative reason. The attributes also which by
means of it we ascribe to the being in question may, objectively used,
involve a covert anthropomorphism. Yet the object which we have in
view in employing them is not that we wish to determine the nature
of that being by reference to them—a nature which is inaccessible to
us—but rather that we seek to use them for determining our own
selves and our will. We may name a cause after the concept which we
have of its eﬀect—though only in respect of the relation in which it
stands to this eﬀect. And we may do this without on that account
seeking to deﬁne intrinsically the inherent nature of that cause by the
only properties known to us of causes of that kind, which properties

457

286

458

Critique of Teleological Judgement

must be given to us by experience. We may, for instance, ascribe to
the soul, among other properties, a vis locomotiva*, because physical
movements are actually initiated, the cause of which lies in the mind’s
activity of representing them. But this we do without on that account
meaning to attribute to the soul the only kind of dynamical forces of
which we have any knowledge—that is, those involving attraction,
pressure, impact, and, consequently, motion, forces which always presuppose a being extended in space. Now in just the same way we have
to assume something that contains the ground of the possibility and
practical reality, or practicability, of a necessary moral ﬁnal end. But,
looking to the character of the eﬀect expected therefrom, we may
conceive this ‘something’ as a wise being ruling the world according
to moral laws. And, in conformity with the character of our cognitive
faculties, we are obliged to conceive it as a cause of things that is distinct from nature, for the sole purpose of expressing the relation in
which this being that transcends all our cognitive faculties stands to
the object of our practical reason. Yet in so doing we do not mean on
that account to ascribe to this being theoretically the only causality of
this kind familiar to us, namely an understanding and a will. Nor
indeed, even as to the causality which we think exists in this being
in respect of what is for us a ﬁnal end, we do not mean to diﬀerentiate
it objectively, as it exists in this being itself, from the causality
in respect of nature and all its purposive determinations. On the
contrary we only presume to be able to admit this distinction as one
subjectively necessary for our cognitive faculty, constituted as it
is, and as valid for reﬂective, and not for objectively determining
judgement. But, once the question touches practical issues, a regulative principle of this kind—one for prudence or wisdom to follow—
which directs us to act in conformity with something, as an end, the
possibility of which, by the character of our cognitive faculties, can
only be conceived by us in a certain manner, then becomes also
constitutive. In other words it is practically determining, whereas the
very same principle regarded as one upon which to judge the objective possibility of things is in no way theoretically determining, or, in
other words, does not imply that the only type of possibility which
our thinking faculty recognizes may also be predicated of the object
of our thought. On the contrary it is a mere regulative principle for
the use of reﬂective judgement.

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

287

Remark
This moral proof is not in any sense a newly discovered argument,
but at the most only an old one in a new form. For its germ was lying
in the human mind when our reason ﬁrst quickened into life, and it
only grew and developed with the progressive culture of that faculty.
The moment human beings began to reﬂect upon right and wrong—
at a time when they as yet cast but a heedless regard at the purposiveness of nature, and when they took advantage of it without imagining
the presence of anything but nature’s accustomed course—one
inevitable judgement must have forced itself upon them. It could
never be a matter of indiﬀerence, whether a person has acted fairly or
falsely, with equity or with violence, albeit to his life’s end, as far at
least as human eye can see, his virtues have brought him no reward,
and his transgressions no punishment. It seems as though they perceived a voice within them say that it must make a diﬀerence. So
there must also have been a lurking notion, however obscure, of
something after which they felt themselves bound to strive, and with
which such a result would be wholly discordant, or with which, once
they regarded the course of the world as the sole order of things, they
would then be unable to reconcile that inner vocation of their minds.
Now crude as are the various notions they might form of the way in
which such an irregularity could be put straight—and it is one that
must be far more revolting to the human mind than the blind chance
which some have sought to make the underlying principle of their
judgement of nature—there is only one principle upon which they
could even conceive it possible for nature to harmonize with the
moral law within them. It is that of a supreme cause ruling the world
according to moral laws. For a ﬁnal end within, that is set before
them as a duty, and a nature without, that has no ﬁnal end, though
in it the former end is to be actualized, are in open contradiction.
I admit they might hatch many absurdities concerning the inner
nature of that world-cause. But that relation to the moral order in the
government of the world always remained the same as is universally
comprehensible to the most untutored reason, so far as it treats itself
as practical, though speculative reason is far from being able to keep
pace with it.—Further, in all probability, it was this moral interest
that ﬁrst aroused attentiveness to beauty and the ends of nature. This
would be admirably calculated to strengthen the above idea, though

459

288

Critique of Teleological Judgement

it could not supply its foundation. Still less could it dispense with the
moral interest; for it is only in relation to the ﬁnal end that the very
study of the ends of nature acquires that immediate interest displayed
to so great an extent in the admiration bestowed upon nature without
regard to any ensuing advantage.

§ 89
The use of the moral argument

460

The fact that, in respect of all our ideas of the supersensible, reason
is restricted to the conditions of its practical employment, is of obvious use in connexion with the idea of God. It prevents theology from
losing itself in the clouds of theosophy, i.e. in transcendent conceptions
that confuse reason, or from sinking into the depths of demonology,
i.e. an anthropomorphic mode of representing the supreme being.
Also it keeps religion from falling into theurgy, which is a fanatical
delusion that a feeling can be communicated to us from other supersensible beings and that we in turn can exert an inﬂuence on them,
or into idolatry, which is a superstitious delusion that one can make
oneself acceptable to the supreme being by any other means than that
of a moral disposition.7
For if the vanity or presumption of those who would argue about
what lies beyond the sensible world is allowed to determine even the
smallest point theoretically, and so as to extend our knowledge; if any
boast is permitted of shedding light upon the existence and constitution of the divine nature, its intelligence and will, and the laws of both
these and the attributes which issue therefrom and inﬂuence the world:
then I should like to know at what precise point the line is going to be
drawn for these pretensions of reason. From whatever source such
light is derived still more may be expected—if, as the idea is, we only
rack our brains. Yet it is only on some principle that bounds can be
set to such claims—it is not enough simply to appeal to our experience of the fact that all attempts of the sort have so far miscarried; for
7 A religion is never free from the imputation of idolatry, in a practical sense, so long
as the attributes with which it endows the supreme being are such that anything that man
may do can be taken as in accordance with God’s will on any other all-suﬃcing condition
than that of morality. For however pure and free from sensuous images the form of that
concept may be from a theoretical point of view, yet, with such attributes, it is from a
practical point of view depicted as an idol—the character of God’s will, that is to say, is
represented anthropomorphically.

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

289

that is no disproof of the possibility of a better result. But the only
principle possible in this case is either that of admitting that in respect
of the supersensible absolutely nothing can be determined theoretically
(unless solely by way of bare negation), or that of supposing the existence in our reason of an as yet untapped mine of who knows how vast
and enlightening information reserved for us and our posterity.—But
the result, so far as concerns religion—that is, morality in relation to
God as lawgiver—would be that morality, supposing that the theoretical knowledge of God has to take the lead, must then conform to
theology. Thus not only will an extrinsic and arbitrary legislation on
the part of a supreme being have to be introduced in place of an immanent and necessary legislation of reason, but, even in such legislation,
all the defects of our insight into the divine nature must spread to the
ethical code, and religion in this way be divorced from morality and
perverted.
What now of the hope of a future life? It is open to us to look to
the ﬁnal end which, in obedience to the injunction of the moral law,
we have ourselves to fulﬁl, and to adopt it as a guiding thread for the
verdict of reason concerning our vocation—a verdict which is therefore
only regarded as necessary or worthy of acceptance from a practical
point of view. But if, instead of so doing, we consult our faculty of
theoretical knowledge, then the same lot befalls psychology in this
connexion as befell theology in the case above. It supplies no more
than a negative conception of our thinking being. It tells us that not
one of the operations of the mind or manifestations of inner sense can
be explained on materialistic lines; that, accordingly, no illuminating
or determining judgement as to the separate nature of what thinks,
or of the continuance or discontinuance of its personality after death,
can possibly be made on speculative grounds by any exercise of our
faculty of theoretical knowledge, Thus everything is here left to the
teleological judging of our existence from a point of view that is
necessary in the practical sphere, and to the assumption of the
continuance of our existence, as a condition required by the ﬁnal end
that is absolutely imposed upon us by reason. Hence in our negative
result we see at once a gain—a gain that at ﬁrst sight no doubt
appears a loss. For just as theology can never become theosophy, so
rational psychology can never become pneumatology, as a science that
extends our knowledge, nor yet, on the other hand, be in danger of
lapsing into any sort of materialism. On the contrary we see that it is

461

290

Critique of Teleological Judgement

really a mere anthropology of the inner sense, a knowledge, that is to
say, of our thinking self as alive, and that, in the form of a theoretical cognition, it also remains merely empirical. But, as concerned
with the problem of our eternal existence, rational psychology is not
a theoretical science at all. It rests upon a single inference of moral
teleology, just as the entire necessity of its employment arises out of
moral teleology and our practical vocation.

§ 90
The type of assurance in a teleological proof of the existence of God

462

Whether a proof is derived from immediate empirical presentation
of what is to be proved, as in the case of proof by observation of the
object or by experiment, or whether it is derived a priori by reason
from principles, what is primarily required of it is that it should not
persuade, but convince, or at least tend to convince. The argument or
inference, in other words, should not be simply a subjective, or aesthetic, ground of assent—a mere semblance—but should be objectively valid and a logical source of knowledge. If it is not this, intelligence
is taken in, not won over. An illusory proof of the type in question is
brought forward in natural theology—maybe with the best of intentions, but nevertheless with a deliberate concealment of its weakness.
The whole host of arguments for an origin of the things of nature
according to the principle of ends is marshalled before us, and capital
is made out of the purely subjective ground of human reason. The
latter is inclined, by its very character, wherever it can do so without
contradiction, to think one single principle in place of several. Also,
where this principle only provides one, or, it may be, a large proportion, of the terms necessary for deﬁning a concept, it supplements
this or these by adding the others, so as to complete the concept of
the thing by an arbitrary extension. For naturally, when we ﬁnd such
a number of products of nature pointing us to an intelligent cause,
should we not suppose one single such cause in preference to supposing a plurality of them? And why, then, stop at great intelligence,
might, and so forth, in this cause, and not rather endow it with omniscience and omnipotence, and, in a word, regard it as one that contains
an ample source of such attributes for all possible things? And why
not go on and ascribe to this single all-powerful primordial being, not
merely the intelligence necessary for the laws and products of nature,

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

291

but also the supreme ethical and practical reason that belongs to a
moral world-cause? For by this completion of the concept we are
supplied with a principle that meets the joint requirements alike of
insight into nature and moral wisdom—and no objection of the least
substance can be brought against the possibility of such an idea. If now,
in the course of this argument, the moral springs that stir the mind are
touched, and a lively interest imparted to them with all the force of
rhetoric—of which they are quite worthy—a persuasion arises of the
objective suﬃciency of the proof, and, in most cases where it is used,
an even beneﬁcent illusion that disdains any examination of its logical
accuracy, and in fact abhors and sets its face against logical criticism,
as if it sprang from some impious misgiving.—Now there is really
nothing to say against all this, so long as we only take popular expediency into consideration. But we cannot and should not be deterred
from the analysis of the proof into the two heterogeneous elements
which this argument involves, namely into so much as pertains to
physical, and so much as pertains to moral teleology. For the fusing
of both elements prevents our recognizing where the real nerve of the
proof lies, or in what part or in what way it must be reshaped, so that
its validity may be able to be upheld under the most searching examination—even though on some points we should be compelled to
confess that reason sees but a short way. Hence, the philosopher
ﬁnds it his duty—supposing that he were even to pay no regard to
what he owes to sincerity—to expose the illusion, however wholesome,
which such a confusion can produce. He must segregate what is mere
matter of persuasion from what leads to conviction—two modes of
assent that diﬀer not merely in degree but in kind—so as to be able
to present openly in all its clearness the attitude which the mind adopts
in this proof, and to subject it frankly to the most rigorous test.
Now a proof which is directed towards conviction may be of one
or other of two kinds. It may be intended to decide what the object
is in itself, or else what it is for us, that is, for man in the abstract,
according to the rational principles on which it is necessarily judged
by us. It may, in other words, be a proof
or one
*—taking the latter word in the broad sense of man in
the abstract. In the ﬁrst case it is grounded on principles adequate for
determining judgement, in the second on such as are adequate merely
for reﬂective judgement. Where, in the latter case, a proof rests simply
on theoretical principles, it can never tend towards conviction. But if

463

292

464

Critique of Teleological Judgement

it is grounded on a practical principle of reason, one which, consequently, is universal and necessary, it may well lay claim to a conviction that is suﬃcient from a practical point of view, that is to a moral
conviction. But a proof tends towards conviction, though without producing conviction, if it merely puts us on the road to conviction.
This it does where it only involves objective sources of conviction
which, while as yet insuﬃcient to produce certitude, are nevertheless
of such a kind that they are not subjective grounds of judgement,
which, as such, serve merely for persuasion.
Now all arguments that establish a theoretical proof are suﬃcient
either: (1) for proof by logically rigorous syllogistic inferences; or,
where this is not the case, (2) for inference by analogy; or, should
even such inference be absent, still (3) for probable opinion; or, ﬁnally,
for what is least of all, (4) the assumption of a merely possible source
of explanation as an hypothesis.—Now I assert that all arguments without exception that tend towards theoretical conviction, are powerless
to produce any assurance of the above type, from its highest degree to
its lowest, where the proposition that is to be proved is the existence of
an original being, regarded as a God in the sense appropriate to the
complete content of this concept, that is to say, regarded as a moral
author of the world, and, consequently, in such a way that the ﬁnal end
of creation is at once derived from him.
1. The critique has abundantly shown* how the matter stands as
regards proof in strict logical form—advancing, that is, from universal to particular. No intuition corresponding to the concept of a being
which has to be sought beyond nature is possible for us. So far, therefore, as that concept has to be determined theoretically by synthetic
predicates, it always remains for us a problematical concept. Hence, there
exists absolutely no cognition of such a being that would in the smallest
degree enlarge the reach of our theoretical knowledge. The particular
conception of a supersensible being cannot possibly be subsumed in
any way under the universal principles of the nature of things, so as
to allow of its being determined by inference from those principles,
for they are solely valid for nature as an object of the senses.
2. In the case of two dissimilar things we may admittedly form some
concept of one of them by an analogy 8 which it bears to the other, and
8
Analogy, in a qualitative sense, is the identity of the relation subsisting between
grounds and consequences—causes and eﬀects—so far as such identity subsists despite
the speciﬁc diﬀerence of the things, or of those properties, considered in themselves

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

293

do so even on the point on which they are dissimilar; but from that in
which they are dissimilar we cannot draw any inference from one to
the other on the strength of the analogy—that is, we cannot transfer
the mark of the speciﬁc diﬀerence to the second. Thus on the analogy of the law of the equality of action and reaction in the mutual
attraction and repulsion of bodies I am able to picture to my mind the
social relations of the members of a commonwealth regulated by civil
laws; but I cannot transfer to these relations the former speciﬁc
determinations, that is, physical attraction and repulsion, and ascribe
them to the citizens, so as to constitute a system called a state.—In
the same way the causality of the original being may, in its relation to
the things of the world, regarded as natural ends, quite properly be
conceived on the analogy of an intelligence, regarded as the source of
the forms of certain products that we call works of art. For this is
only done in the interests of the theoretical or practical use which our
cognitive faculty has to make of this concept when dealing with the
things in the world. But from the fact that with the beings of the
(i.e. apart from this relation), which are the source of similar consequences. Thus when we
compare the formative activities of the lower animals with those of man, we regard the
unknown source of such eﬀects in the former case, as compared with the known source of
similar eﬀects produced by man, that is by reason, as the analogon of reason. By this we
mean to imply that while the source of the formative capacity of the lower animals, to
which we give the name of instinct, is in fact speciﬁcally diﬀerent from reason, yet, comparing, say, the constructive work of beavers and human beings, it stands in a like
relation to its eﬀect.—But this does not justify me in inferring that, because man employs
reason for what he constructs, beavers must possess reason also, and in calling this an inference from analogy. But from the similar mode of activity on the part of the lower animals,
the source of which we are unable directly to perceive, compared with that of man, of
which we are immediately conscious, we may quite correctly infer, on the strength of the
analogy, that the lower animals, like man, act according to representations, and are not
machines, as Descartes contends, and that, despite their speciﬁc diﬀerence, they are living
beings and as such generally kindred to man. The principle that authorizes us to draw this
inference lies in the fact that we have exactly the same reason for putting the lower animals
in this respect in the same genus with human beings as in man for putting human beings,
so far as we look at them from the outside and compare their acts, in the same genus with
one another. There is par ratio* here. In the same way the causality of the supreme worldcause may be conceived on the analogy of an understanding, if we compare its ﬁnal products in the world with the formative works of man, but we cannot, on the strength of the
analogy, infer such human attributes in the world-cause. For the principle that would
make such a mode of reasoning possible is absent in this case, namely the paritas rationis
for including the supreme being and man, in relation to their respective causalities, in
one and the same genus. The causality of the beings in the world which, like causality
by means of understanding, is always sensuously conditioned, cannot be transferred to a
being which has no generic concept in common with man beyond that of a thing in the
abstract.

465

294

466

Critique of Teleological Judgement

world intelligence must be ascribed to the cause of an eﬀect that is
considered artiﬁcial, we are wholly unable to infer by analogy that, in
relation to nature, the very same causality that we perceive in man
belongs also to the being which is entirely distinct from nature. The
reason is that this touches the precise point of dissimilarity between
a cause that is sensuously conditioned in respect of its eﬀects and a
supersensible original being. This dissimilarity is implied in the very
concept of such a supersensible being, and the distinguishing feature
cannot therefore be transferred to it.—In this very fact, that I am
required to conceive the causality of the Deity only on the analogy of an
understanding—a faculty which is not known to us in any other being
besides man, subjected, as he is, to the conditions of sensibility—lies
the prohibition that forbids me to ascribe to God an understanding
in the proper sense of the word.9
3. There is no room for opinion in a priori judgements. Such judgements, on the contrary, enable us to cognize something as quite certain,
or else give us no cognition at all. But even where the given premisses
from which we start are empirical, as are the natural ends in the present case, yet they cannot help us to form any opinion that extends
beyond the sensible world, and to such rash judgements we cannot
accord the least claim to probability. For probability is a fraction of a
possible certainty distributed over a particular series of grounds—the
grounds of the possibility within the series being compared with the
suﬃcient ground of certainty, as a part is compared with a whole. Here
the insuﬃcient ground must be capable of being increased to the point
of suﬃciency. But these grounds, being the determining grounds
of the certainty of one and the same judgement, must be of the same
order. For unless they are, they would not, when taken together, form
a quantum—such as certainty is. Thus one component part cannot lie
within the bounds of possible experience, and another lie beyond all
possible experience. Consequently, since premisses that are simply
empirical do not lead to anything supersensible, nothing can supplement the imperfection of such an empirical series. Not the smallest
approximation, therefore, occurs in the attempt to reach the supersensible, or a knowledge of it, from such premisses; and consequently no
9 This does not involve the smallest loss to our representation of the relation in which
this being stands to the world, so far as concerns the consequences, theoretical or practical, of this concept. To seek to inquire into the intrinsic nature of this being is a curiosity as senseless as it is idle.

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

295

probability enters into a judgement about the supersensible, when it
rests on arguments drawn from experience.
4. If anything is intended to serve as an hypothesis for explaining
the possibility of a given phenomenon, then at least the possibility of
that thing must be perfectly certain. We give away enough when, in the
case of an hypothesis, we waive the knowledge of actual existence—
which is aﬃrmed in an opinion put forward as probable—and more
than this we cannot surrender. At least the possibility of what we
make the basis of an explanation must be open to no doubt, otherwise
there would be no end to empty ﬁctions of the brain. But it would be
taking things for granted without anything whatever to go upon, if we
were to assume the possibility of a supersensible being deﬁned
according to positive concepts, for no one of the conditions requisite for
cognition, so far as concerns the element dependent on intuition, is
given. Hence, all that is left as the criterion of this possibility is the
principle of contradiction—which can only prove the possibility of
the thought and not of the object which is thereby thought.
The net result is that for the existence of the original being, regarded
as a Deity, or of the soul, regarded as an immortal spirit, it is absolutely
impossible for human reason to obtain any proof from a theoretical
point of view, so as to produce the smallest degree of assurance.
And there is a perfectly intelligible reason for this, since we have
no available material for deﬁning the idea of the supersensible,
seeing that we should have to draw that material from things in the
world of the senses, and then its character would make it utterly
inappropriate to the supersensible. In the absence, therefore, of all
determination, we are left merely with the conception of a non-sensible
something containing the ultimate ground of the sensible world.
This constitutes no cognition of its intrinsic nature, such as would
extend our concept of this ground.

§ 91
The type of assurance produced by a practical faith
If we look merely to the manner in which something can be an object
of knowledge (res cognoscibilis) for us, that is, having regard to the subjective nature of our powers of representation, we do not in that case
compare our concepts with the objects, but merely with our faculties
of cognition and the use that they are able to make of the given

467

296

468

Critique of Teleological Judgement

representation from a theoretical or practical point of view. So the
question whether something is a cognizable entity or not, is a question
which touches, not the possibility of the things themselves, but the
possibility of our knowledge of them.
Things which can be known are of three kinds:* matters of opinion (opinabile), matters of fact (scibile), and matters of faith (mere
credibile).
1. The objects of mere ideas of reason, being wholly incapable of
presentation, on behalf of theoretical knowledge, in any possible
experience whatever, are to that extent also things altogether
unknowable, and, consequently, we cannot even form an opinion about
them. For to form an opinion a priori is absurd on the face of it and
the straight road to pure ﬁgments of the brain. Either our a priori
proposition is certain, therefore, or it involves no element of assurance at all. Hence, matters of opinion are always objects of an empirical knowledge that is at least intrinsically possible. They are, in
other words, objects belonging to the sensible world, but objects of
which an empirical knowledge is impossible for us because the degree
of empirical knowledge we possess is as it is. Thus the ether of our
modern physicists—an elastic ﬂuid interpenetrating all other substances and completely permeating them—is a mere matter of opinion, yet it is in all respects of such a kind that it could be perceived if
our external senses were sharpened to the highest degree, but its
presentation can never be the subject of any observation or experiment. To assume rational inhabitants of other planets is a matter of
opinion; for if we could get nearer the planets, which is intrinsically
possible, experience would decide whether such inhabitants are
there or not; but as we never shall get so near to them, the matter
remains one of opinion. But to entertain an opinion that there exist
in the material universe pure unembodied thinking spirits is mere
romancing—supposing, I mean, that we dismiss from our notice, as
well we may, certain phenomena that have been passed oﬀ for such.*
Such a notion is not a matter of opinion at all, but an idea pure and
simple. It is what remains when we abstract from a thinking being all
that is material and yet leave it in possession of its thought. But
whether, when we have taken away everything else, the thought—
which we only know in man, that is in connexion with a body—would
still remain, is a matter we are unable to decide. A thing like this is
a sophistical entity (ens rationis ratiocinantis), not an entity of reason

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

297

(ens rationis ratiocinatae). With the latter it is anyway possible to substantiate the objective reality of its concept, at least in a manner
suﬃcient for the practical employment of reason, for this employment, which has its peculiar and apodictically certain a priori principles, in fact demands and postulates that concept.
2. The objects that answer to concepts whose objective reality can be
proved are matters of fact 10 (res facti). Such proof may be aﬀorded by
pure reason or by experience, and in the former case may derive from
theoretical or practical data of reason, but in all cases it must be eﬀected
by means of an intuition corresponding to the relevant concepts.
Examples of matters of fact are the mathematical properties of geometrical magnitudes, for they admit of a priori presentation for the
theoretical employment of reason. Further, things or qualities of
things that are capable of being veriﬁed by experience, whether it be
one’s own personal experience or that of others (supported by evidence), are in the same way matters of fact.—But there is this
notable point, that one idea of reason, strange to say, is to be found
among the matters of fact—an idea which does not of itself admit of
any presentation in intuition, or, consequently, of any theoretical proof
of its possibility. The idea in question is that of freedom. Its reality is the
reality of a particular kind of causality (the concept of which would be
transcendent if considered theoretically), and as a causality of that
kind it admits of veriﬁcation by means of practical laws of pure
reason and in the actual actions that take place in obedience to them,
and, consequently, in experience.—It is the only one of all the ideas
of pure reason whose object is a matter of fact and must be included
among the scibilia.
3. Objects that must be thought a priori, either as consequences or
as grounds, if pure practical reason is to be used as duty commands,
but which are transcendent for the theoretical use of reason, are mere
matters of faith. Such is the highest good which has to be realized
in the world through freedom—a concept whose objective reality
cannot be proved in any experience possible for us, or, consequently,
so as to satisfy the requirements of the theoretical employment of
10
I here extend the concept of a matter of fact beyond the usual meaning of the term,
and, I think, rightly. For it is not necessary, and indeed not practicable, to restrict this
expression to actual experience where we are speaking of the relation of things to our
cognitive faculties, as we do not need more than a merely possible experience to enable
us to speak of things as objects of a deﬁnite kind of knowledge.

469

298

470

Critique of Teleological Judgement

reason, while at the same time we are enjoined to use it for the purpose
of realizing that end through pure practical reason in the best way possible, and, accordingly, its possibility must be assumed. This eﬀect
which is commanded, together with the only conditions on which its possibility is conceivable by us, namely the existence of God and the immortality of the soul, are matters of faith (res ﬁdei) and, moreover, are of all
objects the only ones that can be so called.11 For although we have to
believe what we can only learn by testimony from the experience of
others, yet that does not make what is so believed in itself a matter
of faith, for with one of those witnesses it was personal experience and
matter of fact, or is assumed to have been so. In addition it must be
possible to arrive at knowledge by this path—the path of historical
belief; and the objects of history and geography, as, in general, everything that the nature of our cognitive faculties makes at least a possible subject of knowledge, are to be classed among matters of fact, not
matters of faith. It is only objects of pure reason that can be matters
of faith at all, and even they must then not be regarded as objects
simply of pure speculative reason; for this does not enable them to be
reckoned with any certainty whatever among matters, or objects, of
that knowledge which is possible for us. They are ideas, that is concepts, whose objective reality cannot be guaranteed theoretically.
On the other hand, the supreme ﬁnal end to be realized by us, which
is all that can make us worthy of being ourselves the ﬁnal end of a
creation, is an idea that has objective reality for us in practical matters, and is a matter in this sense. But since we cannot procure objective reality for this concept from a theoretical point of view, it is a
mere matter of faith on the part of pure reason, as are also God and
immortality, the latter being the sole conditions under which, owing
to the character of our human reason, we are able to conceive the
possibility of that eﬀect of the use of our freedom according to law.
But assurance in matters of faith is an assurance from a purely practical point of view. It is a moral faith that proves nothing for pure
rational knowledge as theoretical, but only for it as practical and
directed to the fulﬁlment of its obligations. It in no way extends either
11 Being a matter of faith does not make a thing an article of faith, if by articles of faith
we mean such matters of faith as one can be bound to acknowledge, inwardly or outwardly—
a kind therefore that does not enter into natural theology. For, being matters of faith, they
cannot, like matters of fact, depend on theoretical proofs, and, therefore, the assurance is a
free assurance, and it is only as such that it is compatible with the morality of the subject.

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

299

speculation or the practical rules of prudence based upon the principle
of self-love. If the supreme principle of all moral laws is a postulate,
this involves the possibility of its supreme object, and, consequently,
the condition under which we are able to conceive such possibility,
being also postulated. This does not make the cognition of the latter
any knowledge or any opinion of the existence or nature of these conditions, as a mode of theoretical knowledge, but a mere assumption,
conﬁned to practical matters and commanded in practical interests,
on behalf of the moral use of our reason.
If we were able with any plausibility to make the ends of nature
which physical teleology sets before us in such abundance the basis
of a determinate concept of an intelligent world-cause, the existence
of this being would not even then be a matter of faith. For as it would
not be assumed on behalf of the performance of our duty, but only
for the purpose of explaining nature, it would simply be the opinion
and hypothesis best suited to our reason. Now the teleology in question does not lead in any way to a determinate concept of God. On the
contrary such a concept can only be found in that of a moral author of
the world, because this alone furnishes the ﬁnal end to which we can
assign ourselves only so far as we live in accordance with what the
moral law prescribes to us as the ﬁnal end, and, consequently,
imposes upon us as a duty. Hence, it is only by relation to the object
of our duty, as the condition which makes its ﬁnal end possible, that
the concept of God acquires the privilege of ﬁguring in our assurance
as a matter of faith. On the other hand, this very same concept cannot
make its object valid as a matter of fact, for although the necessity of
duty is quite plain for practical reason, yet the attainment of its ﬁnal
end, so far as it does not lie entirely in our own hands, is merely assumed
in the interests of the practical employment of reason, and, therefore, is
not practically necessary in the way duty itself is.12
12 The ﬁnal end which we are enjoined by the moral law to pursue is not the ground
of duty. For duty lies in the moral law which, being a formal practical principle, directs
categorically, irrespective of the objects of the faculty of desire—the material content of
willing—and, consequently, of any end whatever. This formal character of our actions—
their subordination to the principle of universal validity—which alone constitutes their
intrinsic moral worth, lies entirely in our own power; and we can quite easily make abstraction from the possibility or the impracticability of the ends that we are obliged to promote
in accordance with that law—for they only form the extrinsic worth of our actions. Thus
we put them out of consideration, as what does not lie altogether in our own power, in
order to concentrate our attention on what rests in our own hands. But the object in

471

300

472

Critique of Teleological Judgement

Faith as habitus, not as actus,* is the moral attitude of reason in its
assurance of the truth of what is beyond the reach of theoretical
knowledge. It is the steadfast principle of the mind, therefore, according to which the truth of what must necessarily be presupposed as the
condition of the supreme ﬁnal end being possible is assumed as true in
consideration of the fact that we are under an obligation to pursue that
end13 —and assumed notwithstanding that we have no insight into
its possibility, though likewise none into its impossibility. Faith, in
the plain acceptation of the term, is a conﬁdence of attaining a purpose the furthering of which is a duty, but whose achievement is a
thing of which we are unable to perceive the possibility—or, consequently, the possibility of what we can alone conceive to be its conditions. Thus the faith that has reference to particular objects is
entirely a matter of morality, provided such objects are not objects of
possible knowledge or opinion, in which latter case, and above all in
matters of history, it must be called credulity and not faith. It is a free
view—the furthering of the ﬁnal end of all rational beings, namely, happiness so far as it
is consistent with duty—is nevertheless imposed upon us by the law of duty. But speculative reason does not in any way perceive the practicability of that object—whether we look
at it from the standpoint of our own physical power or from that of the co-operation of
nature. On the contrary, so far as we are able to form a rational judgement on the point,
speculative reason must, apart from the assumption of the existence of God and immortality, regard it as a baseless and idle, though well-intentioned, expectation, to hope that
mere nature, internal or external, will from such causes bring about such a result of
our good conduct, and could it have perfect certainty as to the truth of this judgement,
it would have to look on the moral law itself as a mere delusion of our reason in respect
of practical matters. But speculative reason is fully convinced that the latter can never
happen, whereas those ideas whose object lies beyond nature may be thought without
contradiction. Hence for the sake of its own practical law and the task which it imposes,
and, therefore, in respect of moral concerns, it must recognize those ideas to be real, in
order not to fall into self-contradiction.
13 It is a conﬁdence in the promise of the moral law. But this promise is not regarded
as one involved in the moral law itself, but rather as one which we import into it, and so
import on morally adequate grounds. For a ﬁnal end cannot be commanded by any law of
reason, unless reason, though it be with uncertain voice, also promises its attainability, and
at the same time authorizes assurance as to the sole conditions under which our reason can
imagine such attainability. The very word ﬁdes expresses this; and it must seem suspicious how this expression and this particular idea ﬁnd a place in moral philosophy, since
it was ﬁrst introduced with Christianity, and its acceptance might perhaps seem only a
ﬂattering imitation of the language of the latter. But this is not the only case in which this
wonderful religion has in the great simplicity of its statement enriched philosophy with far
more deﬁnite and purer concepts of morality than morality itself could have previously
supplied. But once these concepts are found, they are freely approved by reason, which
adopts them as concepts at which it could quite well have arrived itself and which it
might and ought to have introduced.

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

301

assurance, not of any matter for which dogmatic proofs can be found for
theoretical determining judgement, nor of what we consider a matter of
obligation, but of that which we assume in the interests of a purpose
which we set before ourselves in accordance with laws of freedom. But
this does not mean that it is adopted like an opinion formed on inadequate
grounds. On the contrary it is something that is grounded in reason
(though only in relation to its practical employment), and adequately so
in this regard. For without it, when the moral attitude comes into collision with theoretical reason and fails to satisfy its demand for a proof
of the possibility of the object of morality, it forfeits all its stability,
and wavers between practical commands and theoretical doubts. To
be incredulous is to adhere to the maxim of placing no reliance on testimony; but a person is unbelieving who denies all validity to the above
ideas of reason because their reality has no theoretical foundation.
Hence, such a person judges dogmatically. But a dogmatic unbelief
cannot stand side by side with a moral maxim governing the attitude of
the mind—for reason cannot command one to pursue an end that is
recognized to be nothing but a ﬁction of the brain. But the case is
diﬀerent with a doubtful faith. For with such a faith the want of conviction from grounds of speculative reason is only an obstacle—one
which a critical insight into the limits of this faculty can deprive
of any inﬂuence upon conduct and for which it can make amends by
a paramount practical assurance.

If we desire to replace certain mistaken eﬀorts in philosophy, and
to introduce a diﬀerent principle, and gain inﬂuence for it, it gives
great satisfaction to see just how and why such attempts were bound
to miscarry.
God, freedom, and the immortality of the soul are the problems to
whose solution, as their ultimate and unique goal, all the laborious
preparations of metaphysics are directed. Now it was believed that the
doctrine of freedom was only necessary as a negative condition for
practical philosophy, whereas that of God and the nature of the soul,
being part of theoretical philosophy, had to be proved independently
and separately. Then each of those two concepts was subsequently to
be united with what is commanded by the moral law (which is only possible on terms of freedom) and a religion was to be arrived at in this way.
But we perceive at once that such attempts were bound to miscarry.

473

302

474

Critique of Teleological Judgement

For from simple ontological concepts of things in the abstract, or of the
existence of a necessary being, we can form absolutely no concept of
an original being determined by predicates which admit of being
given in experience and which are therefore available for cognition.
But should the concept be founded on experience of the physical
purposiveness of nature, it could then in turn supply no proof adequate for morality or, consequently, the cognition of a God. Just as
little could knowledge of the soul drawn from experience—which
we can only obtain in this life—furnish a concept of its spiritual and
immortal nature, or, consequently, one that would satisfy morality.
Theology and pneumatology, regarded as problems framed in the
interests of sciences pursued by a speculative reason, lie in their very
implication beyond all our faculties of knowledge, and cannot,
therefore, be established by means of any empirical data or predicates.—These two concepts, both that of God and that of the soul
(in respect of its immortality), can only be deﬁned by means of predicates which, although they themselves derive their possibility
entirely from a supersensible source, must, for all that, prove their
reality in experience, for this is the only way in which they can make
possible a cognition of a wholly supersensible being.—Now the only
concept of this kind to be found in human reason is that of the freedom of man subject to moral laws and, in conjunction therewith, to
the ﬁnal end which freedom prescribes by means of these laws.
These laws and this ﬁnal end enable us to ascribe, the former to the
author of nature, the latter to man, the properties which contain the
necessary conditions of the possibility of both. Thus it is from this
idea that an inference can be drawn to the existence and the nature
of both God and the soul—beings that otherwise would be entirely
hidden from us.
Hence, the source of the failure of the attempt to attain to a proof
of God and immortality by the merely theoretical route lies in the
fact that no knowledge of the supersensible is possible if the path of
natural concepts is followed. The reason why the proof succeeds, on
the other hand, when the path of morals, that is, of the concept of
freedom, is followed, is because from the supersensible, which in
morals is fundamental (i.e. as freedom), there arises a deﬁnite law of
causality. By means of this law the supersensible here not only provides material for the knowledge of the other supersensible, that is of
the moral ﬁnal end and the conditions of its practicability, but it also

Theory of the Method of Teleological Judgement

303

reveals its own reality, as a matter of fact, in actions. For that very
reason, however, it is unable to aﬀord any valid argument other than
from a practical point of view—which is also the only one needful
for religion.
There is something very remarkable in the way this whole matter
stands. Of the three ideas of pure reason, God, freedom, and immortality, that of freedom is the one and only concept of the supersensible
which (owing to the causality implied in it) proves its objective reality
in nature by its possible eﬀect there. By this means it makes possible
the connexion of the two other ideas with nature, and the connexion
of all three to form a religion. We are thus ourselves possessed of a
principle which is capable of determining the idea of the supersensible within us, and, in that way, also of the supersensible without us,
so as to constitute knowledge—a knowledge, however, which is only
possible from a practical point of view. This is something of which
mere speculative philosophy—which can only give a simply negative
concept even of freedom—must despair. Consequently the concept
of freedom, as the fundamental concept behind all unconditionallypractical laws, can extend reason beyond the bounds to which every
(theoretical) concept of nature must remain hopelessly restricted.

475

GENERAL REMARK ON TELEOLOGY
If we ask how the moral argument, which only proves the existence of
God as a matter of faith for practical pure reason, ranks with the other
arguments in philosophy, the value of the entire stock of the latter may
be readily judged. It turns out that we are left with no choice here,
but that philosophy in its theoretical capacity must of its own accord
resign all its claims in the face of an impartial critique.
Philosophy must lay the ﬁrst foundations of all assurance on what
is matter of fact, unless such assurance is to be entirely baseless.
Hence, the only diﬀerence that can arise in the proof is on the point of
whether an assurance in the consequence inferred from this matter
of fact may be based upon it in the form of knowledge for theoretical
cognition or in the form of faith for practical cognition. All matters
of fact come under the head either of the concept of nature, which
proves its reality in objects of the senses that are given, or might be
given, antecedently to all concepts of nature; or else of the concept of
freedom, which suﬃciently reveals its reality by the causality of reason
in respect of certain eﬀects in the sensible world that are possible
by means of that causality—a causality which reason indisputably postulates in the moral law. Now the concept of nature—which pertains
merely to theoretical cognition—is either metaphysical and wholly a
priori; or physical, that is a posteriori and of necessity only conceivable
by means of determinate experience. Hence, the metaphysical concept
of nature—which does not presuppose any determinate experience—
is ontological.
Now the ontological proof of the existence of God drawn from the
concept of an original being may take one or other of two paths. It may
start from the ontological predicates which alone enable that being to be
completely deﬁned in thought, and thence infer its absolutely necessary
existence. Or it may start from the absolute necessity of the existence of
something or other, whatever it may be, and thence infer the predicates
of the original being. For an original being implies in accordance with
its very concept—if such a being is not derived from anything else—
the unconditional necessity of its own existence and (if this necessity
may be formulated to the mind) its determination in and through the

General Remark on Teleology

305

concept itself. Now these two requirements were both supposed to be
found in the concept of the ontological idea of an ens realissimum or
superlatively real being. Thus there arose two metaphysical arguments.
The proof which is based on the purely metaphysical concept of
nature—the strictly ontological proof, as it is called— started from the
concept of the superlatively real being and thence inferred its absolutely
necessary existence, the argument being that unless it existed it would
lack one reality, namely, existence.—The other, which is also called the
metaphysico-cosmological proof, started from the necessity of the existence of something or other—and as much as that I must certainly concede, since an existence is given to me in my own self-consciousness—
and thence inferred its complete determination as the superlatively real
being. For, as was argued, while all that has existence is determined in
all respects, what is absolutely necessary—that is, what we have to
cognize as such, and, consequently, cognize a priori—must be completely determined through its concept; but such thorough determination can only be found in the concept of a superlatively real thing. The
sophistries in both these inferences need not be exposed here, as that
has already been done in another place. All I need now say is that, let
such proofs be defended with all the forms of dialectical subtlety you
please, yet they will never reach out beyond the schools and enter into
every-day life or be able to exert the slightest inﬂuence on ordinary
healthy intelligence.
The proof which is founded on a concept of nature, which, while
it can only be empirical, is yet intended to lead beyond the bounds of
nature as the sum of sensible objects, can only be the proof derived from
the ends of nature. Though the concept of these ends, no doubt, cannot
be given a priori, but only through experience, this proof promises
such a concept of the original ground of nature as alone, of all those
that we can conceive, is appropriate to the supersensible—the concept, namely, of a supreme intelligence as cause of the world. And in
point of fact, so far as principles of reﬂective judgement go, that is to
say, in respect of our human faculty of cognition, it is as good as its
word.—But, now, is this proof in a position to give us that concept
of a supreme or independent, intelligent being, when further understood as that of a God, that is an author of a world subject to moral
laws, and so as, therefore, to be suﬃciently deﬁnite for the idea of a
ﬁnal end of the existence of the world? That is the question on which

476

306

477

Critique of Teleological Judgement

everything turns, whether we are looking for a theoretically adequate
concept of the original being on behalf of our knowledge of nature as
a whole, or for a practical concept for religion.
This argument, drawn from physical teleology, is deserving of all
respect. It appeals to the intelligence of the ordinary person with the
same convincing force as it does to the most subtle thinker; and a
Reimarus won undying honour for himself * by elaborating this line
of thought, which he did with his characteristic profundity and clearness in that work of his which has not yet been excelled.—But what
is the source of the powerful inﬂuence which this proof exerts upon
the mind, and exerts especially on a calm and perfectly voluntary assent
arising from the cool judgement of reason (for emotion and exaltation
of the mind produced by the wonders of nature may be put down to
persuasion)? Is it physical ends, which all point to an inscrutable intelligence in the world-cause? No, they would be an inadequate source,
as they do not satisfy the needs of reason or an inquiring mind. For
reason asks: For what end do all those things of nature exist which
exhibit a kind of art? And for what end does man himself exist—man
with whose consideration we are inevitably brought to a halt, he
being the ultimate end of nature, so far as we can conceive? Why does
this universal nature exist, and what is the ﬁnal end of all its wealth
and variety of art? To suggest that it was made for enjoyment, or to
be gazed at, contemplated and admired—which if the matter ends
there, amounts to no more than enjoyment of a particular kind—as
though enjoyment was the ultimate and ﬁnal end of the presence
here of the world and of man himself, cannot satisfy reason. For a
personal worth, which man can only give to himself, is presupposed
by reason, as the sole condition upon which he and his existence can be
a ﬁnal end. In the absence of this personal worth—which alone yields
a deﬁnite concept—the ends of nature do not dispose of the question.
In particular they cannot oﬀer any deﬁnite concept of the supreme being
as an all-suﬃcient (and for that reason one and, in the strict sense of
the term, supreme) being, or of the laws according to which its intelligence is cause of the world.
That the physico-teleological proof produces conviction just as if
it were also a theological proof is, therefore, not due to the use of
ideas of the ends of nature as furnishing so much empirical evidence
of a supreme intelligence. On the contrary it is the moral evidence,
which dwells in every human being and touches him so deeply, that

General Remark on Teleology

307

insinuates itself into our reasoning. One does not stop at the being
that manifests itself with such incomprehensible art in the ends of
nature, but one goes on to ascribe to it a ﬁnal end, and, consequently,
wisdom—although the perception of such natural ends does not
entitle one to do this. Thus the above argument is arbitrarily supplemented in respect of its inherent defect. It is, therefore, really the moral
proof that alone produces the conviction, and even this only does so
from the point of view of moral considerations to which everyone so
inwardly assents. The sole merit of the physico-teleological proof is
that it leads the mind in its contemplation of the world to take the
path of ends, and guides it in this way to an intelligent author of the
world. At this point, then, the moral relation to ends and the idea of
a like lawgiver and author of the world, in the form of a theological
concept, though in truth purely an extraneous addition, seems to
grow quite naturally out of the physico-teleological evidence.
Here we may let the matter rest at the popular statement of the case.
For where ordinary sound understanding confuses two distinct principles, and draws its correct conclusion in point of fact only from one
of them, it generally ﬁnds it diﬃcult, if their separation calls for
much reﬂection, to dissociate one from the other as heterogeneous
principles. But, besides, the moral argument for the existence of God
does not, strictly speaking, merely as it were supplement the physicoteleological so as to make it a complete proof. Rather is it a distinct
proof which compensates for the failure of the latter to produce conviction. For the physico-teleological argument cannot in fact do anything more than direct reason in its judging of the source of nature and
its contingent but admirable order, which is only known to us through
experience, and draw our attention to a cause that acts according to
ends and is as such the source of nature—a cause which through the
character of our cognitive faculty we must conceive as intelligent—
and in this way make us more susceptible to the inﬂuence of the moral
proof. For what the latter concept needs is so essentially diﬀerent
from anything that is to be found in or taught by concepts of nature
that it requires a special premiss and proof entirely independent of
the foregoing if the concept of the original being is to be speciﬁed
suﬃciently for theology and its existence is to be inferred.—The
moral proof (which of course only proves the existence of God when we
take the practical, though also indispensable, side of reason into
account) would, therefore, continue to retain its full force were we to

478

308

479

Critique of Teleological Judgement

meet with no material at all in the world, or only ambiguous material,
for physical teleology. We can imagine rational beings ﬁnding themselves in the midst of a nature such as to show no clear trace of organization, but only the eﬀects of a mere mechanism of crude matter, so
that, looking to them and to the variability of some merely contingently
purposive forms and relations, there would appear to be no reason for
inferring an intelligent author. In this nature there would then be nothing to suggest a physical teleology. And yet reason, while receiving no
instruction here from concepts of nature, would ﬁnd in the concept of
freedom, and the ethical ideas grounded upon it, a ground, suﬃcient
for practice, for postulating the concept of the original being appropriate to those ideas, that is, as a Deity, and nature, including even our
own existence, as a ﬁnal end answering to freedom and its laws, and for
doing so in consideration of the indispensable command of practical
reason.—However the fact that in the actual world abundant material
for physical teleology exists to satisfy the rational beings in it—a fact
not antecedently necessary—serves as a desirable conﬁrmation of
the moral argument, so far as nature can adduce anything analogous
to the ideas of reason (moral ideas in this case). For the concept of a
supreme cause that possesses intelligence—a concept that is far from
suﬃcient for a theology—acquires by that means such reality as is
suﬃcient for reﬂective judgement. But this concept is not required
as a foundation of the moral proof; nor can the latter proof be used
for completing the former, which of itself does not point to morality
at all, and making it one entire proof by continuing the train of
reasoning on the same fundamental lines. Two such heterogeneous
principles as nature and freedom cannot but yield two diﬀerent lines of
proof—while the attempt to derive the proof in question from nature
will be found inadequate for what is meant to be proved.
If the premisses of the physico-teleological argument could really
sustain the proof sought, the result would be very gratifying to speculative reason. For they would aﬀord hope of producing a theosophy—
that being the name one would have to give to a theoretical knowledge
of the divine nature and its existence suﬃcient for explaining both
the constitution of the world and the distinctive scope of moral laws.
Similarly if psychology were suﬃcient to enable us to attain to a
knowledge of the immortality of the soul, it would open the door to
a pneumatology which would be equally acceptable to reason. But,
however much it might ﬂatter the vanity of an idle curiosity, neither

General Remark on Teleology

309

of the two fulﬁls the desire of reason in respect of theory, which would
have to be based on a knowledge of the nature of things. But whether
they do not better fulﬁl their ultimate objective purpose, the ﬁrst in the
form of theology, the second in the form of anthropology, when both are
grounded on the moral principle, namely that of freedom, and adapted,
therefore, to the practical employment of reason, is a diﬀerent question,
and one which we have here no need to pursue further.
But the reason why the physico-teleological argument does not
furnish what theology requires is that it does not, and cannot, yield
any concept of the original being that is suﬃciently determinate for
that purpose. Such a concept has to be derived entirely from a
diﬀerent quarter, or (at least) you must look elsewhere to supplement
the defects of the concept by what is an arbitrary addition. You infer
an intelligent world-cause from the great purposiveness of natural
forms and their relations. But what is the degree of this intelligence?
Beyond doubt you cannot assume that it is the highest possible intelligence; for to do so you would have to see that a greater intelligence
than that of which you perceive any evidence in the world is inconceivable, which means attributing omniscience to yourself.* In the
same way you infer from the greatness of the world a very great
might on the part of its author. But you will acknowledge that this
has only comparative signiﬁcance for your power of comprehension
and that, since you do not know all that is possible, so as to compare it
with the magnitude of the world, so far as known to you, you cannot
infer the omnipotence of its author from so small a standard, and so
forth. Now this does not bring you to any determinate concept of an
original being suitable for a theology. For that concept can only be
found in the thought of the totality of the perfections associated with
an intelligence, and for this merely empirical data can give you no
assistance whatever. But apart from a determinate concept of this
kind you can draw no inference to a single intelligent original being;
whatever your purpose, you can only suppose one.—Now, certainly,
one may quite readily give you the liberty of making an arbitrary
addition—since reason raises no valid objection—and saying that
where one meets with so much perfection one may well suppose all
perfection to be united in a unique world-cause; because reason can
turn such a deﬁnite principle to better account both theoretically and
practically. But then you cannot cry up this concept of the original
being as one which you have proved, since you have only assumed it

480

310

481

Critique of Teleological Judgement

in the interests of a better employment of reason. Hence all lament
or impotent rage on account of the supposed enormity of casting a
doubt on the conclusiveness of your chain of reasoning is idle bluster.
For it would very much like us to believe that the doubt that is freely
expressed as to the validity of your argument is a questioning of sacred
truth, so that under this cover its weakness may pass unnoticed.
On the other hand, moral teleology, whose foundations are no less
ﬁrm than those of physical teleology, and which in fact should be
regarded as in a better position, seeing that it rests a priori on principles that are inseparable from our reason, leads to what the possibility
of a theology requires, namely to a deﬁnite concept of the supreme
cause as one that is the cause of the world in its accordance with moral
laws, and, consequently, of such a cause as satisﬁes our moral ﬁnal end.
Now that is a cause that requires nothing less than omniscience, omnipotence, omnipresence, and so forth, as the natural attributes characterizing its operation. These attributes must be thought as connected to
the moral ﬁnal end which is inﬁnite, and accordingly as adequate to
that end. Thus moral teleology alone can furnish the concept of a
unique author of the world suitable for a theology.
In this way theology also leads directly to religion, that is the recognition of our duties as divine commands.* For it is only the recognition
of our duty and of its content—the ﬁnal end enjoined upon us by
reason—that was able to produce a determinate concept of God.
This concept is, therefore, from its origin indissolubly connected
with a sense of obligation to that being. On the other hand, even supposing that by pursuing the theoretical path one could arrive at a determinate concept of the original being, namely, as simple cause of nature,
one would afterwards encounter considerable diﬃculty in ﬁnding valid
proofs for ascribing to this being a causality in accordance with moral
laws, and might, perhaps, not be able to do so at all without resorting to arbitrary interpolation. Yet, if the concept of such causality is
left out, that would-be theological concept can form no basis for the
support of religion. Even if a religion could be established on these
theoretical lines, yet in what touches our own disposition, which is the
essential element in religion, it would really be a diﬀerent religion from
one in which the concept of God and the (practical) conviction of his
existence springs from our fundamental ideas of morality. For if
omnipotence, omniscience, and so forth on the part of an author of the
world were concepts given to us from another quarter, and if, regarded

General Remark on Teleology

311

in that light, we had to take them for granted for the purpose only of
applying our concepts of duties to our relation to such author, then
these latter concepts would inevitably betray strong traces of compulsion and forced submission. But what of the alternative? What if the
ﬁnal end of our true vocation is presented to our minds quite freely,
and through the prescription of our own reason, by a reverence for the
moral law? Why, then, we accept into our moral perspective a cause
harmonizing with that end and with its accomplishment, and accept
it with deepest veneration—wholly diﬀerent from any pathological
fear—and we willingly bow down before it.1
But why should it be of any consequence to us to have a theology
at all? Well, as to this, it is quite obvious that it is not necessary for
the extension or rectiﬁcation of our knowledge of nature or, in fact, for
any theory whatever. We need theology solely on behalf of religion, that
is to say, of the practical or, in other words, moral employment of our
reason, and need it as a subjective requirement. Now if it turns out that
the one and only argument which leads to a determinate concept of the
object of theology is itself a moral argument, the result will not seem
strange. But, more than that, we shall not feel that the assurance produced by this line of proof falls in any way short of the ultimate intention it has in view, provided we are clear on the point that an argument
of this kind only proves the existence of God in a way that satisﬁes
our moral vocation, that is, from a practical point of view. Speculation
does not here display its force in any way, nor does it enlarge the borders of its realm. Also the surprise at the fact that we here assert the
possibility of a theology, and the alleged contradiction in that assertion
with what the critique of speculative reason argued with respect to the
categories, will disappear on close inspection. What that critique
claimed was that the categories can only produce knowledge when
applied to sensible objects, and that they can in no way do so when
applied to the supersensible. But let it be observed that while the categories are here used on behalf of the knowledge of God, they are so
1 Both the admiration for beauty and the emotion excited by the profuse variety of
ends of nature, which a reﬂective mind is able to feel prior to any clear representation of an
intelligent author of the world, have something about them akin to a religious feeling. Hence
they seem primarily to act upon the moral feeling (of gratitude and veneration towards the
unknown cause) by means of a kind of judging analogous to the moral kind, and therefore
to aﬀect the mind by exciting moral ideas. It is then that they inspire that admiration
which is fraught with far more interest than mere theoretical observation can produce.

482

312

483

Critique of Teleological Judgement

used solely for practical, not for theoretical purposes, that is they are
not directed to the intrinsic, and for us inscrutable, nature of God.
—Let me take this opportunity of putting an end to the misinterpretation of the above doctrine in the critique—a doctrine which is very
necessary, but which, to the chagrin of blind dogmatists, relegates
reason to its proper bounds. In this regard I here append the following elucidation.
If I ascribe motive force to a body, and conceive it, therefore, by
means of the category of causality, then at the same time and by the
same means I cognize it; that is to say, I determine the concept which
I have of it as an object in general by means of what applies to it in
the concrete as an object of sense (this being the condition of the possibility of the relation in question). Thus, suppose the dynamical
force that I ascribe to it is that of repulsion, then—even though I do
not as yet place beside it another body against which it exerts this
force—I may predicate of it a place in space, further an extension or
space possessed by the body itself, and, besides, a ﬁlling of this space
by the repelling forces of its parts, and, ﬁnally, the law regulating this
ﬁlling of space—I mean the law that the force of repulsion in the parts
must decrease in the same ratio as the extension of the body increases,
and as the space which it ﬁlls with the same parts and by means of
this force is enlarged.—On the other hand, if I form a notion of a
supersensible being as prime mover, and thus employ the category of
causality in consideration of the same mode of action in the world,
namely, the movement of matter, I must not then conceive it to be at
any place in space, or to be extended, indeed I am not even to conceive
it as existing in time at all or as coexistent with other beings.
Accordingly, I have no forms of thought whatever that could interpret
to me the condition under which movement derived from this being as
its source is possible. Consequently from the predicate of cause, as
prime mover, I do not get the least concrete cognition of it: I have
only the representation of a something containing the source of the
movements in the world. And as the relation in which this something,
as cause stands to these movements, does not give me anything further
that belongs to the constitution of the thing which is cause, it leaves the
concept of this cause quite empty. The reason is, that with predicates
that only get their object in the sensible world I may no doubt advance
to the existence of something that must contain the source of these
predicates, but I cannot advance to the determination of the concept of

General Remark on Teleology

313

this something as a supersensible being, a concept that excludes all
those predicates. If, therefore, I make the category of causality determinate by means of the concept of a prime mover, it does not help me
in the slightest to cognize what God is. But maybe I shall fare better
if I take a line from the order of the world and proceed, not merely to
think the causality of the supersensible being as that of a supreme intelligence, but also to cognize it by means of this determination of the
concept in question; for then the troublesome terms of space
and extension drop out.—Beyond all doubt the great purposiveness
present in the world compels us to think that there is a supreme
cause of this purposiveness and one whose causality has an intelligence
behind it. But this in no way entitles us to ascribe such intelligence to
that cause. (Thus, for instance, we are obliged to think the eternity of
God as an existence throughout all time, because we can form no other
concept of mere existence than that of a magnitude, or in other words,
than as duration. Similarly we have to think the divine omnipotence
as an existence in all places, in order to interpret to ourselves God’s
immediate presence in respect of things external to one another. All
this we do without, however, being at liberty to ascribe any of these
thought-forms to God as something we could cognize in him.) If I
determine the causality of man in respect of certain products that are
only explicable by reference to intentional purposiveness by conceiving it as an intelligence on his part, I need not stop there, but I can
ascribe this predicate to him as a familiar attribute of man and
thereby cognize him. For I know that intuitions are given to the
senses of man, and by means of understanding are brought under a
concept and thus under a rule; that this concept contains only the
common characteristic, letting the particular drop out, and is therefore discursive; that the rules for bringing representations under
the general form of a consciousness are given by understanding in
advance of those intuitions, and so on. Accordingly, I ascribe this attribute to man as one whereby I cognize him. But supposing, now that
I seek to think a supersensible being (God) as intelligence, while this is
not merely permissible but unavoidable if I am to exercise certain
functions of my reason, I have no right whatever to ﬂatter myself that
I am in a position to ascribe intelligence to that being and thereby to
cognize it by one of its attributes. For in that case I must omit all the
above conditions under which I know an intelligence. Consequently,
the predicate that is only available for the determination of man is

484

314

485

Critique of Teleological Judgement

quite inapplicable to a supersensible object. Hence we are quite unable
to cognize what God is by means of any such deﬁnite causality. And
it is so with all categories. They can have no signiﬁcance whatever for
knowledge theoretically considered, unless they are applied to objects
of possible experience.—But I am able to think even a supersensible
being on the analogy of an understanding—indeed must do so when
I look to certain other considerations—without, however, thereby
desiring to cognize it theoretically. I refer to the case of this mode of
its causality having to do with an eﬀect in the world that involves an
aim which is morally necessary but for sensuous beings is unrealizable.
For in that case a knowledge of God and his existence, that is to say
a theology, is possible by means of attributes and determinations of
this causality merely conceived in him according to analogy, and
this knowledge has all requisite reality in a practical relation, but also
in respect only of this relation, that is, in relation to morality.—An
ethical theology is therefore quite possible. For while morality without theology may certainly carry on with its own rule, it cannot do so
with the ﬁnal purpose which this very rule enjoins, unless it throws
reason to the winds as regards this purpose. But a theological ethics—
on the part of pure reason—is impossible, seeing that laws which are
not originally given by reason itself, and the observance of which it
does not bring about as a practical capacity, cannot be moral. In the
same way a theological physics would be a monstrosity, because it
would not bring forward any laws of nature but rather ordinances of
a supreme will, whereas a physical, or, properly speaking, physicoteleological, theology can at least serve as a propaedeutic to theology
proper, since by means of the study of natural ends, of which it
presents a rich supply, it awakens us to the idea of a ﬁnal end which
nature cannot exhibit. Consequently it can make us alive to the need
of a theology which should deﬁne the concept of God suﬃciently for
the highest practical employment of reason, though it cannot produce a theology or furnish demonstrations adequate for its support.

APPENDIX
The ‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

195

i. Philosophy as a System
I F philosophy is a system of rational knowledge through concepts, this
already suﬃces to distinguish it from a critique of pure reason, for although
the latter includes a philosophical investigation into the possibility of this
kind of knowledge, it does not form part of such a system, but rather projects and examines the very idea of this system in the ﬁrst place.
We must begin by dividing the system into its formal and material parts,
the ﬁrst of which (logic) merely treats the form of thought in a system of
rules, while the second (the real part) systematically considers the objects
that are thought in so far as rational cognition of them is possible through
concepts.
Now this real system of philosophy itself can only be divided into
theoretical and practical philosophy, in accordance with the original diﬀerence in their respective objects and with the essential distinction, deriving
from this, in the principles of a science that includes them. One part,
therefore, must be the philosophy of nature, the other part the philosophy
of morals; while the former may also contain empirical principles, the
latter can never contain anything but pure a priori principles (since freedom cannot possibly be an object of experience).
But there is a major and prevailing misconception, one very damaging
to the way in which we approach the science itself,* with regard to the
meaning of the practical character that permits something to be assigned to
practical philosophy. It has been deemed proper to include diplomacy and
political economy, the rules of household management, and those of general behaviour, prescriptions concerning diet and the health of body and 196
soul alike (and indeed why not all the arts and professions?) within practical philosophy since all of these contain a body of practical propositions.
But while practical propositions are distinguished from theoretical propositions, which contain the possibility and the determinations of things, not by
their content but by a diﬀerence in the way we represent them, merely those
which consider freedom under laws are so distinguished. All the rest are simply
applications of the theory of the nature of things to the way in which we can
produce them according to a principle, that is to say, their possibility represented as resulting from a voluntary act (which equally belongs to the realm
of natural causes). Thus the solution of the problem in mechanics—to discover the respective lengths of the arms of a lever if a given force is to be

316

Critique of Teleological Judgement

in equilibrium with a given weight—is certainly expressed as a practical
formula, but one which contains no more than the theoretical proposition: in
a state of equilibrium the lengths of the arms of the lever are inversely proportional to the former. It is simply that this relationship, since it is an eﬀect
of a cause governed (through our own choice) by the representation of that
relation, is thought as possible. And the same holds for all practical propositions that are concerned only with the production of objects. If someone
oﬀers prescriptions for promoting happiness and discusses, for example,
what one must do to be happy, then it is only the inner conditions of the
possibility of being happy—temperance, moderation of the inclinations in
order not to yield to passion, etc.—which are represented as relevant to the
nature of the subject, together with the way we can produce this balance
through our own eﬀorts. Consequently, all this is derived directly from
the relation between the theory of the object and that of our own nature
(ourselves as cause). Since the practical prescription is here distinguished
197 from a theoretical one by its formula rather than by its content, no special
type of philosophy is required to investigate such a connection of ground
and consequent. In short, all practical propositions which derive what can
occur in nature from the power of our own choice as a cause belong to theoretical philosophy as knowledge of nature. Only those propositions which
give freedom its law are speciﬁcally diﬀerentiated by their content from the
former propositions. One can say of the ﬁrst kind that they constitute the
practical part of a philosophy of nature, while the latter alone lay the foundation of a special practical philosophy.
Remark
It is very important to divide philosophy precisely according to its parts, and
to that end not to include amongst the members of this systematic division
something that is only a consequence or an application of it to given cases
and that thus requires no special principles.
Practical propositions are distinguished from theoretical ones either with
regard to their principles or their consequences. In the latter case, they do
not comprise a particular part of science, but belong to the theoretical part
of science as consequences of a particular kind that derive from it. Now the
possibility of things under the laws of nature diﬀers essentially and in principle from their possibility under laws of freedom. But this diﬀerence does
not lie in the fact that in the latter case we locate the cause in a will, while
in the former case we locate it in the things themselves external to the will.
For if the will obeys no other principles than those in accordance with
which, as merely natural laws, the understanding grasps the possibility of
the object, and the proposition implying the possibility of something as an
eﬀect of the causality of voluntary action can be described as a ‘practical’

‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

317

proposition, we still cannot claim that this proposition is remotely distinguished, in principle, from the theoretical propositions which concern the
nature of things; and it must therefore borrow its principle from the latter 198
in order to present the representation of an object in reality.
Thus practical propositions, the content of which concerns merely the
possibility of a represented object (through voluntary action), are simply
an application of a thorough theoretical knowledge and cannot comprise a
special part of a science. A ‘practical’ geometry, considered as a separate
science, is a nonsense, however many practical propositions this pure science
may contain, most of which, as problems, require special instruction for their
solution. The problem of constructing a square with a given side and a
given right angle is a practical proposition, but it is purely a consequence
of the relevant theory. Nor can the art of surveying (agrimensoria) ever presume the title of a practical geometry or ever be described as a special part of
geometry itself, but belongs amongst the scholia of the latter, namely the
employment of this science for purposes of commerce.1
Even in a science of nature, in so far as it rests upon empirical principles, namely physics in the proper sense, the practical procedures for discovering the hidden laws of nature, under the name of ‘experimental physics’,
can never justify the (equally nonsensical) name of ‘practical physics’ as a part
of natural philosophy. For the principles according to which we perform our 199
experiments must themselves always be derived from our knowledge of
nature, and thus from theory. And exactly the same is true of the practical
precepts concerning the voluntary production of a certain state of mind
within ourselves (e.g. the arousing or taming of the imagination, or the
pacifying or subduing of the inclinations). There is no practical psychology
as a special part of the philosophy of human nature since the principles for
a possible, artfully produced, state of mind must be borrowed from those
concerning the possible determinations of the character of our nature, and
although these consist of practical propositions they still do not comprise a
practical part of psychology, but belong simply to its scholia precisely
because they possess no special principles.
In general, practical propositions (whether they be pure a priori or
empirical), if they immediately imply the possibility of an object through
1 This pure and therefore sublime science seems to forfeit something of its dignity in
conceding that, as elementary geometry, it requires implements for the construction of its
concepts, albeit only two, namely the compass and the ruler; these constructions alone
are called ‘geometrical’, while those of higher geometry are called ‘mechanical’ because
more complex mechanical devices are required to construct the concepts of the latter. But
what we understand in the former case is not the actual implements (circinus et regola),*
which can never render the relevant ﬁgures with mathematical precision, but rather the
simplest ways in which the imagination can exhibit the latter a priori, something which
cannot be matched by any instrument.

318

Critique of Teleological Judgement

our own power of choice, always belong to our knowledge of nature and
thus to the theoretical part of philosophy. Only those propositions which
directly present the determination of an act as necessary, simply by representing its form (in accordance with laws in general), regardless of the
material content of the envisaged object, can and must possess their own
special principles (in the idea of freedom), and although the concept of an
object of the will (the highest good) is grounded on precisely these principles,
this object still only belongs indirectly, as a consequence, to the practical
precept (henceforth described as a ‘moral’ one). Moreover, the possibility
of the highest good cannot properly be grasped through any knowledge of
nature (or theory). Thus it is only such propositions which belong to a
special part of a system of rational cognition under the name of practical
philosophy.
In order to avoid ambiguity, all of the remaining practical propositions,
regardless of the science with which they may be connected, can be called
200 technical rather than practical ones. For they belong to the art of realizing
what is envisaged, something which, in the case of a complete theory, is
always merely an extension of the latter and never an independent part of
any kind of precept. In this sense all precepts of skill are technical 2 and
therefore belong to our theoretical knowledge of nature and derive from
the latter.
But in what follows we shall also employ the term ‘technic’* where the
objects of nature are merely judged as if their possibility depended upon
201 art. In such cases the judgements are neither theoretical nor practical (in
the sense just described) since they determine nothing with regard to the
character of the object or to the way in which we produce the latter; rather
nature itself is thereby judged, though merely in analogy with art, and
indeed in a subjective relation to our faculty of cognition rather than in an
2 This is the place to correct an error which I committed* in the Groundwork for the
Metaphysics of Morals. For after asserting that the imperatives of skill command only conditionally, under the condition of ends that are merely possible, i.e. problematic, I described
such practical precepts as ‘problematical imperatives’, an expression which obviously harbours a contradiction. I should have called them technical imperatives, i.e. imperatives of
art. The pragmatic imperatives, or rules of prudence, which command under the condition
of an actual and thus even subjectively necessary end, are now also included under the
technical imperatives (for what is prudence other than the skill of being able to use free
human beings, and even one’s own natural dispositions and inclinations, for one’s own
intentions?). It is only because the end which we ascribe to ourselves and to other human
beings, namely that of one’s own happiness, cannot be counted amongst the merely arbitrary ends, that we are justiﬁed in designating these technical imperatives in a special
way. For the task requires not merely that we specify the means of executing an end,
as in technical imperatives, but that we also determine what constitutes the end itself
(happiness), whereas in the case of general technical imperatives this is presupposed as
already known.

‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

319

objective relation to the objects. Here we shall not indeed describe the judgements themselves as technical, but rather the power of judgement upon
whose laws these judgements are grounded, and in conformity with this
nature itself will also be called ‘technical’. Since this technic includes no
propositions of an objectively determining character, it does not constitute
a part of doctrinal philosophy, but only part of the critique of our cognitive faculties.

ii. The System of the Higher Cognitive Faculties which lies at the
Basis of Philosophy
I F we are speaking of the division not of philosophy, but of our faculty for
a priori cognition through concepts (the higher faculty), i.e. of a critique of
pure reason with respect solely to its capacity for thinking (leaving the pure
form of intuition out of consideration), then the systematic representation
of the capacity for thought falls into three parts: ﬁrst, the capacity for knowledge of the universal (of rules)—the understanding; secondly, the capacity
for subsuming the particular under the universal—the power of judgement; and
thirdly, the capacity for determining the particular through the universal
(the derivation from principles)—reason.
The critique of pure theoretical reason, dedicated to uncovering the 202
sources of all knowledge a priori (and thus also of the intuitive aspect
which belongs to reason), furnished the laws of nature, the critique of practical reason furnished the laws of freedom, and thus the a priori principles
of all philosophy appear to have been entirely dealt with already.
But if the understanding furnishes a priori laws of nature, while reason
furnishes those of freedom, then we may expect by analogy that the power
of judgement, which mediates the relationship of the other two faculties,
will likewise aﬀord its own special a priori principles which will perhaps
form the basis for a particular division of philosophy, and that the latter,
as a system, can only be composed of two parts.
Yet the power of judgement is such a peculiar, and by no means independent, faculty of cognition that it provides neither concepts, as does the
understanding, nor ideas, as does reason, for any object whatsoever, because
it is merely a power of subsuming under concepts that are given from
elsewhere. If, therefore, there were any rule or concept that sprang originally from the power of judgement, it would have to be a concept of things in
nature in so far as nature conforms to our power of judgement; it would thus
concern that character of nature of which we can form no other concept
than that its organization conforms to our capacity for subsuming the particular given laws under more general ones which are not given. In other
words, this would have to be the concept of a purposiveness of nature that

320

Critique of Teleological Judgement

furthers our capacity to know nature in so far as we must be able to judge
203 the particular to be contained under the universal and to subsume it under

the concept of nature as one.
A concept of this kind is that of experience as a system in accordance with
empirical laws. For although experience forms a system under transcendental laws, which comprise the condition of the possibility of experience in
general, one might yet be presented with such an inﬁnite multiplicity of
empirical laws and so great a heterogeneity of natural forms in particular
experience that the concept of a system in accordance with these (empirical) laws would necessarily appear alien to the understanding, and neither
the possibility nor still less the necessity of such a uniﬁed whole would be
conceivable. Yet particular experience, which is thoroughly coherent under
constant principles, also demands this systematic connection of empirical
laws through which it becomes possible for the power of judgement to
subsume the particular under the universal, while always remaining within
the empirical sphere and advancing to the highest empirical laws and the
forms of nature that correspond to them. Hence the aggregate of particular experiences must be regarded as a system since without this presupposition no thoroughly lawlike interconnection, i.e. no empirical unity of
these experiences,3 could be established.
204
This lawfulness, which is in itself contingent (as far as all the concepts
of the understanding are concerned) and which the power of judgement
(merely for its own advantage) presumes and presupposes in nature, is a
formal purposiveness of nature which we in fact assume in the latter, but
which forms the basis neither for a theoretical knowledge of nature nor for
a practical principle of freedom; nonetheless, it provides a principle for
judging and investigating nature with regard to the general laws through
which we arrange the particular cases of experience in order to bring out
3
The possibility of an experience in general is the possibility of empirical cognitions
as synthetic judgements. Thus it cannot be derived analytically from the mere comparison
of perceptions (as is commonly believed) since the combination of two diﬀerent perceptions in the concept of an object (for its cognition) is a synthesis, one which makes empirical cognition, i.e. experience, possible only in accordance with principles of the synthetic
unity of appearances, i.e. in accordance with principles which permit the latter to be
brought under the categories. Now these empirical cognitions, in accordance with what
they necessarily have in common (namely those transcendental laws of nature), constitute
an analytic unity of all experience, but not that synthetic unity of experience as a system
which binds together under a principle the empirical laws even in regard to their
diﬀerences (and where their multiplicity may be endless). What the category is with respect
to every particular experience, that is what the purposiveness or ﬁtness of nature is to our
power of judgement (even with regard to its particular laws), and that is why nature is represented as not merely mechanical, but also as technical, a concept that certainly does not
determine synthetic unity objectively, but still subjectively furnishes principles which
serve to guide our enquiries into nature.

‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

321

the systematic connection required for coherent experience and which we
have an a priori ground for assuming.
The concept which springs originally from the power of judgement and
belongs peculiarly to it is therefore that of nature as art or, in other words,
the concept of the technic of nature with respect to its particular laws. This
concept does not supply the foundation for any theory and no more implies
any knowledge of objects and their characteristics than does logic, but merely
furnishes a principle for advancing in accordance with empirical laws
through which the investigation of nature becomes possible. This does not 205
enrich our knowledge of nature with any speciﬁc objective law, but merely
provides the basis for a maxim of the power of judgement, namely to
observe in accordance with it and thereby to unify the forms of nature.
Philosophy, as a doctrinal system of the knowledge of both nature and
freedom, is not endowed with any new division here since this representation
of nature as art is a mere idea which serves as the principle for our investigations into nature and thus merely enables the subject to introduce systematic
interconnection into the aggregate of empirical laws as such wherever possible in so far as we attribute to nature a relationship to this need of ours. On
the other hand, our concept of the technic of nature, as a heuristic principle
for judging it, will belong to the critique of our cognitive faculty; this critique indicates what cause we have for representing the technic of nature
in this way, what the origin of this idea may be, whether it is to be found
in an a priori source, and likewise what the range and limits of its employment may be. In short, such an enquiry will belong to the system of the
critique of pure reason, but not to doctrinal philosophy.

iii. The System of All the Faculties of the Human Mind
W E can trace all the powers of the human mind, without exception, back to
three: the faculty of cognition, the feeling of pleasure and displeasure, and the
faculty of desire. Now it is true that philosophers, who otherwise deserve 206
unstinting praise for the thoroughness of their thinking, have sought to
explain this distinction away as a purely apparent one and to bring all the
faculties under that of cognition alone. But it is very easily demonstrated,
and it has already been obvious for some time, that this attempt to bring
unity to the plurality of the faculties—one that was otherwise undertaken
in a genuinely philosophical spirit—is futile. For there always remains a
great diﬀerence between representations which belong to knowledge, as
related merely to the object and to the unity of our consciousness of these
representations, and likewise between the objective relation in which they
belong to the faculty of desire when regarded as the cause of the reality of the
object, and representations which merely stand in relation to the subject,

322

Critique of Teleological Judgement

when they aﬀord their own grounds for merely maintaining their existence
in the subject, and to that extent are regarded in relation to the feeling of
pleasure. This latter is not a case of knowledge at all, nor does it furnish any
knowledge, although it may presuppose something of the kind as a determining ground.
The connection between knowledge of an object and the feeling of
pleasure or displeasure occasioned by its existence, or the way in which the
faculty of desire resolves to bring the object into existence, can certainly
be known empirically, but since this connection is not based on any a priori
principle, the powers of the mind to that extent constitute only an aggregate rather than a system. Now one can certainly elicit an a priori connection between the feeling of pleasure and the other two faculties, and if we
connect an a priori cognition, namely the rational concept of freedom, to the
207 faculty of desire as its determining ground, we can at the same time discover
subjectively within this objective determination a feeling of pleasure contained in the determination of the will. But the cognitive faculty is not linked
to the faculty of desire in this way by means of pleasure or displeasure since
here the pleasure does not precede the latter faculty, but either only follows
after its determination or is perhaps nothing but the sensation of this
capacity of the will to be determined by reason itself; pleasure therefore is
not a particular feeling or a unique form of receptivity which would
demand a particular domain for itself amongst the properties of the mind.
But since the analysis of the powers of the mind incontestably reveals a
feeling of pleasure which is independent of any determination by the faculty
of desire and can instead furnish a basis for determinations of the latter, the
connection between this faculty and the other two within a single system
implies that this feeling of pleasure, like the other two faculties, rests on a priori
principles rather than on merely empirical grounds. Thus, for the idea of
philosophy as a system, we still require a critique (though not a doctrine)
of the feeling of pleasure and displeasure to the extent that is not empirically
grounded.
Now since the faculty of cognition through concepts ﬁnds its a priori principle in the pure understanding (in its concept of nature), and the faculty of
desire ﬁnds its a priori principle in pure reason (in its concept of freedom),
there remains amongst the general properties of the mind an intermediate
faculty or receptivity, namely the feeling of pleasure and displeasure, just as
there remains amongst the higher cognitive faculties a certain intermediate power, namely that of judgement. What is more natural than to suspect
208 that the latter will also contain a priori principles for the former?
Without descrying anything further about the possibility of this connection, we can certainly already recognize here a kind of ﬁtness between the
power of judgement and the feeling of pleasure, which can serve as the

‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

323

determining ground for the latter or ﬁnd such a ground within it. For while
the understanding and reason, in the division of the faculty of cognition through
concepts, relate their representations to objects in order to acquire concepts
of the latter, the power of judgement relates solely to the subject and for
its own part produces no concepts of objects. Similarly, while in the general
division of the powers of the mind in general both the cognitive faculties and the
faculty of desire contain an objective relation to representations, the feeling
of pleasure and displeasure, by contrast, is merely a receptivity with respect
to a state of the subject; thus if the power of judgement is to determine anything on its own part, this could only be the feeling of pleasure, and conversely,
if the latter is to possess an a priori principle at all, this will only be found
in the power of judgement.

iv. Experience as a System for the Power of Judgement
W E observed in the Critique of Pure Reason that nature in its entirety, as
the sum of all objects of experience, comprises a system according to transcendental laws, ones which the understanding itself furnishes a priori
(namely for appearances in so far as, connected in one consciousness, they
are to constitute experience). In precisely the same way, experience must
also ideally form a system of possible empirical knowledge in accordance
with universal as well as particular laws, in so far as this is objectively possible at least in principle. The unity of nature under a principle of the thorough- 209
going connection of everything contained in this sum of all appearances
requires this. To this extent we are to regard experience in general as a
system under transcendental laws of the understanding, rather than as a mere
aggregate.
But it does not follow from this that nature is a system that is comprehensible for the human faculty of cognition with respect to empirical laws as
well, and that the thoroughgoing systematic interconnection of its appearances in one experience, and thus experience itself as a system, is possible
for human beings. For the variety and diversity of empirical laws might be
so great that while it would still be possible in part to connect our perceptions in one experience in accordance with particular laws that we happen
to have discovered already, it would never be possible to bring these
empirical laws themselves together under a common principle, if it were
the case, as is perfectly possible (as far as the understanding can tell us
a priori), that the variety and diversity of these laws, and of the corresponding forms of nature, were inﬁnitely great and we were thus confronted by
a crude and chaotic aggregate revealing no trace of system whatsoever,
even if we still had to presuppose a system in accordance with transcendental laws.

324

Critique of Teleological Judgement

For the unity of nature in space and time and the unity of our possible
experience are one and the same because the former is a sum of mere appearances (kinds of representation) which only possesses objective reality in
experience, and the latter must be possible as a system under empirical laws
if we are to think the former as a system (as indeed we must). It is therefore
a subjectively necessary, transcendental presupposition that this dismaying
and limitless diversity of empirical laws and this heterogeneity of natural
forms does not belong in nature, but that, instead, nature is ﬁtted for
experience as an empirical system through the aﬃnity of particular laws
under more general ones.
Now this presupposition is the transcendental principle of the power of
judgement. For the latter is not merely the faculty of subsuming the particular under the universal whose concept is given, but also, conversely, that of
210 discovering the universal for the particular. But the understanding, in its
transcendental legislation for nature, ignores the whole manifold of possible
empirical laws. It considers only the conditions of the possibility of experience in general with respect to its formal character. In the understanding,
therefore, we cannot discover the aforementioned principle of the aﬃnity of
particular laws of nature. The power of judgement alone, to which it falls to
bring particular laws under higher, though still empirical, principles, while
also taking account of the diversity of these laws under the same universal laws
of nature, must take such a principle as the basis of its procedure. For in groping about amongst the forms of nature, whose reciprocal agreement with
common empirical but higher laws would otherwise be regarded by the
power of judgement as entirely contingent, it would be even more contingent if
individual perceptions lent themselves so luckily to formulation in terms of an
empirical law; but it would be all the more contingent if manifold empirical
laws simply happened to be ﬁtted for the systematic unity of our knowledge
of nature in a wholly interconnected possible experience, unless, by means of an
a priori principle, we presupposed nature to possess such a form.
All of the current formulae: nature takes the shortest path—she does nothing in vain—she makes no leaps in the manifold of forms (continuum formarum)—
she is rich in species but poor in genera, and so forth, are nothing but this same
transcendental expression of the power of judgement that lays down for
itself a principle for experience as a system and thus for its own needs.
Neither the understanding nor reason can establish such a law of nature
a priori. For although we can perhaps see that nature conforms, in its
purely formal laws, to our understanding (and thus becomes an object of
experience in general), with respect to the plurality and heterogeneity of
the particular laws of nature it is free of all restrictions legislated by our
faculty of cognition. It is a sheer assumption on the part of the power of
judgement, for the sake of its own employment in advancing continuously

‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

325

from particular empirical laws to more general, though still empirical, ones
in order to consolidate empirical laws, which establishes that principle. 211
Under no circumstances can such a principle be set to the account of
experience since only under this assumption is it possible to order experience in a systematic fashion.

v. The Reﬂective Power of Judgement
T HE power of judgement can be regarded either as a mere faculty for
reﬂecting on a given representation, in accordance with a certain principle,
for producing a concept that is thereby made possible, or as a faculty for
determining an underlying concept by means of an empirical representation.
In the ﬁrst case, we are dealing with the reﬂective, in the second case, with
the determining power of judgement. But to reﬂect (to deliberate) is to compare and combine given representations either with other representations or
with our faculty of cognition in relation to a concept that is thereby made
possible. The reﬂective power of judgement is also what is called the faculty of judging ( facultas diiudicandi).
Now reﬂecting (which even occurs in animals, albeit only instinctively:
not in relation to a resulting concept, but to an inclination yet to be determined) requires a principle just as much as the act of determining in which the
underlying concept of the object prescribes the rule to the power of judgement and thus assumes the place of the principle.
The principle of reﬂection upon given objects of nature is that empirically determinate concepts can indeed be found for all things in nature;4 or,
4 At ﬁrst glance this principle does not look like a synthetic and transcendental proposition, but rather appears to be tautological and to belong to mere logic. For the latter
teaches us how we can compare a given representation with others and form a concept by
abstracting what it shares with others as a characteristic mark for general use. But logic
tells us nothing about whether for each object nature must also show many others that
can be compared with it in similarity of form; on the contrary, this condition for the possibility of applying logic to nature is a principle of representing nature, as system for our
power of judgement, in which the manifold, divided into genera and species, makes it
possible for us, through comparison, to bring all the forms of nature that we may encounter
to concepts (of greater or lesser generality). Now the understanding certainly teaches us
(though also through synthetic principles) how to think of all things in nature as contained in a transcendental system in accordance with a priori concepts (the categories);
but the power of judgement, which (as reﬂective) also seeks out concepts for empirical
representations as such, must assume therefore in addition that nature in its boundless
multiplicity has hit upon a division into genera and species which makes it possible for our
power of judgement to ﬁnd concordance amongst the natural forms which it compares
with one another, and to arrive at empirical concepts, and their interconnection, by
ascending to more general, though still empirical, concepts; i.e. the power of judgement
presupposes a system of nature in accordance with empirical laws as well, and does so
a priori, and therefore by means of a transcendental principle.

326

Critique of Teleological Judgement

212 in other words, that in the products of nature one can always presuppose

a form which is possible under universal laws that are accessible to our
knowledge. For if we were not entitled to assume this, and were unable to base
our treatment of empirical representations upon this principle, all reﬂection
would be undertaken in a merely blind and random fashion with no legitimate expectation that it could harmonize with nature.
With respect to the universal concepts of nature, under which a concept
of experience (without particular empirical determination) is possible in
the ﬁrst place, reﬂection already possesses a guide in the concept of nature
in general, i.e. in the understanding. And the power of judgement requires
no special principle of reﬂection, but schematizes nature a priori and applies
these schemata to every empirical synthesis, something without which no
judgements of experience would be possible. In this case, the power of judgement, in its reﬂection, is also determining and its transcendental schematism
simultaneously serves it as a rule under which the given empirical intuitions
can be subsumed.
213
But for those concepts which have to be found for given empirical intuitions in the ﬁrst place, and which presuppose a special law of nature through
which alone particular experience is possible, the power of judgement requires
a peculiar, equally transcendental principle for its reﬂection. And one cannot
in turn refer this power to empirical laws which are already known, something
which would transform reﬂection into a mere comparison with empirical forms
for which one already possesses the relevant concepts. For the question is how,
by comparing perceptions, one could ever hope to arrive at empirical concepts
that capture what is common to a variety of natural forms, if (as is entirely conceivable) nature had bestowed so great a heterogeneity upon the immense
variety of its empirical laws, that all, or almost all, comparison would be useless for discovering any coherence or hierarchical order in the plurality of
species and genera. All comparison of empirical representations, in order to
discover in natural things empirical laws and the corresponding speciﬁc forms
and, through comparison of these with others, to discover generically corresponding forms, presupposes that nature has observed in its empirical laws a certain
economy, ﬁtted for our power of judgement, and a similarity amongst its forms
which we can comprehend. And this presupposition, as an a priori principle of
the power of judgement, must precede all such comparison.
The reﬂective power of judgement thus works with given appearances
to bring them under empirical concepts of determinate natural things not
214 schematically, but technically; not merely mechanically, like a tool controlled
by the understanding and the senses, but artistically, according to the universal but nonetheless indeterminate principle of a purposive and systematic
ordering of nature. Our power of judgement is favoured, as it were, by the conformity of the particular laws of nature (about which the understanding is

‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

327

silent) to the possibility of experience as a system, which is a presupposition
without which we have no hope of ﬁnding our way in the labyrinth of the multiplicity of possible particular laws. Thus the power of judgement itself
makes the technic of nature into the principle of its reﬂection a priori, without
being able to explain or determine it more precisely or to possess an objective
determining ground for the universal concepts of nature (through a cognition
of things in themselves), but only in order to facilitate its reﬂection in accordance with its own subjective laws and needs while remaining in harmony
with the laws of nature in general.
But the principle of the reﬂective power of judgement, through which
nature is thought as a system under empirical laws, is to be considered merely
as a principle for the logical employment of the power of judgement, and while it
is indeed a transcendental principle with regard to its origin, it serves merely
to regard nature a priori as qualiﬁed for a logical system in its multiplicity
under empirical laws.
The logical form of a system consists simply in the division of given general concepts (like the concept of nature in general here) through which we
think, according to a certain principle, the particular (here the empirical) in
its diversity as contained in the universal. If one proceeds empirically and
ascends from the particular to the universal, a classiﬁcation of the manifold
is required, i.e. a comparison of several classes each of which is determined
by a distinct concept. When the classiﬁcation is complete with respect to
the common characteristic, its subsumption under higher classes (genera)
proceeds until one reaches the concept which contains the principle of the
entire classiﬁcation (and constitutes the highest genus). If, on the other hand,
one begins with the universal concept, in order to descend to the particular
by means of exhaustive division, the procedure is described as the speciﬁcation 215
of the manifold* under a given concept, since one is moving here from the
highest genus towards the lower one (subgenera or species) and from species
to subordinate species. Instead of employing the everyday expression that
one must specify the particular which stands under the universal, it is more
exact to say that one is specifying the general concept since the manifold is
here ordered under the latter. This is because the genus, logically considered,
is, as it were, the matter or raw substrate which nature works into particular
species and subspecies through multiple determinations. Thus one can say
that nature speciﬁes itself according to a certain principle (or the idea of a
system), on analogy with the way in which jurists use the word when
speaking of the speciﬁcation of certain raw material of their own.5
Now it is clear that the reﬂective power of judgement, given its character, cannot undertake to classify the whole of nature in accordance with its
5

The Aristotelian school also called the genus matter, but the speciﬁc diﬀerence the form.

328

Critique of Teleological Judgement

empirical varieties unless it assumes that nature itself speciﬁes its transcendental laws in accordance with some principle or other. This principle can be
none other than that of suitability for the faculty of the power of judgement
itself in ﬁnding suﬃcient kinship amongst the inﬁnite multiplicity of things
under possible empirical laws as to bring them under empirical concepts
(classes) and these in turn under more universal laws (higher genera), and
thus to arrive at an empirical system of nature. Since this kind of classiﬁcation is not a matter of ordinary empirical knowledge, but rather an artistic
knowledge, nature, in so far as it is thought as specifying itself in accordance
with such a principle, is here also regarded as art. The power of judgement
thus necessarily carries with it a priori a principle of the technic of nature,
which is distinct from the nomothetic of nature through transcendental laws of
the understanding since the latter can validate its principle as law, while the
former can do so only as a necessary presupposition.6
The special principle of the power of judgement is therefore this: nature
216
speciﬁes its universal laws as empirical ones, in accordance with the form of a
logical system, on behalf of the power of judgement.
It is here that the concept of a purposiveness of nature arises, and indeed
as a characteristic concept of the reﬂective power of judgement, rather than
of reason, since the end is posited not in the object but solely in the subject,
and indeed in the subject’s mere capacity for reﬂection. We describe something as ‘purposive’ if its existence seems to presuppose an antecedent representation of the thing in question. But natural laws that are so constituted
and interrelated as if the power of judgement had designed them to satisfy
its own requirements resemble the case in which the possibility of things
presupposes the representation of them as a ground. Thus the power of
judgement, by means of its principle, thinks a purposiveness in nature in
the speciﬁcation of its forms through empirical laws.
It is not these forms themselves, however, that are thereby thought as
purposive, but only their relation to one another and their ﬁtness, even in
their great multiplicity, for a logical system of empirical concepts. Even if
nature revealed to us no more than this logical purposiveness, we should
still have cause for admiring nature in this regard since we are unable to ﬁnd
any ground for this in the universal laws of the understanding themselves.
Yet hardly anyone but a transcendental philosopher would be capable of
such admiration, and even he could identify no determinate case where
6
Could Linnaeus* possibly have hoped to outline a system of nature if he had had to
worry whether, on ﬁnding a stone that he called granite, this might diﬀer in its internal constitution from every other apparently identical one, so that all he could ever hope to
encounter were individual things merely isolated, as it were, for the understanding, but
never a class of things which could be brought under the concepts of genus and species?

‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

329

this purposiveness is manifested in concreto, but would have to think it solely
in general terms.

vi. The Purposiveness of Natural Forms as so many Particular Systems

217

T HAT nature, in its empirical laws, should so specify itself as is requisite
for the possibility of experience as a single system of empirical knowledge,
implies that this form of nature contains a logical purposiveness, i.e. that of
its conformity with the subjective conditions of the power of judgement concerning the possible coherence of empirical concepts in the totality of one
experience. But this does not entitle us to infer any adaptation of nature to a
real purposiveness in its products, i.e. to the generation of individual things
as systems. For these could always be mere aggregates, as far as intuition can
tell, and still be subject to empirical laws which cohere with others in a logically divisible system without having to assume for their individual possibility
a specially identiﬁed concept and thus a teleology of nature as their basis. It
is in this way that we regard earths, stones, minerals etc. as mere aggregates
and devoid of any purposive form, but as nevertheless so related in their
inner character and the grounds of their possibility as objects of knowledge
that they lend themselves to classiﬁcation as a system of nature under empirical laws, even though in themselves they display no systematic form.
By an absolute purposiveness of natural forms I therefore understand that
external conﬁguration or internal structure of such forms which are so constituted that their possibility is necessarily grounded in an idea of the same
within our power of judgement. For purposiveness is conformity to law on
the part of something which is contingent. Nature works mechanically, as
mere nature, in producing aggregates, but it works technically, i.e. artistically,
in producing systems, for example, crystals, all sorts of ﬂower forms, or the 218
internal structure of plants and animals. The diﬀerence between these two
ways of judging natural beings lies simply in the reﬂective power of judgement which certainly can and perhaps must proceed to do what the determining power of judgement (governed by principles of reason) does not
concede to the latter with respect to the possibility of objects, and it might
be the case that the determining power of judgement is capable of tracing
everything back to a mechanical explanation. For it is quite possible that the
explanation of a given appearance, governed by objective principles of reason,
may be mechanical, while the rule for judging the same object, according
to subjective principles of reﬂection, may be technical.
In fact the principle of the power of judgement, namely the purposiveness of nature in the speciﬁcation of its universal laws, may not extend so
far that we can infer the production of natural forms that are purposive in

330

Critique of Teleological Judgement

themselves (because even without them the system of nature under empirical
laws, which is all that the power of judgement is justiﬁed in postulating, is
possible), and this is something that must always be given through experience; but since we have reason to suppose a principle of the purposiveness
of nature in its particular laws, it is still always possible and permissible, if
experience shows us purposive forms amongst its products, to ascribe this to
the same ground on which the ﬁrst type of purposiveness may rest.
Even though this ground itself might lie in the supersensible and wholly
transcend the domain of our possible insights into nature, we have nevertheless accomplished something in so far as the power of judgement oﬀers us a
transcendental principle of the purposiveness of nature in relation to the
purposiveness of natural forms which we encounter in experience. If this
is not suﬃcient to account for the possibility of such forms, at least it still
permits us to apply such a special concept as that of purposiveness to nature
and its conformity to law, even though this principle cannot be an objective
concept of nature but is simply derived from the subjective relation of nature
to one of the faculties of the mind.
219

vii. The Technic of the Power of Judgement as the Ground
of the Idea of a Technic of Nature
A S we have shown above, it is the power of judgement which ﬁrst makes it
possible, and indeed necessary, to think, in addition to the mechanical necessity of nature, a purposiveness in nature. Without this assumption systematic
unity in the complete classiﬁcation of particular forms under empirical laws
would be impossible. We have shown, in the ﬁrst place, that the principle of
purposiveness, being only a subjective principle of the division and speciﬁcation of nature, determines nothing with regard to the forms of nature’s
products. In this respect, the purposiveness in question would remain merely
conceptual and would supply a maxim suggesting the unity of empirical laws
of nature for the logical employment of the power of judgement in experience, furthering the application of reason to its objects. But there would be
no natural products, as such, whose form corresponds with this particular
kind of systematic unity, namely that according to a representation of an end.
The causality of nature with respect to the form of its products as ends I would
describe as the technic of nature. It is opposed to the mechanism of nature,
which consists in the connection of the manifold without any concept underlying the speciﬁc character of this connection, just as certain lifting devices,
such as a lever or an inclined plane, which can also exercise their intended eﬀect
as a means to an end without presupposing any idea, are called machines rather
than products of art because while they can indeed be used purposively,
their possibility is not dependent upon this use.

‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

331

The ﬁrst question at this point is this: how can the technic of nature be
perceived in its products? Precisely because it is not a category, the concept
of purposiveness is in no way a concept that is constitutive of experience,
and nor is it any determination of an appearance appropriate to an empir- 220
ical concept of the object. We perceive purposiveness in our power of judgement in so far as it merely reﬂects upon a given object, perhaps on the
empirical intuition of the same, to bring it under some (as yet undetermined)
concept, or upon the concept of experience itself, to bring the laws it contains under common principles. Thus it is essentially the power of judgement
that is technical. Nature is therefore represented as technical only to the
extent that it harmonizes with this procedure and makes it necessary. We
shall shortly indicate how the concept of reﬂective judgement, which makes
possible the inner perception of a purposiveness of representations, can
also be applied to the representation of the object as contained under it.7
Now to each empirical concept there belong three acts of the spontaneous faculty of cognition: 1. the apprehension (apprehensio) of the manifold
of intuition; 2. the synthesis, i.e. the synthetic unity of the consciousness of
this manifold in the concept of an object (apperceptio comprehensiva); 3. the
presentation (exhibitio) in intuition of the object corresponding to this
concept. The ﬁrst act requires imagination, the second requires reason and
the third requires the power of judgement which, where an empirical concept is involved, is the determining power of judgement.
But since in simple reﬂection on perception it is not a question of
reﬂecting on a determinate concept, but in general only of reﬂecting on the
rule concerning perception as an aid to the understanding, as a faculty of
concepts, it is evident in the case of a merely reﬂective judgement that the
imagination and the understanding are regarded in their necessary relationship to one another with respect to power of judgement in general, in
contrast to their actual relationship in a given perception.
If, then, the form of a given object in empirical intuition is such that the
apprehension of its manifold in the imagination agrees with the presentation of a concept of the understanding (regardless of which concept), then 221
in simple reﬂection the understanding and the imagination harmonize with
one another for the furtherance of their work and the object is perceived as
purposive with respect to the power of judgement alone. The purposiveness
itself is therefore considered as merely subjective since a determinate concept of the object is thereby neither required nor produced, and the judgement involved is not a cognitive one. Such a judgement is called an
aesthetic judgement of reﬂection.
7 We put, it is said, ﬁnal causes into things, we do not draw them, as it were, out of our
perception of things.

332

Critique of Teleological Judgement

If, on the other hand, empirical concepts and laws conforming to the
mechanism of nature are already given, and the power of judgement compares such a concept of the understanding with reason and its principle of the
possibility of a system, then if this form is encountered in the object the purposiveness is judged to be objective and the thing is called a natural end, since
in the previous case things were only judged to be indeterminately purposive
natural forms. A judgement on the objective purposiveness is called teleological.
This is a cognitive judgement, but it belongs only to the reﬂective and not to
the determining power of judgement. For in general the technic of nature,
whether it be merely formal or real, is only a relation of things to our power
of judgement, in which alone we can ﬁnd the idea of the purposiveness of
nature that we attribute to nature itself merely in relation to that power.

viii. The Aesthetic of the Faculty of Judging
T HE expression ‘an aesthetic kind of representation’ is completely unambiguous if we understand it to signify the relation of the representation to
the object as appearance with a view to the cognition of the object. For in this
case the expression ‘aesthetic’ means that the form of sensibility (i.e. how the
subject is aﬀected) is necessarily attached to the representation and is
thus unavoidably transferred to the object (though only as phenomenon).
Consequently there can be a transcendental aesthetic* as a science that
222 belongs to the faculty of cognition. It has long been customary, however,
to describe a mode of representation as ‘aesthetic’, i.e. as sensuous, also to
signify our intention of relating a representation not to the faculty of cognition, but rather to our feeling of pleasure and displeasure. Although we
are also accustomed (in accordance with this nomenclature) to calling this
feeling a ‘sense’ (a modiﬁcation of our state), since we lack an alternative
expression, it is nonetheless not an objective sense the determination of
which is employed for cognition of an object (for to intuit or otherwise perceive something with pleasure is not a simple relation of the representation
to the object but rather involves a receptivity on the part of the subject); on
the contrary, it contributes nothing whatsoever to our knowledge of objects.
There can therefore be no aesthetic science of feeling, as there is indeed an
aesthetic of the faculty of cognition, because all the determinations of feeling
are of purely subjective signiﬁcance. A certain ambiguity, therefore, inevitably
clings to the expression ‘aesthetic kind of representation’ if it is understood
now to mean that which arouses pleasure or displeasure and now to concern
merely the cognitive faculty, in so far as it involves sensuous intuition, with
regard to the knowledge of objects as appearances.
This ambiguity can, however, be removed if we apply the expression
‘aesthetic’ neither to intuition nor to the representations of the understanding,

‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

333

but solely to the acts of the power of judgement. An aesthetic judgement, if we
intended to employ it for objective knowledge, would be so blatantly contradictory that this expression is a suﬃcient insurance against misinterpretation.
For intuitions can indeed be sensuous, but judgements certainly belong
only to the understanding (taken in the broader sense), and to judge aesthetically or sensuously, in so far as this purports to be knowledge of an
object, is therefore a contradiction where sensibility meddles in the aﬀairs
of the understanding and (through a vitium subreptionis)* gives a false direction to the latter. An objective judgement, by contrast, is always brought about
through the understanding alone and cannot therefore be called an aesthetic 223
one. Consequently our transcendental aesthetic of the faculty of judgement
was certainly able to speak of sensory intuitions, but could never speak of aesthetic judgements because, since it is concerned solely with cognitive judgements that determine an object, all of its judgements must be logical ones.
The expression ‘an aesthetic judgement of an object’ therefore signiﬁes
that a given representation is indeed related to an object, but such a judgement conveys the determination of the subject and its feeling rather than that
of the object. As far as the power of judgement is concerned, the understanding and the imagination are regarded in relationship with one another, and
this relationship can be considered (as happened in the transcendental
schematism of the power of judgement) as objective and cognitive. But this
same relationship of two cognitive faculties can also be regarded purely
subjectively, in so far as one of them helps or hinders the other in the selfsame representation and thereby aﬀects the state of the mind, and is thus a
relationship that can be sensed (something encountered in the independent
employment of no other faculty of cognition). Now although this sensation
is not a sensuous representation of an object, it can nonetheless be ascribed
to sensibility since it is subjectively connected with the sensuous rendering
of the concepts of the understanding through the power of judgement, as a
sensuous representation of how the state of the subject is aﬀected by an
act of that faculty. A judgement can be termed ‘aesthetic’, i.e. sensuous
(according to its subjective eﬀect rather than to its determining ground),
even though an act of (objective) judging is an act of the understanding (as
a higher faculty of cognition in general) rather than one of sensibility.
Every determining judgement is logical because its predicate is a given
objective concept. A merely reﬂective judgement about a particular object,
however, can be aesthetic if the judgement, even before it contemplates comparing the object with others, and with no concept antecedent to the given
intuition, unites the imagination (which merely apprehends the object) with
the understanding (which produces a general concept) and perceives a relationship between the two cognitive faculties which forms the subjective
and merely sensitive condition of the objective employment of the power 224

334

Critique of Teleological Judgement

of judgement (namely the mutual harmony of these two faculties). But an
aesthetic sensuous judgement is also possible, where the predicate of the
judgement cannot be a concept of an object because it does not belong to the
cognitive faculty at all, as in the example: ‘The wine is pleasant’—for here
the predicate expresses the relation of a representation directly to the feeling of pleasure, and not to the faculty of cognition.
An aesthetic judgement can thus in general be deﬁned as that kind of
judgement whose predicate can never be cognitive, i.e. involve a concept
of an object, although it may contain the general subjective conditions for
cognition in general. Sensation is the determining ground in this kind of
judgement. But there is only one unique, so-called, sensation which can
never become the concept of an object, and this is the feeling of pleasure and
displeasure. This is purely subjective since, by contrast, all other sensations
can be employed with a view to cognition. An aesthetic judgement, therefore,
is one whose determining ground lies in a sensation that is immediately connected with the feeling of pleasure and displeasure. In an aesthetic judgement
of the senses it is that sensation that is immediately produced by the empirical intuition of the object, whereas in aesthetic judgements of reﬂection it is
that sensation produced in the subject by the harmonious play between the
two cognitive faculties of the power of judgement, the imagination and the
understanding, when the former’s capacity for apprehension and the latter’s
capacity for presentation reciprocally further one another in a given representation. In such a case, this relation, merely through its form, causes a sensation which is the determining ground of a judgement. This judgement is
consequently described as ‘aesthetic’ and is connected with the feeling of
pleasure as subjective purposiveness (without a concept).
Whereas aesthetic judgements of the senses express material purposiveness, aesthetic judgements of reﬂection express formal purposiveness.
But since aesthetic judgements of the senses do not relate to the faculty of
cognition at all, but only relate immediately through the senses to the feeling
of pleasure, it is only aesthetic judgements of reﬂection that we can regard as
grounded on principles peculiar to the power of judgement. For if reﬂection
upon a given representation precedes the feeling of pleasure (as the deter225 mining ground of the judgement), then the subjective purposiveness is
thought before it is felt in its eﬀect; and in that respect an aesthetic judgement belongs, by virtue of its principles, to the higher faculty of cognition,
and indeed to the power of judgement under whose subjective but universal conditions the representation of the object is subsumed. But since a
merely subjective condition of a judgement permits no determinate concept
of its determining ground, this ground can only be furnished through the
feeling of pleasure, though in such a way that the aesthetic judgement is

‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

335

always a judgement of reﬂection. This is the case because, by contrast, a
judgement that assumes no comparison of the representation with the cognitive faculties and their cooperative eﬀect in the power of judgement is an
aesthetic judgement of the senses. The latter also relates a given representation to the feeling of pleasure (though not by means of the power of judgement and its principle). It is only in the treatise itself that the characteristic
feature which allows us to specify this diﬀerence can be identiﬁed, namely
the claim of the judgement to universal validity and necessity. For if an aesthetic judgement inevitably implies the latter, it thereby also claims
that its determining ground must lie not merely in the feeling of pleasure and
displeasure alone, but equally in a rule belonging to the higher cognitive faculties, and here speciﬁcally in a rule belonging to the power of judgement,
which thereby legislates a priori with respect to the conditions of reﬂection
and demonstrates autonomy. This autonomy, however, is not objective (like
that of the understanding with respect to the theoretical laws of nature, or
that of reason concerning the laws of freedom), i.e. by means of concepts
of things or of possible actions, but is merely subjective and valid for a
judgement derived from feeling, a judgement which, if it can lay claim to
universal validity, indicates its origin as based upon a priori principles.
We should properly have to describe this legislation as heautonomy since the
power of judgement furnishes the law neither for nature nor for freedom
but solely for itself, and is not a faculty of producing concepts of objects,
but only of comparing speciﬁc cases with concepts supplied to it from
elsewhere and of stating the subjective conditions of the possibility of this
connection a priori.
It is precisely this which also explains why judgement, when it is merely
reﬂective and is not based upon a concept of the object, is expressed in an act
which is immediately related only to sensation (something which transpires 226
with no other higher faculty) and which, like all sensation, is always accompanied by pleasure or displeasure, instead of consciously relating the given
representation to its own rule. And this is because the rule itself is only subjective, and agreement with it can only be recognized in something which
also merely expresses a relation to the subject, namely sensation, as the
characteristic feature and determining ground of the judgement. This is
why it is also called an ‘aesthetic’ judgement, so that all our judgements
can be divided, according to the order of the higher cognitive faculties, into
theoretical, aesthetic, and practical ones, where under aesthetic judgements
only those of reﬂection are to be understood since they alone are related to
a principle of the power of judgement, whereas by contrast aesthetic judgements of the senses are immediately concerned solely with the relation of
representations to inner sense considered as a feeling.

336

Critique of Teleological Judgement

Remark
I T is especially important at this point to elucidate the explanation of pleasure as a sensuous representation of the perfection of an object. According to
this explanation an aesthetic judgement of the senses or one of reﬂection
would invariably be a cognitive judgement of the object since perfection is
a determination that presupposes a concept of the object. Hence a judgement attributing perfection to an object could not be distinguished from
other logical judgements, except perhaps, as some allege, through the
‘confused’ character attaching to the concept (which is how some presume
to describe sensibility). But this can never constitute any speciﬁc distinction
amongst judgements. For otherwise a countless host of judgements, not
only those belonging to the understanding but also especially to reason,
would also have to be described as aesthetic because an object is thereby determined through a confused concept, as in judgements concerning right and
wrong since few people (even including philosophers) possess a clear concept
227 of what right is.8 A sensuous representation of perfection is a contradiction
in terms, and if the harmonious uniﬁcation of the manifold is to be
described as perfection this must be represented through a concept if it is
properly to bear the name of perfection. If one were to regard pleasure and
displeasure as nothing but a cognition of things through the understanding
(though one unconscious of its own concepts), and claim that they only
seem to be mere sensations, then we should have to describe this way of
judging things as entirely intellectual rather than as aesthetic (sensuous);
the senses would then basically be nothing but a judging understanding
(albeit one without suﬃcient consciousness of its own acts) and the aesthetic kind of representation would no longer be speciﬁcally distinguished
from logical kind of representation. And since the boundary between the
8 In general one can say that things can never be regarded as speciﬁcally diﬀerent from
one another by virtue of a quality which passes over into another one merely through an
increase or decrease in degree. As far as the diﬀerence in the distinctness or confusedness of concepts is concerned, this depends solely on the degree to which we are conscious of their distinguishing features and that corresponds to the amount of attention
directed to them. Hence, in this respect, one kind of representation is not speciﬁcally
diﬀerent from any other. But intuition and concept are speciﬁcally distinct from one
another for neither can pass over into the other, however much our consciousness of
each, and of their characteristic features, may wax or wain. The greatest indistinctness
in a kind of conceptual representation (that of ‘right’ for example) still retains the
speciﬁc diﬀerence deriving from its origin in the understanding, while the greatest distinctness in intuition cannot bring it one whit closer to the former, for this latter kind of
representation has its seat in sensibility. Logical distinctness is also utterly diﬀerent from
aesthetic distinctness, and the latter may obtain even though we do represent the object
to ourselves through concepts at all, that is to say, even though the representation, as an
intuition, is sensuous.

‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

337

two could never be drawn with precision, this diﬀerence of nomenclature
would be quite useless. (No mention will be made here of this mystical way
of representing the things of the world, one which recognizes no sensuous
intuition distinct from concepts and thus leaves it with nothing but an
intuitive understanding.)
But one might still ask: does not our concept of the purposiveness of nature
mean exactly the same as what is aﬃrmed by the concept of perfection,* and
is the empirical consciousness of subjective purposiveness, or the feeling of
pleasure we take in certain objects, not simply the sensuous intuition of a
perfection, as some like to explain pleasure in general?
My answer is this: perfection, as the mere completeness of a plurality in 228
so far as it together constitutes a unity, is an ontological concept which is
the same as that of totality (allness) of a composite (through coordination
of the manifold in an aggregate, or its simultaneous subordination as a series
of grounds and consequences) and has nothing whatsoever to do with the
feeling of pleasure or displeasure. The perfection of a thing with respect to
the relation between its manifold and the concept of the thing is only formal.
But if I speak of a perfection (and there can be many such in a thing grasped
under the same concept), it is always grounded in the concept of something
as an end to which the ontological concept of the uniﬁcation of the manifold
is applied. This end need not, however, be a practical end, one which presupposes or includes a pleasure in the existence of the object, but can also
belong to technic; it thus concerns merely the possibility of things and is the
conformity to law of an intrinsically contingent combination of the manifold in
the object. As an example we may consider the purposiveness which is necessarily thought in the possibility of a regular hexagon for it is entirely contingent that six equal lines on a plane should intersect at precisely equal angles
and this lawlike combination presupposes a concept which, as a principle,
makes it possible. This kind of objective purposiveness observed in things
of nature (and especially in organized beings) is now thought as objective
and material and necessarily carries with it the concept of an end of nature
(actual or imputed) in relation to which we also attribute perfection to
things; judgement in this regard is called ‘teleological’ and carries with it
no feeling of pleasure whatsoever, just as the latter is not to be looked for
in any judgement that concerns mere causal connection.
The concept of perfection as objective purposiveness thus has nothing
whatsoever to do with the feeling of pleasure and the latter has nothing
whatsoever to do with the former. For judging the former a concept of an
object is necessarily required, whereas for judging the latter no concept is
needed and purely empirical intuition can suﬃce. The representation of
subjective purposiveness in an object, on the other hand, is even the same
as the feeling of pleasure (without involving an abstracted concept of any

338

Critique of Teleological Judgement

purposive relation) and there is a great gulf between these two kinds of
229 purposiveness. If what is subjectively purposive is to be objective as well,

a much more far-reaching investigation is required, not only of practical
philosophy but also of the technic, whether it be that of nature or of art. That
is to say: to ﬁnd perfection in a thing requires reason, to ﬁnd a thing agreeable
only requires the senses, to encounter beauty in a thing requires nothing
but reﬂection (devoid of any concept) upon a given representation.
The aesthetic faculty of reﬂection thus judges only about the subjective
purposiveness (not the perfection) of the object, and the question now arises
whether it judges only by means of the pleasure or displeasure which is felt
here, or whether it even judges about the latter, so that the judgement simultaneously determines that pleasure or displeasure must be combined with the
representation of the object.
This question, as we have already indicated, cannot yet be decided adequately at this point. It is only through the exposition of such judgements,
furnished in the treatise itself, that we shall be able to conclude whether or
not they possess a universal validity and necessity which permits them to be
derived from a determining ground a priori. In that case, a judgement would
indeed determine something a priori by means of the sensation of pleasure
or displeasure, but it would also simultaneously determine something
a priori through the faculty of cognition (namely the power of judgement)
by means of the universality of a rule for combining the feeling with a
given representation. On the other hand, if a judgement contained nothing but the relation between the representation and the feeling (without
the mediation of any cognitive principle), as is the case with an aesthetic
judgement of the senses (which is neither a cognitive judgement nor a judgement of reﬂection), then all aesthetic judgements would belong in the merely
empirical domain.
For the moment we can note that no transition from cognition to the
feeling of pleasure takes place through concepts of objects (in so far as the
latter are to relate to that feeling), and that we cannot therefore expect to
determine a priori the inﬂuence which a given representation exercises on
the mind; and further, as we already noted in the Critique of Practical Reason,
that the representation of a universal lawfulness of willing must simultaneously determine the will and thereby also awaken the feeling of respect, as a
law contained, and indeed a priori contained, in our moral judgements, even
though this feeling still cannot be derived from concepts. In the same way
230 we shall see that aesthetic judgements of reﬂection contain the concept of
a formal but subjective purposiveness of objects, resting on an a priori
principle which is fundamentally the same as the feeling of pleasure, but
which cannot be derived from any concepts to whose possibility in general

‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

339

the power of representation stands in relation when it aﬀects the mind in
reﬂecting on an object.
An explanation of this feeling, considered in general and without distinguishing whether it accompanies sense perception, reﬂection, or a
determination of the will, must be transcendental.9 It can be expressed as
follows: pleasure is a state of the mind in which a representation is in harmony with itself, as a ground for simply preserving this state itself (for the
state in which the powers of the mind mutually further one another in a 231
representation does preserve itself) or else for producing its object. In the
ﬁrst case, the judgement concerning the given representation is an aesthetic
9 It is worth attempting a transcendental deﬁnition of concepts which are employed
as empirical principles if one has cause to suspect that they share kinship with the pure
faculty of cognition a priori. Thus one proceeds like the mathematician who greatly facilitates the solution of his problem by leaving the empirical data indeterminate and bringing the mere synthesis of the latter under the expressions of pure arithmetic. But an
objection has been raised against a similar deﬁnition of mine concerning the faculty of desire
(Critique of Practical Reason, Preface): namely that it cannot be deﬁned as the capacity for
causing, through its representations, the existence of the objects of these representations since mere
wishes are also desires, although we can readily see that they are incapable of producing
their objects. But this simply proves that there are also determinations of the faculty of
desire where it stands in contradiction with itself. This is certainly a noteworthy phenomenon for empirical psychology (as is the observed inﬂuence of prejudices on the understanding for logic), but it should not disturb the deﬁnition of the faculty desire objectively
considered, namely as it is in itself, before it diverted from its own determination in some
way or other. For in fact a human being can desire, in the liveliest and most persistent
fashion, something that he is nonetheless convinced he cannot achieve, or that is even
utterly impossible, like wishing undone something that has already transpired, or longing for a burdensome time to us to pass more quickly, and so forth. It is also important
for morality to warn emphatically against such hollow and fantastic desires which are
often nourished by novels, and sometimes by not dissimilar mystical notions of a morethan-human perfection and fanatical blessedness. But the very eﬀect which such hollow
longings and desires, that cause the heart to swell and languish, exert upon the mind,
weakening it through exhaustion of its forces, are enough to prove that while these forces
are repeatedly incited through such representations to realize their object, the mind just
as often sinks back into an awareness of its own impotence. It is a task of no little signiﬁcance for anthropology to investigate why nature has planted within us a disposition to
the fruitless expenditure of our powers in such hollow wishes and longings (which certainly play a great role in human life). Here, as everywhere else, it seems to me that nature
has proceeded wisely. For if the representation of an object had never led us to exercise
our powers before ascertaining the adequacy of our capacity to produce the object, those
powers would surely remain largely unused. For we ordinarily come to know our powers
only through the attempt to use them. Nature has thus connected the exercise of power
to the representation of an object even before we become aware of our capacity, and the
latter is often ﬁrst brought forth through the very eﬀort which initially appeared to the
mind itself as an idle wish. Now it falls to wisdom to put limits on this instinct, but it
will never succeed in eradicating it or ever desire to do so.

340

Critique of Teleological Judgement

judgement of reﬂection. In the second case, however, it is an aestheticpathological or aesthetic-practical judgement. It can readily be seen here that
232 pleasure and displeasure, since they are not kinds of cognition, cannot be
explained in their own right, and ask to be felt rather than understood; and
that one can only explain them, and then only inadequately, through the
inﬂuence which a representation exercises by means of this feeling upon
the activity of the powers of the mind.

ix. Teleological Judging
B Y the term ‘formal technic of nature’ I intended to express the purposiveness
of nature in intuition, whereas by the term ‘real technic of nature’ I understand the purposiveness of nature in accordance with concepts. The former
yields purposive structures for the power of judgement, i.e. a form in the
representation of which the imagination and the understanding are spontaneously and reciprocally harmonious with respect to the possibility of a
concept. The latter indicates the concept of things as natural ends, i.e. as
things whose inner possibility presupposes a purpose, and therefore a concept, which is the underlying condition of the causality of their production.
The power of judgement itself can provide and construct purposive
forms for intuition a priori when it devises such forms for apprehension as
are suitable for the presentation of a concept. But ends, i.e. representations
which are themselves regarded as conditions for the causal production of
their objects (as eﬀects), must in general be given from elsewhere before
the power of judgement concerns itself with harmonizing with the conditions of the manifold; and if there are to be any natural ends, we must be
able to regard certain things in nature as if they were products of a cause
whose activity could only be determined through a representation of the
object. But we cannot determine a priori precisely how, and in what variety of ways, things are possible with respect to their causes since for this
we require knowledge of empirical laws.
A judgement concerning purposiveness in things of nature as a ground of
their possibility (as natural ends) is called a teleological judgement. Although
a priori aesthetic judgements are not possible, we nonetheless encounter
a priori principles in the necessary idea of the systematic unity of experience,
and they include the concept of the formal purposiveness of nature for our
power of judgement; and this reveals a priori the possibility of aesthetic
233 judgements of reﬂection that are based upon a priori principles. Nature is
necessarily harmonious, not merely with respect to the agreement of its
transcendental laws with our understanding, but also with respect to the
agreement of its empirical laws with the power of judgement and the capacity of the latter to present an empirical apprehension of the forms of nature

‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

341

by means of the imagination. This agreement simply serves for the furtherance of experience, and the formal purposiveness of experience with respect
to the ultimate harmony of nature (with the power of judgement) is thereby
revealed as necessary. But if nature, as the object of teleological judgement,
is also to be thought in agreement with the causality of reason, under the
concept of an end which reason fashions for itself, then that is more than
can be attributed to the power of judgement alone; the power of judgement
can, of course, contain its own a priori principles for the form of intuition, but
not for concepts of the production of things. The concept of a real end of
nature thus falls completely beyond the scope of the power of judgement,
taken simply on its own. For the latter, as a separate cognitive power, considers only how two faculties (the imagination and the understanding) are
related in a representation prior to the formation of a concept and thereby
perceives the subjective purposiveness of the object for its apprehension
(through the imagination) by the cognitive faculties. Thus in the teleological
purposiveness of things as natural ends, which can only be represented
through concepts, the power of judgement will have to relate the understanding to reason (something unnecessary for experience in general) in
order to be able to represent things as ends of nature.
The aesthetic judging of natural forms might, without supplying a concept underlying the object, discover simply through intuitive and empirical
apprehension certain objects occurring in nature to be purposive, i.e. merely
in relation to the subjective conditions of the power of judgement. Aesthetic
judging would therefore neither require a concept of an object nor produce
one; that is why it would not interpret these objects in an objective judgement as natural ends, but merely as purposive under a subjective relation
to the power of representation. This purposiveness of forms can be called 234
ﬁgurative, and the technic of nature with respect to these forms can also be
designated accordingly (technica speciosa).*
On the other hand, teleological judgement presupposes a concept of the
object and judges the possibility of the latter according to a law that connects
cause and eﬀect. This technic of nature might therefore be called plastic, if
this word were not already now commonly used with reference both to natural beauty and to the purposes of nature. Thus one could, if one wishes,
also call it an organic technic of nature, an expression which then designates
the concept of purposiveness not merely for the mode in which we represent
them but also for the possibility of the objects themselves.
The most essential and most important thing for this section, however,
is the demonstration that the concept of ﬁnal causes in nature, which separates the teleological judging of nature from judging it in accordance with
universal mechanical laws, is a concept which belongs merely to the power
of judgement and not to the faculties of understanding or reason. Thus if

342

Critique of Teleological Judgement

the concept of natural ends were also to be employed in an objective sense,
as an intention of nature, this employment would already be sophistical and
could never be grounded within experience. For although experience
exhibits ends, nothing can demonstrate that these are also intentions, and
thus anything pertaining to teleology that is encountered in experience
contains nothing but the relation of its objects to the power of judgement,
and in fact to a fundamental principle of the latter, through which it
legislates for itself (and not for nature)—namely as the reﬂective power of
judgement.
The concept of ends and of purposiveness is indeed a concept of reason,
in so far as one attributes to reason the ground of the possible existence of
an object. But the purposiveness of nature, or even the concept of things
as natural ends, places reason into relation with these things as their cause,
although through experience we have no knowledge of the ground of the
possibility of things. For it is only in products of art that we can become aware
of the causality of reason with respect to objects, which are therefore called
ends or described as purposive, and to call reason ‘technical’ in this regard
conforms to our experience of the causality of our own powers. But to rep235 resent nature as technical on analogy with reason (and thus to ascribe purposiveness, and thus even ends, to nature) involves a speciﬁc concept which
can never be encountered within experience, and which is only introduced by
the power of judgement in its reﬂection upon objects in order to organize
experience, as indicated by this concept, under speciﬁc laws, namely those of
the possibility of a system.
For all purposiveness in nature can be regarded either as natural ( forma
ﬁnalis naturae spontanea) or as intentional (intentionalis). Experience on its
own justiﬁes only the ﬁrst way of representing purposiveness, while the
second is a hypothetical way of explaining it which goes beyond any concept
of things as natural ends. The former concept of things as ends of nature
originally belongs to the reﬂective power of judgement (as logically rather
than aesthetically reﬂective), while the latter belongs to the determining power
of judgement. In the ﬁrst case reason is certainly also required, albeit only for
the sake of experience that is to be organized in accordance with principles
(thus in its immanent employment), whereas the second case requires reason
to lose itself in extravagant demands (in its transcendent employment).
We can and should endeavour, to the best of our ability, to investigate
nature as causally connected in experience according to purely mechanical
laws, since it is these which furnish the true grounds of physical explanation and their interconnection constitutes rational scientiﬁc knowledge of
nature. But amongst nature’s products we ﬁnd speciﬁc and very widely distributed genera which contain within themselves a connection of eﬃcient
causes that we can only ground in the concept of an end if we wish to have

‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

343

ordered experience at all, i.e. observation according to a principle that is
adequate to their inner possibility. If we were to judge their form and its
possibility merely according to mechanical laws, where the idea of the eﬀect
must be regarded not as the ground of the possibility of the cause but rather
the reverse, it would be impossible, simply from the speciﬁc form of these
natural things, to derive an empirical concept which would allow us to pass
from this inner structure, as cause, to the eﬀect, since the parts of these
machines are the cause of the eﬀect which they manifest not in so far as each
part has a separate ground of its own, but only in so far as they all share one 236
common ground of their possibility. It is entirely contrary to the nature of
physico-mechanical causes that the whole should be the cause of the possibility of the causality of the parts, for the parts must already be given if we
are to grasp the possibility of a whole on the basis of the latter; and further,
the particular representation of a whole, a representation that precedes the
possibility of the parts, is a mere idea and is called an ‘end’ if it is regarded
as the ground of a causality. Thus it is clear that if there are such products
of nature, it is impossible to investigate their character or their cause even
within experience (let alone to explain them through reason) without representing their form and their causality as determined according to a principle of ends.
Now it is clear in such cases that the concept of an objective purposiveness of nature serves merely to assist reﬂection on an object, and not
its determination through the concept of an end, and that a teleological
judgement concerning the inner possibility of a product of nature is a merely
reﬂective, not a determining judgement. Thus when we say, for example,
that the crystalline lens in the eye has the purpose of focusing, through a secondary refraction, the light rays emanating from a certain point into a point
on the retina, we are merely saying that we think the representation of a
purpose in the causal action of nature in producing the eye because such
an idea serves as a principle for conducting our investigation concerning
this part of the eye, and thus also assists us to devise possible means of
enhancing the relevant eﬀect. But this does not yet involve attributing
to nature a causality in accordance with a representation of ends, i.e. an
intentional action, which latter would involve a determining teleological
judgement, and as such a transcendent one, that introduces a causality
lying beyond the bounds of nature.
The concept of natural ends is therefore merely a concept of the reﬂective
power of judgement for the sake of exploring the causal connection in
objects of experience. Employing a teleological principle for the explanation
of the inner possibility of certain natural forms leaves it undecided whether
their purposiveness is intentional or unintentional. A judgement asserting
either one or the other conclusion would be a determining rather than a

344

Critique of Teleological Judgement

reﬂective one, and the concept of an end of nature would then no longer be
237 a mere concept of the power of judgement, for immanent (empirical) employ-

ment, but would be bound up with a concept of reason, of an intentionally
acting cause set over nature, irrespective of whether we wished to pass an
aﬃrmative or a negative judgement in this case.

x. The Search for a Principle of the Technical Power of Judgement
I F we are seeking for a general ground of explanation for events, this may be
found either in an empirical principle, or an a priori principle, or in a combination of both. This can be seen from the physico-mechanical explanations of the events occurring in the material world, which take their principles
partly from universal (rational) natural science and partly from that science
which contains the empirical laws of motion. It is the same when we seek
psychological grounds of explanation for the behaviour of the mind, but
with the diﬀerence that, as far as I am aware, these principles are wholly
empirical with one exception, namely that of the continuity of all changes
which underlies these perceptions a priori (since time, which has only one
dimension, is the formal condition of inner intuition). But this contributes
virtually nothing to the process of explanation because the general theory
of time does not furnish suﬃcient material for an entire science, unlike the
pure theory of space (geometry).
If it were important to explain how what we call ‘taste’ ﬁrst arose
amongst human beings, why it has been aﬀected by certain things more
than others, or how it has brought forth judgements of beauty under varying regional and social circumstances, which have allowed it to grow into
a luxury, and so forth, we should have to seek the relevant principles of
explanation mainly in psychology (which in a case like this invariably
means nothing but empirical psychology). Thus moral teachers expect
238 psychologists to explain the curious phenomenon of miserliness which
places an absolute value upon the mere possession of the means for a more
than comfortable condition of life (or for any other goal) while resolving
never to use them, or to explain that craving for honour on the part of
those who take reputation itself as their only goal and direct their precepts
less to moral laws themselves than to the removal of obstacles which
impede the inﬂuence of such laws. In this connection we must confess that
psychological explanations are in a very sorry state as compared with physical ones, that hypotheses are inﬁnitely available here, that given three
explanations, we can also always easily imagine a fourth equally convincing one. Hence there is a host of alleged psychologists of this kind who
are adept at identifying the causes for every movement or aﬀection of the
mind that is aroused by plays, poetic images, or objects of nature, and who

‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

345

even bestow the name of philosophy upon their ingenuity in ﬁnding a
scientiﬁc explanation for the most ordinary natural events of the material
world, although they thereby reveal not merely an absence of real knowledge,
but also perhaps of any capacity for attaining it. To furnish psychological
observations (as Burke did in his treatise on the beautiful and the sublime),*
and thus to gather material for the systematic connection of empirical rules
in the future without here making any attempt to understand them, is probably the sole true duty of an empirical psychology which will probably
never legitimately aspire to the rank of a philosophical science.
But if a judgement presents itself as universally valid, and thereby positively lays claim to necessity, this professed necessity may rest either upon
concepts of the object a priori or upon the subjective conditions of underlying concepts a priori; thus if we grant the claim of such a judgement, it would
be quite absurd to justify it by explaining the origin of the judgement
psychologically. This would be self-defeating since if the desired explanation were fully accomplished, it would prove that the judgement can claim no
necessity whatsoever precisely because its empirical origin has now been
identiﬁed.
Now aesthetic judgements of reﬂection (which we shall later analyse
under the name of judgements of taste) are of the type we have just described.
They claim to be necessary, and they assert not that everyone does 239
indeed so judge—for then they would be open to explanation by empirical psychology—but rather that everyone should so judge, and this implies
that they possess their own a priori principle. If the relation to such a principle,
one which claims necessity for itself, were not intrinsic to these judgements, we
should have to assume that a judgement should be regarded as universally
valid because it is actually so regarded, as conﬁrmed by observation, and,
conversely, that the fact that everyone does judge in a certain manner implies
that they should so judge, and this is a patent absurdity.
Aesthetic judgements of reﬂection do indeed reveal the diﬃculty that
they are not based upon concepts at all and thus cannot be derived from any
determinate principle, for in that case they would be logical judgements.
The subjective representation of purposiveness is not supposed to be a concept of an end. But a relation to an a priori principle can and must invariably hold wherever a judgement claims necessity; and here we are concerned
solely with this claim and its possibility in so far as a critique of reason is
precisely thereby encouraged to seek out the underlying, though indeterminate, principle at work here. And reason can successfully discover this
principle and recognize it as one which subjectively and a priori underlies
the judgement in question, although it can never be a determinate concept
of an object.

346

Critique of Teleological Judgement

Thus one is compelled to admit that a teleological judgement is grounded
in an a priori principle and would be impossible without such a principle,
although we only discover the purpose of nature in judgements of this sort
through experience and could never become aware without experience that
things of this kind are even possible. For a teleological judgement, although
it connects a determinate concept of an end, upon which it grounds the
possibility of certain products of nature, with the representation of the
object (something that does not happen in an aesthetic judgement), it still
merely remains a reﬂective judgement, as in the former case. A teleological
240 judgement does not presume to assert, with respect to this objective purposiveness, that nature (or any other being working through nature) in fact
acts intentionally, i.e. that in nature or its cause the thought of an end determines causality, but merely that we must employ the mechanical laws of
nature in accordance with this analogy (the relation of cause and eﬀect) in
order to recognize the possibility of such objects and acquire a concept of
them capable of furnishing a single systematic and coherent structure in
experience.
A teleological judgement compares the concept of a natural product as
it is with what it ought to be. Here the judgement of the possibility of the natural product is based upon a previous a priori concept (of an end). There is
no diﬃculty in representing the possibility of something in this way where
the products of art are concerned. But to conceive that a product of nature
ought to be something or other, and thus to judge whether it actually is so
or not, itself presupposes a principle which could not have been derived from
experience (which only tells us what things are).
We are immediately aware through experience that we see by means of the
eye, and we likewise learn through experience of the internal and external
structure of the eye, which deﬁne the conditions of its possible use, and
therefore of its causality under mechanical laws. But I can also make use
of a stone either to crush something or to build something, etc., and these
eﬀects can also be related to their causes as speciﬁc ends. Yet this does not
permit me to say that the stone ought to be used for building. But with regard
to the eye I judge that it ought to be adapted to seeing, and although its form,
the character of all its parts, and their composition, when judged in accordance with merely mechanical laws, are entirely contingent as far as my own
power of judgement is concerned, I nevertheless think that its form and
structure manifest a certain necessity, namely one that accords with a concept
which precedes the formative causes of the organ in question and without
which I am incapable of conceiving of the possibility of this natural product
under any mechanical laws of nature (something that is not the case with
the stone). This ‘ought’ therefore implies a necessity which is clearly diﬀerentiated from that physico-mechanical necessity through which a thing is

‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

347

possible under the laws of eﬃcient causes alone (with any preceding idea), 241
and it can no more be determined through mere empirical and physical
laws than the necessity belonging to aesthetic judgements can be determined through psychological ones.
Thus all judgements concerning the purposiveness of nature, whether
they be aesthetic or teleological, are subject to a priori principles, and indeed
to those belonging speciﬁcally and exclusively to the power of judgement,
because they are merely reﬂective rather than determining judgements. And
that is precisely why they also belong to a critique of pure reason (understood
in the most general sense). Teleological judgements require this critique
more than aesthetic judgements do since the former, left to themselves, only
encourage reason to draw potentially extravagant conclusions, whereas the
latter demand careful investigation only to guard against their own principle leading to an exclusive preoccupation with the empirical and thereby
forfeiting their claims to a universally valid necessity.

xi. The Encyclopedic Introduction of the Critique of Judgement into
the System of the Critique of Pure Reason
Every introduction to an exposition serves either to introduce a proposed
doctrine or to introduce the doctrine itself into a system in which it belongs
as a part. The ﬁrst kind of introduction precedes the doctrine, while the
second should properly only constitute its conclusion and indicate its
place, according to fundamental principles, in the body of doctrines with
which it is connected through common principles. The former approach
is a propaedeutic introduction, while the second can be called an encyclopedic one.
Propaedeutic introductions are the customary ones, which prepare the
way for the proposed doctrine by drawing the preliminary knowledge that is
requisite from other already existing doctrines or sciences in order to facilitate the transition in question. If they are so designed as to distinguish
carefully between the special principles of the novel doctrine (domestica) and 242
those belonging to some other doctrine (peregrinis),* they serve to demarcate
the boundaries of the sciences—a precaution which cannot be recommended too highly since without it no thoroughness, especially with regard
to philosophical knowledge, can be hoped for.
An encyclopedic introduction, however, presupposes not the existence
of a related doctrine that is preparatory to the newly promulgated doctrine, but rather the idea of a system which will only be completed through
the latter. This cannot be accomplished by raking over or collecting up the
many things that have been discovered on the path of research, but only
when we are able to specify completely the subjective or objective sources

348

Critique of Teleological Judgement

of a certain kind of cognition through the formal concept of a whole which
equally contains the principle of a complete a priori division. Thus one can
easily see why encyclopedic introductions, useful though they might be, are
nonetheless so rare.
The faculty whose distinctive principle will be sought out and discussed
here (the power of judgement) is of a very special kind in that it produces,
on its own account, no knowledge whatsoever, whether theoretical or practical, and, despite its a priori principle, contributes nothing to transcendental
philosophy as an objective doctrine, but simply constitutes the connection
between two other higher cognitive faculties (understanding and reason).
Hence in determining the principles of this faculty, which lends itself only
to a critique and is incapable of becoming a doctrine, I may be permitted
to relinquish the order of argument that is otherwise always necessary and
oﬀer a brief encyclopedic introduction. This is not an introduction to the
system of the sciences of pure reason, but merely to the critique of all the faculties of the mind which can be determined a priori and in so far as they
constitute a system within the mind, an approach which thus serves to unite
a propaedeutic introduction with an encyclopedic one.
The introduction of the power of judgement into the system of the pure
faculties of cognition through concepts rests entirely upon its distinctive
transcendental principle: that nature in specifying the transcendental laws
243 of the understanding (the principles of its possibility as nature in general),
i.e. the manifold of its empirical laws, operates in accordance with the idea
of its own systematic division and thus facilitates the possibility of experience as an empirical system. This suggests ﬁrst, and indeed a priori, the
concept of a conformity to law, i.e. a purposiveness of nature, which is
objectively contingent but subjectively necessary (for our cognitive faculties).
Even if this principle determines nothing with respect to the particular forms
of nature, since the purposiveness of the latter can only be given empirically, a judgement concerning such forms nonetheless acquires a claim to
necessity and universal validity, as a merely reﬂective judgement, through
the relation between the subjective purposiveness of the given representation for the power of judgement and the a priori principle of the power of
judgement of nature’s purposiveness in its empirical conformity to law in
general. Thus an aesthetic reﬂective judgement can be regarded as resting
upon an a priori principle (although it is not determining) and the power
of judgement will thereby ﬁnd itself entitled to a place within the critique
of the higher faculties of pure cognition.
The concept of a purposiveness of nature (as a technical purposiveness
which is essentially diﬀerent from a practical one), if it is not simply to be
the fraudulent substitution of what we make of nature for what nature is, is
a concept distinct from all dogmatic philosophy (theoretical and practical)

‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

349

and is grounded merely on that principle of the power of judgement which
precedes empirical laws and ﬁrst renders possible their coherence within the
unity of a system of such laws. It is therefore clear, with respect to the two
ways of employing the reﬂective power of judgement (the aesthetic and the
teleological), that only the judgement which precedes any concept of the
object, namely the reﬂective aesthetic judgement, possesses its determining ground in the power of judgement, unmixed with any other faculty of
cognition; on the other hand, a teleological judgement on the concept of a
natural end, even if it merely employs the principle of the reﬂective rather
than the determining power of judgement, can only be made by combining reason with empirical concepts. It is thus easy to show the possibility
of a teleological judgement on nature without having to base it upon any
special principle of the power of judgement since this possibility merely 244
follows from the principle of reason. By contrast, the possibility of a mere
judgement of reﬂection, which is aesthetic yet nonetheless grounded on an
a priori principle, i.e. a judgement of taste, if it can actually be shown to
have a justiﬁable claim to universal validity, certainly does require a critique of the power of judgement as a faculty with distinctive transcendental principles (like reason and the understanding), and only in this way
does it qualify for inclusion within the system of the pure faculties of cognition. This is because an aesthetic judgement, while it presupposes no
concept of its object, nonetheless ascribes purposiveness and indeed universal validity to it. Thus the principle for this can only lie in the power of
judgement itself since a teleological judgement, by contrast, presupposes a
concept of the object, which reason brings under the principle of teleological connection, although only in so far as the power of judgement employs
this concept of an end of nature in a merely reﬂective rather than in a determining judgement.
The power of judgement thus reveals itself in taste alone, and indeed in
that concerning objects of nature, as a faculty possessing its own distinctive
principle, and it thereby claims a place in the general critique of the higher
faculties of cognition which one might not otherwise have believed it
deserves. But once we concede that the faculty of the power of judgement
can set a priori principles for itself, it also becomes necessary to determine its
proper range. And for this completion of the task of critique we must recognize that both the aesthetic and the teleological capacities are contained
within a single faculty and rest upon the same principle, for the teleological judgement concerning things of nature also belongs, along with the
aesthetic judgement, to the reﬂective rather than to the determining power
of judgement.
The critique of taste, however, which is otherwise employed merely for
the improvement or strengthening of taste itself, ﬁlls a lacuna within the

350

Critique of Teleological Judgement

system of our cognitive faculties if one considers it from a transcendental
perspective, and thus opens up the striking and, it seems to me, highly
encouraging prospect of a complete system of all the powers of the mind in
their relationship not merely to the sensuous but also to the supersensible
domain, without thereby eﬀacing the boundaries which have been set to
245 their use in this respect by the most rigorous critique. It may perhaps prove
helpful for the reader, and facilitate a clearer view of the structure of the
investigations which follow, if I here furnish an outline of their systematic
connection with one another, although, like the whole of the section, it
should properly assume its place at the end of the treatise itself.
All of the faculties of the mind can be traced back to these three:
the faculty of cognition
the feeling of pleasure and displeasure
the faculty of desire
The cognitive faculty, although it does not always function as cognition
(since a representation belonging to this faculty can also be a pure or empirical intuition without reference to concepts), nonetheless invariably underlies the exercise of all the faculties. If we thus consider the general capacity
for knowledge in accordance with principles, we can correlate the powers
of the mind with the following higher faculties:
the faculty of cognition
the feeling of pleasure and displeasure
the faculty of desire

the understanding
the power of judgement
reason

We ﬁnd that the understanding possesses speciﬁc a priori principles for
the faculty of cognition, the power of judgement possesses such principles
only for the feeling of pleasure and displeasure, while reason possesses
such principles merely for the faculty of desire. These formal principles
serve to ground a necessity which is partly objective and partly subjective,
but which also possesses objective validity in part because it is subjective,
in so far as these principles determine, through the higher faculties here
correlated with them, the corresponding powers of the mind:
the faculty of cognition
the feeling of pleasure
and displeasure
the faculty of desire

the understanding
the power of judgement

lawfulness
purposiveness

reason

purposiveness
which is also law
(obligation)

351

‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement
Finally, associated with these a priori grounds of the possibility of
forms, we also ﬁnd the following products corresponding to them:
Faculties of
the mind

Higher faculties
of cognition

A priori
principles

Products

faculty of cognition
feeling of pleasure
and displeasure
faculty of desire

the understanding
the power
of judgement
reason

lawfulness
purposiveness

nature
art

purposiveness
which is also
law (obligation)

morality

246

NATURE thus grounds its lawfulness on a priori principles of the understanding as the faculty of cognition; ART is guided a priori in its purposiveness in accordance with the power of judgement in relation to the feeling of
pleasure and displeasure; lastly, MORALITY (as the product of freedom)
stands under the idea of a form of purposiveness which is qualiﬁed for
universal law as the determining ground of reason with respect to the
faculty of desire. The judgements which arise in this way from a priori principles that are peculiar to each of the fundamental faculties of the mind are
theoretical, aesthetic, and practical judgements respectively.
Thus we uncover a system of the powers of the mind in their relation to
nature and to freedom, both of which possess their own distinctive determining a priori principles and which therefore constitute the two parts of
philosophy as a doctrinal system (theoretical and practical philosophy), as
well as a transition from the sensible substrate of the former to the intelligible substrate of the latter by means of the power of judgement which connects both parts through a distinctive principle of its own; this transition
is accomplished through the critique of a faculty (the power of judgement)
whose function is simply connective and which cannot therefore furnish
any knowledge on its own account or make any contribution to doctrine, but
whose judgements—called aesthetic (possessing merely subjective principles)
as distinct from those called logical (whether theoretical or practical) which
247
necessarily possess objective principles—are of a special kind in that they
relate sensuous intuitions to an idea of nature whose conformity to law
cannot be understood except in relation to a supersensible substrate. The
proof of this will be produced in the course of the treatise itself.
We shall not call the critique of this faculty with respect to the former
type of judgement an aesthetic (understood as a doctrine of the senses) but
a critique of aesthetic judgement. This is because the meaning of the former
expression is too broad, since it can also signify the sensuous character of

352

Critique of Teleological Judgement

the intuition which belongs to theoretical cognition and which furnishes
the material for logical (objective) judgements. That is why we have earlier deﬁned the expression ‘aesthetic’ exclusively as a predicate belonging
to intuition in the context of cognitive judgements. But there is no danger
of misunderstanding if we call the power of judgement ‘aesthetic’ precisely
because it does not relate the representation of an object to concepts, and
thus does not relate a judgement to cognition at all (being merely reﬂective
rather than determining). For although intuitions are sensuous (aesthetic)
for the logical power of judgement, they must nevertheless ﬁrst be raised
to the level of concepts in order to contribute to the knowledge of objects,
something which is not the case for the aesthetic power of judgement.

xii. The Division of the Critique of Judgement
D IVIDING the domain of a certain kind of cognition in order to present it as
a system has an importance that is rarely recognized, but also involves a
commonly misunderstood diﬃculty. If we regard the parts of such a possible
whole as already complete in themselves, the division is made mechanically,
simply for the sake of comparing the parts, and the resulting whole becomes
an aggregate (rather as cities do when land is divided amongst prospective
settlers according to the individual designs of each without any regulation).
But if we can and should presuppose an idea of whole, according to a certain principle, and prior to the determination of the parts, the division
must be made scientiﬁcally, and it is only in this way that the whole becomes
a system. And this is always required where the domain of a priori knowl248 edge is concerned (which together with its principles rests upon a special
legislative faculty on the part of the subject), for in such cases the range
within which these laws can be employed, and therefore also the number
and the relationship of the parts to knowledge as a whole, are determined
a priori through the distinctive character of this faculty. But no properly
grounded division can be produced without simultaneously producing the
whole itself and already presenting it completely in all its parts, though
only of course under the rule of critique. Nothing further is then required
to bring it into the systematic form of a doctrine (in so far as this cognitive
faculty can by its nature furnish such a thing) except the thoroughness of its
application and the elegant precision of its connection to particular content.
Now in order to divide a critique of the power of judgement (a faculty
which, although grounded on a priori principles, can never furnish the
material for a doctrine), we must fundamentally recognize that it is only
the reﬂective, not the determining, power of judgement which possesses its
own a priori principles. The former proceeds merely schematically, under
the laws of another faculty (the understanding), while the latter proceeds

‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

353

merely technically, under its own laws. The procedure of the latter is based
upon the principle of a technic of nature, and consequently upon a concept
of purposiveness in nature which must be presupposed a priori. Although
the reﬂective power of judgement, in accordance with its own principle,
must assume this purposiveness to be only subjective, i.e. relatively to this
faculty itself, it still carries with it the concept of a possible objective purposiveness, i.e. the conformity to law on the part of the things of nature as
natural ends.
A purposiveness that is judged merely subjectively, which is not therefore based on any concept, and in so far as it is merely subjectively judged
never can be based on one, is a relation to the feeling of pleasure and displeasure, and the judgement concerning this relation is aesthetic (and this
is indeed the only possible way of judging aesthetically). When this feeling merely accompanies the sensuous representation of the object, i.e. the
sensation of the object, the aesthetic judgement is empirical, and while it certainly requires a speciﬁc receptivity, it calls for no speciﬁc power of judgement;
and if, furthermore, the latter were assumed to be determining, it would
also have to be grounded in a concept of an end, and the purposiveness, as
objective, would therefore have to be judged logically rather than aesthetically. For these reasons are compelled to recognize that the aesthetic
power of judgement, as a special faculty, is nothing but the reﬂective power
of judgement, and that the feeling of pleasure (which cannot be distinguished from the representation of subjective purposiveness) must not be 249
regarded as derived from or related by an a priori principle either to the
sensation in an empirical representation of the object or to the concept of
the object. This feeling can only therefore be regarded as connected with
reﬂection and the form (the distinctive activity of the power of judgement)
through which it advances from empirical intuitions to general concepts.
The aesthetic of the reﬂective power of judgement will therefore constitute
one part of the critique of this faculty, just as the logic of the same faculty,
under the name of teleology, will constitute the other part. In both cases, however, nature itself is considered as technical, i.e. as purposive with respect to
its products, on the one hand subjectively, merely with regard to the mode of
representation of the subject, and on the other hand as objectively purposive
in relation to the possibility of the object itself. We shall see hereafter that
the purposiveness of form in the realm of appearance is beauty and that the
faculty for judging it is taste. It would seem to follow from this that the
division of the critique of the power of judgement, into its aesthetic and
its teleological part, must comprise solely the theory of taste and that of
physical ends (the judging of things in the world as natural ends).
But all purposiveness, whether subjective or objective, can be divided into
inner and relative purposiveness; the former is based upon the representation

354

Critique of Teleological Judgement

of the object as such, while the latter is based simply upon the contingent
use of the object. Thus the form of the object can be perceived, in the ﬁrst
place, in mere intuition without regard to any concepts, as purposive for
the reﬂective power of judgement, and in this case subjective purposiveness is ascribed to the thing and to nature itself. In the second place, the
perception of the object may reveal for reﬂection absolutely no purposiveness of its form as such, although the representation of the object can certainly arouse the feeling of a purposiveness lying a priori in the subject
250 (perhaps the supersensible determination of the powers of the subject) and
thereby ground an aesthetic judgement which is also related to an a priori
principle (though only a subjective one), but not, as in the ﬁrst case, relative
to the purposiveness of nature with regard to the subject, but only to a possible teleological use of certain sensuous intuitions, by virtue of their form,
through the merely reﬂective power of judgement. The ﬁrst kind of judgement therefore ascribes beauty to the objects of nature, while the second
ascribes sublimity to them, and in both cases merely by means of aesthetic
(reﬂective) judgements devoid of any concept of an object, merely with
regard to subjective purposiveness. But no special technic of nature would
be presupposed for the second kind since it depends merely on a contingent
use of a representation that is contributory not to cognition of an object but
to a diﬀerent feeling, namely that of the inner purposiveness in the constitution of the powers of the mind. Yet judgement concerning the sublimity of
nature would not be excluded from the aesthetic division of the reﬂective
power of judgement because it too expresses a subjective purposiveness
that does not rest upon the concept of an object.
It is just the same with regard to the objective purposiveness of nature,
i.e. the possibility of things as natural ends where we judge only in accordance with concepts of the latter, i.e. judge not aesthetically (in relation to
the feeling of pleasure and displeasure) but logically, in what we call a teleological judgement. Objective purposiveness is grounded either on the
inner possibility of the object or on the relative possibility of its external
consequences. In the ﬁrst case, a teleological judgement considers the
perfection of a thing in accordance with an end which lies within it (since
the manifold is here interrelated reciprocally as both end and means). In
the second case, a teleological judgement extends only to the usefulness of
a natural object, namely its correspondence to a purpose which lies in
other things.
Thus the critique of the aesthetic power of judgement comprises,
ﬁrstly, the critique of taste (the faculty of judging the beautiful) and, secondly, the critique of the feeling of spirit, for that is how I would initially
describe the faculty of representing sublimity in certain objects. Since the
faculty of the teleological power of judgement relates its representation of

‘First Introduction’ to the Critique of Judgement

355

purposiveness to the object not by means of feeling but through concepts,
no special terms are required in order to distinguish the faculties it implies, 251
whether we are speaking of inner or relative (though in both cases objective)
purposiveness; for the teleological power of judgement here relates its
reﬂection entirely to reason (rather than to feeling).
But we should note that it is the technic of nature—and not that of the
human powers of representation that we call art (in the proper sense of the
word)—with respect to which we are here investigating purposiveness as
a regulative concept of the power of judgement. We are not seeking for the
principle of artistic beauty or of artistic perfection, although one could call
the process of nature ‘technical’, i.e. quasi artistic, if we regard it as technical (or plastic) as represented on analogy with the comparable causality
of art. For we are concerned here with the principle of the merely reﬂective
power of judgement, rather than with the determining power of judgement
(which underlies all human works of art), and in this case purposiveness
must therefore be regarded as unintentional and can thus only be ascribed
to nature. The judgement of artistic beauty will subsequently have to be
regarded as a mere derivative of those principles which underlie the judgement concerning natural beauty.
The critique of the reﬂective power of judgement with respect to nature
will thus consist of two parts: the critique of the aesthetic faculty and the
critique of the teleological faculty of judging the things of nature.
The ﬁrst part will contain two books, of which the ﬁrst will be the critique
of taste or of the judging of the beautiful, and the second the critique of the
feeling of the spirit (in the mere reﬂection upon an object) or of the judging of
the sublime.
The second part likewise contains two books, the ﬁrst of which will bring
under principles the judging of things as natural ends with respect to their
inner possibility, while the other will do the same for the judgement concerning their relative purposiveness.
Each of these books will contain two sections, an analytic and a dialectic
of the faculty of judging.
The analytic will attempt to furnish in the same number of chapters ﬁrst
the exposition and then the deduction of the concept of a purposiveness of
nature.

This page intentionally left blank

EXPLANATORY NOTES
References to Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason are given in standard form, indicating the original pagination of the ﬁrst (A) and/or second (B) edition of the
text (which is also reproduced in the Academy and subsequent editions and translations of the work).
PART I
3 Preface to the First Edition: the second edition of 1793 reprinted the text
of the 1790 edition of the third Critique with generally minor changes of
an orthographic and stylistic kind. Signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the
two editions will be indicated at the relevant points.
6 the metaphysics of nature and of morals: Kant is referring to his project of a
new kind of metaphysics (an immanent ‘metaphysics of experience’ rather
than a transcendent ‘dogmatic’ metaphysics), namely a rigorous transcendental analysis of the ﬁrst principles underlying natural science and
morality. He had already published his Groundwork for the Metaphysics of
Morals in 1785, and made a contribution to a transcendental metaphysics
of nature in his Metaphysical Principles of Natural Science in 1786. The
Metaphysics of Morals followed in 1797.
13 O mihi praeteritos, etc.: A citation from Virgil’s Aeneid (viii. 560): ‘O mihi
prateritos referat si Iuppiter annos’ (‘If only Jupiter could give me back
those vanished years’).
15 the judgement which subsumes the particular . . . is determining: Meredith’s
older term ‘determinant’ for Kant’s use of reﬂektierend has been replaced
throughout with the term ‘determining’. Both these forms will be found
in the Anglophone secondary literature on Kant’s work.
then the judgement is simply reﬂective: Meredith’s term for Kant’s use of
reﬂektierend has been retained throughout. The term has also been rendered in English as ‘reﬂecting’ and again both forms can be found in the
secondary discussions of the third Critique.
16 the purposiveness of its form: as indicated in the Note on the Text, Translation,
and Revision Meredith’s older term ‘ﬁnality’ and the corresponding adjectival form ‘ﬁnal’ have been replaced throughout by the now more
standard rendering of ‘purposiveness’ and ‘purposive’ for Kant’s
Zweckmäßigkeit and zweckmäßig respectively.
32 quodlibet ens est aut A aut non A: traditional Latin formulation of the logical law of non-contradiction: ‘any being whatsoever is either A or non-A’.
35 In my search for the moments: Kant is using the term ‘moment’ (das Moment)
in a technical sense. It has nothing to do with temporal succession and
signiﬁes a fundamental aspect or dimension that can be analysed in relation

358

36

55
60
65

71
73
82
95
107

109

Explanatory Notes
to a complex phenomenon. The term is related to the Latin momentum
and originally derives from physics and mechanics. It is frequently used
in a philosophical context by Hegel and thinkers in the dialectical tradition,
such as Adorno.
with an accompanying sensation of delight: Meredith’s rendering of Kant’s
term das Wohlgefallen as ‘delight’ and of the corresponding verbal form
gefallen as ‘to please’ have been retained throughout. Other translators
have employed ‘satisfaction’ and ‘to please’ or variations on ‘like’ or ‘liking’.
that Iroquois sachem: Kant alludes to an anecdote related by a French
Jesuit traveller François-Xavier Charlevoix in his History and General
Description of New France of 1744.
inveigh with the vigour of a Rousseau: Kant is thinking of the general attitudes of Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–78), and his criticism of artiﬁcial
civilization and luxury in his Discourse on the Origin and Foundations of
Inequality amongst Men of 1755.
Assuming with Euler: Leonard Euler (1707–83), a renowned Swiss
mathematician and physicist, who defended a wave theory of light and
presented his scientiﬁc views in popular epistolary form.
designs à la grecque: ‘in the Greek manner’.
the famous Doryphorus of Polycletus . . . and Myron’s Cow: celebrated Greek
sculptures from the ﬁfth century bc. The Doryphoros, the spear-bearer
by Polycletus of Argos, and the bronze cow of Myron of Eleutherae were
regarded as perfect classical models of proportion and were widely reproduced and discussed by artists and writers, including Goethe.
General Remark on the First Section of the Analytic: the remark strictly
speaking refers to the ﬁrst ‘book’ (the Analytic of the Beautiful).
Marsden in his description of Sumatra: William Marsden (1754–1836),
English philologist and orientalist whose History of Sumatra (1783) was
translated into German in 1785.
Savary’s observations in his account of Egypt: Nicolas Savary (1750–88),
French orientalist and Egyptologist, published his Lettres sur l’Égypte
in 1787.
as Herr von Sassure relates: Horace Bénédict de Saussure (1740–99) was a
Swiss geographer, botanist, and traveller, who described his experiences
in his voluminous Voyages dans les Alpes of 1779–86.
Burke, who deserves to be called the foremost author: Edmund Burke (1729–97)
published his Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of our Ideas of the Sublime
and Beautiful in 1757. For the original passage quoted from the German
translation, see part IV, section vii.
The deduction of aesthetic judgements: here as elsewhere Kant uses the term
‘deduction’, derived from legal terminology, in his speciﬁcally critical
sense of exhibiting the right to make a certain type of universal claim. See
Critique of Pure Reason A 84–92.

Explanatory Notes

359

114 then let him adduce Batteux or Lessing: Charles Batteux (1713–80), prominent French theorist of the arts, and Gotthold Ephraim Lessing
(1729–81), inﬂuential German writer, critic, and controversialist whose
most important contribution to aesthetics was his treatise Laokoon of 1766
comparing the limits and possibilities of diﬀerent arts and their respective
media.
115 Thus although critics, as Hume says: Kant is referring to Hume’s essay ‘The
Sceptic’ in his Essays, Moral and Political of 1741–2: ‘There is something
approaching to principles in mental taste, and critics can reason and dispute
more plausibly than cooks or perfumers.’
126 a posse ad esse non valet consequentia: ‘there is no valid inference from the
possible to the actual.’
132 it is only production through freedom . . . that should be termed art: Kant is using
‘art’ (Kunst) here in the broad sense as a speciﬁcally human skill for shaping or fabricating a ‘work’ (corresponding to the Latin ‘ars’ and the Greek
‘technē).
133 Camper describes very exactly: Kant is alluding to Peter Camper (1722–89),
a Dutch anatomist and naturalist who also wrote a treatise on The Best
Form for Shoes.
134 only beautiful art: the German expression for the ‘ﬁne arts’, as they had
come to be distinguished from handicraft and the artisanal domain in general, like the equivalent contemporary terms in the romance languages, is
the ‘beautiful arts’. The repudiation of the idea of a comparable beautiful
form of ‘science’ is directed primarily against the aesthetician Alexander
Gottlieb Baumgarten (1714–62).
138 So all that Newton has set forth in his immortal work: Kant is alluding to
Newton’s great treatise on The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy
of 1687.
Wieland: Christoph Martin Wieland (1733–1813), inﬂuential and proliﬁc
German poet, translator, and critic whose History of Agathon is regarded
as the earliest example of the Bildungsroman (novel relating the personal
and cultural development of its protagonist).
141 things that in nature would be ugly or displeasing: a thought that is already
clearly expressed by Aristotle in a famous passage of his Poetics (chapter IV:
1448b).
144 When the great king expresses himself in one of his poems: Kant is referring
to King Frederick II of Prussia (1712–86), ‘Frederick the Great’, whose
poem he cites in a slightly free and vaguely poetical prose German translation (possibly his own). The French original runs as follows:
Oui, ﬁnissons sans trouble, et mourons sans regrets,
En laissant l’Univers comblé de nos bienfaits.
Ainsi l’Astre du jour, au bout de sa carrière,
Répand sur l’horizon une douce lumière,
Et les derniers rayons qu’il darde dans les airs
Sont les derniers soupirs qu’il donne à l’Univers

360

Explanatory Notes

145 So, for example, a certain poet says: Kant quotes from P. L. Withof (1725–89)
and his Academic Poems, which appeared in 1782. The original has ‘goodness’
where Kant writes ‘virtue’.
Segner made use of this idea: Kant is referring to Johann Andreas von
Segner (1704–77), German mathematician and natural philosopher, and
the frontispiece to his Introduction to the Theory of Nature of 1754.
148 Hume, in his history, informs the English: Kant is referring to David Hume’s
History of England (1754–62).
150 formative arts: the common German expression ‘die bildende Kunst’ has
no precise equivalent in English and reﬂects a traditional interest in
deﬁning the ﬁne arts in terms of their relevant medium, and therefore the
kind of speciﬁc content and expression open to them. ‘Formative’ art fundamentally involves the deliberate artistic shaping or treatment of a
medium in the context of spatial perception and thus includes architecture,
sculpture, landscape gardening, and painting, as Kant’s following remarks
make clear.
156 the vir bonus dicendi peritus: ‘an excellent man and skilled speaker’.
159 And so, perhaps, Epicurus was not wide of the mark: Epicurus was famous
for identifying ‘happiness’ with ‘pleasure’ and arguing that all human
beings inevitably pursue the latter under one form or another as their
ultimate goal.
162 Voltaire said that heaven has given us two things: Kant alludes to a line in
the long poem Henriade by Voltaire (1694–1778).
164 A person . . . is said to have humours: Meredith attempts to capture Kant’s
play on the diﬀerent senses of the words launisch (‘moody’) and the (now
antiquated) launicht (‘humorous’).
176 the halo in the grotto of Antiparos: Antiparos is a small Greek island famous
for an impressive stalactite cavern.
179 subiectio sub adspectum: submission to view.
183 education in what are called the humaniora: the humanities.
the beﬁtting social character of mankind: Meredith, like most modern translators, follows the reading of the second edition of the text. The ﬁrst edition
has ‘happiness’ (Glückseligkeit) rather than ‘social character’ (Geselligkeit).
PART II
191 Plato, himself a master of this science: Kant alludes to the ‘enthusiasm’ with
which Plato was inspired by the apparently innate and immutable character of mathematical truths to develop his metaphysical ‘theory of ideas’
and the pre-existence of the soul.
he could derive all that Anaxagoras inferred: Athenian philosopher
(c.500–428 bc) who espoused a teleological view of the world as under the
governance of mind or intelligence (nous).

Explanatory Notes

361

198 vestigium hominis video: the Latin means ‘I see the trace of a human being’.
It appears to be a reference to a story related by Vitruvius in his treatise
On Architecture (Preface to book VI): ‘Aristippus, the Socratic philosopher, suﬀered shipwreck and was cast up on the shore at Rhodes where
he glimpsed geometrical ﬁgures traced in the sand and is said to have
cried out to his companions: There is hope for I see the traces of men.’
203 a complete transformation, recently undertaken, of a great people: it is unclear
whether Kant is alluding here to the American Revolution of 1776–83 or
revolutionary developments that had begun in France in 1789.
206 the New Hollanders or Fuegians: the indigenous inhabitants of Australia and
Tierra del Fuego respectively.
211 The German word vermessen (presumptuous) is a good word: the German
word suggests a hybristic loss or transgression of due ‘measure’.
219 The system . . . attributed to Epicurus or Democritus: the Greek thinkers
Democritus of Abdera (c.460–c.370 bc) and Epicurus (341–271 bc)
denied immortality and presented a broadly materialist explanation of all
things in terms of matter, motion, and the void. Epicurus appears in
Dante’s Inferno as he ‘who set down the world to chance’.
the system of fatality, of which Spinoza is the accredited author: like Fichte
after him, Kant regards the metaphysical monism presented by Spinoza
(1632–77) in his Ethics as ultimately indistinguishable from a ‘fatalistic’
determinism that submerges the ﬁnitely free rational subject in the
anonymous mechanism of nature and replaces the practical autonomy of
the will with a contemplative relation to the absolute.
220 This is called hylozoism: the theory of an original living matter or primal
stuﬀ that has been ascribed to the ﬁrst Greek philosophers of nature and
to modern pantheistic thinkers like Giordano Bruno.
230 An understanding into whose mode of cognition: see Critique of Pure Reason
B 139 and the following note.
233 And there was a similar implication in the Critique of Pure Reason: for Kant’s
discussion of the possible idea of an ‘archetypal intellect’ which, unlike
‘our’ human cognition, is not intrinsically ﬁnite and dependent upon sensuous intuition and could generate its objects simply through thinking
them, see Critique of Pure Reason B 307–9.
249 Hume raises the objection: Kant may be alluding here to Hume’s discussion of
religious questions in An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding (section 11)
or possibly to the latter’s Dialogues concerning Natural Religion (part V).
253 Herr. Hofr. Blumenbach: important German naturalist and zoologist Johann
Friedrich Blumenbach (1752–1848) who published an inﬂuential treatise
On the Formative Impulse and the Process of Reproduction in 1781. ‘Epigenesis’
is the modern theory that an individual living being develops by means of
the gradual diﬀerentiation and elaboration of a fertilized egg cell, as
contrasted with the older biological theory of ‘preformation’ which sees

362

255

257
262

265
266

268

279
286
291
292
293
296

Explanatory Notes
the development of the individual as the unfolding and extension of an
originally complete organic form.
We might also follow the chevalier Linné: Kant is referring to the celebrated
Carl von Linné (1707–78), better known by the Latinized form of Linnaeus,
the Swedish naturalist chieﬂy remembered for his contributions to botanical
classiﬁcation and his metaphor of the ‘three kingdoms’ of mineral, vegetable,
and animal nature. His most inﬂuential works were his System of Nature
(1st ed. 1735) and The Genera of Plants (1737).
And even if man . . . seems, in Camper’s judgement: see note to p. 133.
developing to the highest pitch all talents that minister to culture: Kant also
presents the ideas presented in the preceding paragraph in his late essays,
particularly in his Idea for a Universal History from a Cosmopolitan Point
of View (1784) and his On Perpetual Peace of 1795.
Physico-Theology is the attempt: for Kant’s ﬁrst discussion of physicotheology in a fully ‘critical’ context see the Critique of Pure Reason A 620–30.
its solution seems an easy matter: Kant’s objections to the traditional argument from design in natural theology in this paragraph closely parallel
those of Hume in An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding (section
11) and in his Dialogues concerning Natural Religion (though it is unknown
whether Kant was familiar with the latter work, which had appeared in
German translation in 1781).
Others who were physicists: by physicists here Kant probably means ‘natural
philosophers’ of a monistic kind from the ancient Milesian cosmologists,
like Thales and Anaximenes, who tried to explain the world from a single
primal stuﬀ or principle, to metaphysical thinkers like Spinoza, who
identiﬁed God and Nature and interpreted everything as an expression of
the one and only ultimate ‘substance’.
This note was added by Kant in the 2nd edn.
vis locomotiva: Latin term denoting a vital or ‘moving force’.
: the Greek expressions signify ‘according to the truth’ (intrinsically) and ‘according to the human
perspective’.
The critique has abundantly shown: Kant is here referring back to his analysis
in the Critique of Pure Reason A 631–42.
par ratio: Latin expression meaning ‘the same grounds’.
Things which can be known are of three kinds: Kant discusses these distinctions in the Critique of Pure Reason A 820–31. There is an intrinsic ambiguity about the German word Glauben which may mean ‘belief ’ (whether
it is true or not) in an everyday empirical sense or ‘faith’ in the moral or
religious sense of believing ‘in’ someone or something.
certain phenomena that have been passed oﬀ for such: Kant may well be
alluding here to the theosophical speculations of Emanuel Swedenborg
(1688–1772), whose pretensions to theoretical knowledge he had treated

Explanatory Notes

300
306

309
310

363

highly ironically in his early work Dreams of a Spirit-Seer Elucidated
through the Dreams of Metaphysics of 1766.
Faith as habitus, not as actus: faith as an ‘attitude’ rather than as an ‘act’,
i.e. in terms of a general disposition seeking to promote the realization of
the good, not in terms of ritual acts or a confessional creed.
a Reimarus won undying honour for himself: Hermann Samuel Reimarus
(1694–1768), Professor of Oriental Languages in Hamburg and a wellknown deist thinker in his time. He defended the teleological argument
for God as the intelligent author of the world in his Treatises concerning
the Pre-eminent Truths of Natural Religion of 1754 and also discussed
biological questions from a philosophical point of view in his General
Reﬂections concerning the Instincts of Animals of 1760. Soon after his
death Lessing created something of a scandal (the ‘controversy of the
fragments’) by publishing extracts from his unpublished manuscripts that
contained devastating criticism of ‘revealed’ religion and the authority of
scripture. Kant knew the texts in question but was unaware of Reimarus’s
authorship which was only clearly established in the early nineteenth
century.
this means attributing omniscience to yourself: Kant may be implicitly alluding here to Hume’s arguments in An Enquiry concerning Human
Understanding (section VII: ‘Of the Idea of necessary Connexion’).
the recognition of our duties as divine commands: Kant brieﬂy presented
this exclusively moral-practical conception of God’s ‘commandments’
in the ﬁrst Critique (A 818–19) and the second Critique (Ak. 6: 153), but
only developed it at length in Religion within the Bounds of Reason Alone
in 1793.
‘FIRST INTRODUCTION’

315 the science itself : Kant is referring to philosophy itself as the ‘science’ or
systematic articulation of the fundamental principles governing experience and knowledge in general.
317 circinus et regola: compass and ruler.
318 the term ‘technic’: a term derived from the Greek word techne indicating a
craft, art, or productive capacity.
an error which I committed: Kant is referring to his earlier discussion of
diﬀerent kinds of imperatives in the Groundwork (Ak. 4: 414ﬀ.)
327 the speciﬁcation of the manifold: see Critique of Pure Reason A 652.
328 Linnaeus: see note to p. 255.
332 there can be a transcendental aesthetic: Kant is alluding to his earlier use of
the term ‘aesthetic’ in his ‘transcendental aesthetic’ in the Critique of Pure
Reason A 19–49. In that context aesthetic signiﬁes ‘pertaining to the conditions of sensuous intuition’, i.e. to space and time as the forms of pure
intuition that deﬁne human receptivity or sensibility.

364

Explanatory Notes

333 through a vitium subreptionis: through a ‘fallacy of subreption’, i.e. the substitution of a concept of something sensuous for a concept of something
intellectual in character. See Critique of Pure Reason A260–92.
337 the concept of perfection: Kant is alluding to the ideas of A. G. Baumgarten.
341 technica speciosa: technic in respect of appearance.
345 as Burke did in his treatise on the beautiful and the sublime: see note to p. 107
above.
347 domestica . . . pergrinis: ‘native’ and ‘foreign’ principles respectively.

BILINGUAL GLOSSARY
German–English
die Abgötterei
der Abgrund
die Absicht
absichtlich
die Achtung
adhärierend
der Aﬀekt
aﬃzieren
die Allegorie
allgemein
allgemeingültig
die Allgemeinheit
angemessen
die Angemessenheit
angenehm
das Angenehme
anhängend
die Anlage
der Anreiz
anschauen
die Anschauung
der Anschein
ansinnen
der Anspruch
die Arbeit
die Art
die Ästhetik
ästhetisch
das Attribut
der Ausdruck
die Baukunst
bedingen
die Bedingung
das Begehrungsvermögen
die Begierde
der Begriff
der Beifall
das Beispiel

idolatry
abyss
intention, aim
intentional
respect
adherent
aﬀect
to aﬀect
allegory
universal
universally valid
universality
suitable, ﬁtting
suitability
agreeable
the agreeable
dependent
potential, disposition
stimulus
to intuit
intuition
semblance
to impute
claim
labour
kind, species
the aesthetic
aesthetic
attribute
expression
architecture
to condition
condition
faculty of desire
desire
concept
approval, assent
example

die Beistimmung
beleben
die Belebung
bestimmen
bestimmend
die Bestimmung

assent, agreement
to enliven
animation, enlivening
to determine
determining
determination,
vocation
der Bestimmungs- determining
grund
ground
die Betrachtung
contemplation
beurteilen
to judge
die Beurteilung
judging
die Bewunderung admiration
die Bezeichnung designation
das Bild
image
bilden
to form
die bildende Kunst formative art
die Bildhauerei
sculpture
die Bildung
formation, form
die Bildungstrieb formative impulse
das Bildwerk
piece of sculpture
billigen
to approve
die Billigung
approbation
der Boden
territory
der Charakterismus
mark
darstellen
to present
die Darstellung
presentation
das Dasein
existence
die Dichtkunst
poetry, literature
disputieren
to dispute
die Doktrin
doctrine
die Ehrfurcht
reverence
die Eigenschaft
property
die Eigentümpeculiarity,
lichkeit
distinctiveness
die Einbildungskraft
imagination
die Eingebung
inspiration
die Einhelligkeit agreement, accord

366
einstimmig
die Einstimmigkeit
der Ekel
empf änglich
die Empf änglichkeit
die Empﬁndelei
empﬁnden
die Empﬁndung
die Endursache
der Endzweck
der Enthusiasmus
die Entschlossenheit
entspringen
das Erhabene
die Erhebung
erkennen
die Erkenntnis
das Erkenntnisurteil
das Erkenntnisvermögen
erregen
erscheinen
die Erscheinung
die Erschütterung
exemplarisch
die Existenz
das Feld
ﬁgürlich
fühlen
der Furcht
furchtbar
die Gattung
der Gaumengeschmack
das Gebiet
gebieten
das Gebot
gefallen
das Gefühl
der Gegenstand
der Geist

Bilingual Glossary
concordant
agreement,
concordance
disgust
receptive, susceptible
receptivity,
susceptibility
sentimentality
to sense, to feel
sensation
ﬁnal cause
ﬁnal end
enthusiasm
resoluteness
to arise, spring
the sublime
elevation
to cognize, to know
cognition, knowledge
cognitive judgement
faculty of cognition
to arouse
to appear
appearance
shaking
exemplary
existence
ﬁeld
ﬁgural
to feel
fear
fearful
genus
taste of the palate
realm
to command
command
to please
feeling
object
spirit

geistreich
der Gemeinsinn
das Gemüt
die Gemütsstimmung
das Genie
genießen
der Genuß
die Geschicklichkeit
der Geschmack
das Geschmacksurteil
das Geschöpf
das Gesetz
die Gesetzgebung
gesetzmäßig
die Gesetzmäßigkeit
die Gestalt
die Gesundheit
die Gewalt
der Glaube
gleichgültig
das Glied
die Glückseligkeit
gräßlich
die Grenze
die Grenzlosigkeit
die Größe
der Grundsatz
gültig
die Gültigkeit
die Gunst
das Gute
das höchste Gut
das Handwerk
der Hang
hemmen
die Hemmung
die Humanität
die Idee
der Inbegriﬀ
indemonstrabel

inspired
common sense
mind
disposition/temper
of the mind
genius
to enjoy
enjoyment
skill
taste
judgement of taste
creature
law
legislation,
jurisdiction
conformable to law
conformity to law
shape, figure
health
violence, dominion
faith, belief
indiﬀerent
member
happiness
horrible
limit, bound
boundlessness
magnitude
fundamental
principle
valid
validity
favour
the good
the highest good
handicraft
tendency, propensity
to check, inhibit
inhibition
humanity
idea
sum
indemonstrable

Bilingual Glossary
inexponibel
das Interesse
die Kluft
die Klugheit
die Kontemplation
der Körper
die Kultur
die Kunst
künstlich
das Kunstwerk
die Laune
launicht
launisch

inexponible
interest
gulf
prudence

contemplation
body
culture, cultivation
art
artistic, artiﬁcial
work of art
humour
humorous
moody, full of
humours
das Leben
life
das Lebensgefühl feeling of life
leiden
to suﬀer
die Leidenschaft passion
der Leitfaden
clue, guide
letzter Zweck
ultimate end
die Liberalität
liberality
die Lohnkunst
remunerative art
die Lust
pleasure
die Macht
might
die Malerkunst
(art) painting
die Maschine
machine, device
der Maßstab
standard
die Maxime
maxim
der Mensch
man, human being
die Menschheit
mankind
die Mißbilligung disapprobation
das Mißfallen
aversion
mitteilbar
communicable
die Mitteilbarkeit communicability
mitteilen
to communicate
das Mittel
means
das Mittelglied
middle term
das Moment
moment
moralishpraktisch
morally-practical
die Moralität
morality
das Muster
model
musterhaft
exemplary
die Nachäﬀung
aping
nachahmen
to imitate

der Nachahmer
die Nachahmung
die Nachmachung
die Nachfolge
die Naturgabe
die Neigung
die Nützlichkeit
das Nützliche
das Objekt
die Ohnmacht
das Organ
die Organisation
der Organismus
die Originalität
die Pﬂicht
die Phantasie
die Plastic
das Prinzip
die Quelle
das Reale
reﬂektierend
die Reﬂexion
die Regel
das Reich
der Reiz
reizen
der Richter
der Richtma
rühren
die Rührung
der Satz
schätzen
die Schätzung
der Schauer
der Schein
der Scheu
der Schmerz
der Schmuck
schön
das Schöne
die Schönheit
die Schöpfung
die Schranke
der Schreck

367
imitator
imitation
copying
following
natural
endowment
inclination
usefulness
the useful
object
helplessness,
impotence
organ
organisation
organism
originality
duty
fantasy
plastic art
principle
source
the real
reﬂective
reﬂection
rule
kingdom
charm
to charm
judge
standard, criterion
to move, to touch
emotion
proposition
to estimate
estimation
awe, dread
illusion, semblance
dread
pain
ﬁnery
beautiful
the beautiful
beauty
creation
restriction
terror

368
die Schwärmerei

Bilingual Glossary
fanaticism,
enthusiasm

die Selbsterhaltung
self-preservation
die Selbstschätzung
self-esteem
sinnlich
sensuous
der Sinn
sense
die Sinne
the senses
der Sinnenschein sensuous semblance
die Sinnlichkeit
sensibility
die Sitten
morals
die Sittlichkeit
morals
die Seele
soul
das Spiel
play
spielen
to play
die Spontaneität spontaneity
der Sprung
leap
der Spur
trace
der Staatskörper body politic
die Stimmung
disposition, temper,
mood
stimmen
to agree, to dispose
streiten
to contend
das Subjekt
subject
das Substrat
substrate
das Symbol
symbol
symbolisch
symbolic
das Talent
talent
die Technik
technic
technischpraktisch
technically-practical
die Teilnehmung participation
das Teilnehmungsgefühl
feeling of sympathy
die Teleologie
teleology
teleologisch
teleological
die Totalität
totality
der Trieb
impulse, drive
der Triebfeder
incentive, spring
übereinstimmen to agree, to harmonize
die Übereinstimmung
agreement, harmony
der Übergang
transition
die Überlegenpre-eminence,
heit
superiority

überschwenglich
übersinnlich
das Übersinnliche
überreden
die Überredung
übertreﬀen
überzeugen
die Überzeugung
das Unbedingte
die Unbegrenztheit
die Unermeßlichkeit
das Ungeheure
uninteressiert
die Unlust
die Unparteilichkeit
die Unwiderstehlichkeit
unzweckmä ig
die Unzweckmä igkeit
das Urbild
die Ursache
das Urteil
urteilen
die Urteilskraft
vergnügen
das Vergnügen
die Verknüpfung
das Vermögen
die Vernunft
die Vernünftelei
vernünftelnd
die Vernünftidee
die Versinnlichung
der Verstand
die Verwandtschaft
die Verwunderung
vollkommen

extravagant
supersensible
the supersensible
to persuade
persuasion
to surpass
to convince
conviction
the unconditioned
limitlessness
unmeasurability
the monstrous
disinterested
displeasure
impartiality
irresistibility
non-purposive
non-purposive
character
archetype
cause
judgement
to judge
judgement
to gratify
gratiﬁcation
connection
faculty
reason
subtlety
sophistical,
rationalizing
idea of reason
sensuous
rendering
understanding
kinship, similarity
astonishment
perfect

Bilingual Glossary
die Vollkommenheit
voraussetzen
die Voraussetzung
die Vorschrift
vorstellen
die Vorstellung
der Wahn
der Wahnsinn
der Wahnwitz
die Wahrnehmung
die Weisheit
der Welturheber
das Werk
das Werkzeug
der Wert
das Wesen
der Widerstand
der Widerstreit
der Wille
um . . . willen
die Willkür
wirklich
die Wirkung
das Wohlbeﬁnden
das Wohlgefallen

perfection
to presuppose
presupposition
precept
to represent
representation
delusion
delirium
mania
perception
wisdom
author of the world
work
tool, instrument
worth, value
essence
resistance
conﬂict
the will
for the sake of . . .
free choice
actual
eﬀect
well-being
delight

der Wohnplatz
das Zeichen
die Zeichnung
die Zerstreuung
zeugen
die Zeugung
das Ziel
der Zierat
die Zucht
der Zufall
zufällig

369

abode
sign
design
diversion
to generate
generation
gaol
ornamentation
training, discipline
chance, contingency
contingent,
fortuitous
die Zufriedenheit contentment
zumuthen
to demand, to expect
zusammento accord,
stimmen
to harmonise
die Zusammenstimmung
accordance, harmony
der Zwang
coercion
der Zweck
end, purpose
zweckmäßig
purposive
die Zweckmäßigkeit
purposiveness
die Zweckverbindung
purposive connection
zweckwidrig
counter-purposive

370

Bilingual Glossary

English–German
abyss
adherent
admiration
aesthetic
aesthetic
to aﬀect
aﬀect
to agree
agreeable
the agreeable
agreement
allegory
animation
aping
to appear
appearance
approbation
approval
to approve
to arouse
archetype
architecture
art
assent
astonishment
attribute
author of the
world
aversion
belief
body
body politic
bound
boundlessness
cause
charm
check
claim
clue
cognition
cognitive
judgement
to cognize

der Abgrund
adhärierend
die Bewunderung
ästhetisch
die Ästhetik
aﬃzieren
der Aﬀekt
übereinstimmen
angenehm
das Angenehme
die Übereinstimmung,
die Einhelligkeit
die Allegorie
die Belebung
die Nachäﬀung
erscheinen
die Erscheinung
die Billigung
der Beifall
billigen
erregen
das Urbild
die Baukunst
die Kunst
die Beistimmung
die Verwunderung
das Attribut
der Welturheber
das Mißfallen
der Glaube
der Körper
der Staatskörper
die Grenze
die Grenzlosigkei
die Ursache
der Reiz
die Hemmung
der Anspruch
der Leitfaden
die Erkenntnis
das Erkenntnisurteil
erkennen

command
common sense
communicable
communicability
to communicate
concept
condition
to condition
conﬂict
conformable
to law
conformity to law
contemplation
to contend
contentment
to convince
to copy
copying
creation
creature
culture,
cultivation
delight
delirium
dependent
design
designation
desire
determinate
to determine
determining
power of
judgement
determination
determining
ground
dignity
disapprobation
disgust
disinterested
displeasure
to dispute
diversion

das Gebot
der Gemeinsinn
mitteilbar
die Mitteilbarkeit
mitteilen
der Begriff
die Bedingung
bedingen
der Widerstreit
gesetzmäßig
die Gesetzmäßigkeit
die Betrachtung, die
Kontemplation
streiten
die Zufriedenheit
überzeugen
nachmachen
die Nachmachung
die Schöpfung
das Geschöpf
die Kultur
das Wohlgefallen
der Wahnsinn
anhängend
die Zeichnung
die Bezeichnung
die Begierde
bestimmt
bestimmen
die bestimmende
Urteilskraft
die Bestimmung
der Bestimmungsgrund
die Würde
die Mißbilligung
der Ekel
uninteressiert
die Unlust
disputieren
die Zerstreuung

Bilingual Glossary
drive
duty
eﬀect
elevation
end
endowment
to enjoy
enjoyment
to enliven
enthusiasm
essence
to estimate
estimation
example
exemplary
existence
to expect
expression
faculty
faculty of desire
faculty of
cognition
faculty of
knowledge
faith
fanaticism
fantasy
favour
fear
fearful
to feel
feeling
feeling of life
ﬁeld
ﬁgure
ﬁgural
ﬁnal cause
ﬁnal end
ﬁnery
following
to form
formation
formative art
free choice

der Trieb
die Pﬂicht
die Wirkung
die Erhebung
der Zweck
die Anlage
genießen
der Genuß
beleben
der Enthusiasmus
das Wesen
schätzen
die Schätzung
das Beispiel
exemplarisch
die Existenz,
das Dasein
ansinnen, zumuten
der Ausdruck
das Vermögen
das Begehrungsvermögen
das Erkenntnisvermögen
das Erkenntnisvermögen
der Glaube
die Schwärmerei
die Phantasie
die Gunst
der Furcht
furchtbar
fühlen
das Gefühl
das Lebensgefühl
das Feld
die Gestalt
ﬁgürlich
die Endursache
der Endzweck
der Schmuck
die Nachfolge
bilden
die Bildung
die bildende Kunst
die Willkür

genius
gaol
gratiﬁcation
gulf
handicraft
happiness
to harmonize
harmony
health
helplessness
the highest good
horrible
human being
humanity
humorous
humour
idea
ill-humoured
image
imagination
imitation
to imitate
imitator
impartiality
impulse
to impute
incentive
inclination
indemonstrable
indiﬀerent
inexponible
inspiration
inspired
instrument
intentional
interest
intuition
irresistibility
to judge
judgement
judgement
of taste

371
das Genie
das Ziel
das Vergnügen
die Kluft
das Handwerk
die Glückseligkeit
übereinstimmen
die Übereinstimmung
die Gesundheit
die Ohnmacht
das höchste Gut
gräßlich
der Mensch
die Humanität,
die Menschheit
launicht
die Laune
die Idee
launisch
das Bild
die Einbildungskraft
die Nachahmung
nachahmen
der Nachahmer
die Unparteilichkeit
der Trieb
ansinnen
der Triebfeder
die Neigung
indemonstrabel
gleichgültig
inexponibel
die Eingebung
geistreich
das Werkzeug
absichtlich
das Interesse
die Anschauung
die Unwiderstehlichkeit
beurteilen
das Urteil,
die Beurteilung
das Geschmacksurteil

372
jurisdiction
kingdom
knowledge
to know
labour
law
leap
legislation
limit
limitlessness
machine
magnitude
man
mania
mark
maxim
means
member
middle term
might
mind
model
moment
the monstrous
morality
morally practical
morals
natural end
natural
endowment
nature
object
organ
organism
organization
originality
ornamentation
participation
passion
peculiarity
perception
perfect
perfection
play

Bilingual Glossary
die Gesetzgebung
das Reich
die Erkenntnis
erkennen, wissen
die Arbeit
das Gesetz
der Sprung
die Gesetzgebung
die Grenze
die Unbegrenztheit
die Maschine
die Größe
der Mensch
der Wahnwitz
der Charakterismus
die Maxime
das Mittel
das Glied
das Mittelglied
die Macht
das Gemüt
das Muster
das Moment
das Ungeheure
die Moralität
moralisch-praktisch
die Sitten,
die Sittlichkeit
der Naturzweck
die Naturanlage
die Natur
der Gegenstand,
das Objekt
das Organ
der Organismus
die Organisation
die Originalität
der Zierat
die Teilnehmung
die Leidenschaft
die Eigentümlichkeit
die Wahrnehmung
vollkommen
die Vollkommenheit
das Spiel

to play
to please
pleasure
poetry
precept
pre-eminence
to present
presentation
principle
property
proposition
prudence
purpose
purposive
purposiveness
rationalizing
the real
realm
reason
idea of reason
reﬂection
reﬂective
remunerative art
to represent
representation
resoluteness
respect
reverence
rule
self-esteem
self-preservation
semblance
sensation
sense, meaning
the senses
sensibility
sensible,
sensuous
sensuous
rendering
sensuous
semblance
sentimentality
sign
skill

spielen
gefallen
die Lust
die Dichtkunst
die Vorschrift
die Überlegenheit
darstellen
die Darstellung
das Prinzip,
der Grundsatz
die Eigenschaft
der Satz
die Klugheit
der Zweck
zweckmäßig
die Zweckmäßigkeit
vernünftelnd
das Reale
das Gebiet
die Vernunft
die Vernunftidee
die Reﬂexion
reﬂektierend
die Lohnkunst
vorstellen
die Vorstellung
die Entschlossenheit
die Achtung
die Ehrfurcht
die Regel
die Selbstschätzung
die Selbsterhaltung
der Schein
die Empﬁndung
der Sinn
die Sinne
die Sinnlichkeit
sinnlich
die Versinnlichung
sinnlicher Schein
die Empﬁndelei
das Zeichen
die Geschicklichkeit

Bilingual Glossary
sophistical
soul
source
species
spirit
spontaneity
standard
stimulus
subject
sublime
the sublime
substrate
subtlety
to suﬀer
sum
supersensible
to surpass
symbol, symbolic

vernünftelnd
die Seele
die Quelle
die Art
der Geist
die Spontaneität
der Maßstab
der Anreiz
das Subjekt
erhaben
das Erhabene
das Substrat
die Vernünftelei
leiden
der Inbegriff
übersinnlich
übertreﬀen
das Symbol,
symbolisch
talent
das Talent
taste
der Geschmack
taste of the palate der Gaumengeschmack
technic
die Technik
technicallypractical
technisch-praktisch

tendency
territory
terror
tool
totality
transition
the unconditioned
understanding
universal
universality
universally valid
unmeasurability
useful
the useful
valid
validity
violence
vocation
well-being
will
work
work of art
worth

373
der Hang
der Boden
der Schreck
das Werkzeug
die Totalität
der Übergang
das Unbedingte
der Verstand
allgemein
die Allgemeinheit
allgemeingültig
die Unermeßlichkeit
nützlich
das Nützliche
gültig
die Gültigkeit
die Gewalt
die Bestimmung
das Wohlbeﬁnden
der Wille
das Werk
das Kunstwerk
der Wert

This page intentionally left blank

ANALYTICAL INDEX
abstraction from content of judgement of taste 112; from concept of object
60, 62; from the agreeable 47
actual deﬁnition of 229
actuality of what is only possible according to ideas 277
admiration deﬁnition of 102; contrasted with astonishment 193
advantageousness as purely relative purposiveness 195
aesthetic aesthetic quality deﬁned 23; transcendental aesthetic deals only with
pure judgements 100; the aesthetic faculty is legislative 177; aesthetic and
mathematical estimation of magnitude contrasted 82; all estimation of magnitude ultimately aesthetic 82
aesthetic ideas meaning of 142; justiﬁcation of the expression 142; spirit as
faculty of presenting such ideas 142; as counterpart to rational ideas 143;
contrasted with intellectual ideas 143; faculty of such ideas best displayed
in poetry 143; serve rational ideas in place of logical presentation 144;
beauty as an expression of such ideas 149; main intention of sculpture is
expression of such ideas 151; ﬁne art derives its rule from such ideas 178;
distinguished from rational ideas of determinate ends 178; play of aesthetic
ideas in relation to laughter and music 160
aesthetic judgement diﬃculty of discovering a priori principle of such judgement 4; reveals relationship between faculty of knowledge and feeling of
pleasure 5; such judgement deﬁned 29; compared with teleological judgement 29; compared with logical judgement 36; pleasure in such judgement
54; division of aesthetic judgement 54; does not aﬀord confused knowledge
of objects 59; subjective reference of aesthetic judgement 59; the ought in
aesthetic judgement 68; logical peculiarities of aesthetic judgement 111;
arises through delight predicated of the object 118; contrasted with cognitive judgement 117; as itself both object and law 118; dialectic of aesthetic
judgement 165
aﬀect physiological aspects of 13 n; freedom from 102; of strenous or languid type 102 f.
agreeable deﬁnition of 37; interested delight in the agreeable 37; it not merely
pleases, but gratiﬁes 38; compared with the good 39; contrasted with delight
in the beautiful 39, 44, 47; it rests entirely on sensation 39; contrasted with
the beautiful and the good 40, 44, 67; diﬀerence of opinion about the agreeable tolerated 45; abstraction from the agreeable 57; contrasted with the
beautiful, the sublime, and the good 96; as motive of desire always the same
in kind 96; diﬀerence amongst people concerning the agreeable 121; empiricism confuses it with aesthetic delight 174; music and jest are agreeable
rather than ﬁne art 134

376

Analytical Index

agreement necessity of agreement concerning the beautiful 68; between
diﬀerent judging subjects 70; judgement of taste demands agreement from
everyone 70; as a duty 125; the agreement of all ages and nations as empirical
criterion 62
analogue of art and life contrasted 202
analogy between art and expression 149; as means of presenting concepts
179; analogy underlying related words 180; points of analogy between the
beautiful and the good 181; names applied to beautiful objects on analogy
with the morally good 181; analogy between purposiveness of reﬂective
judgement and practical purposiveness 16; imagination building up another
nature on the basis of an analogy 143; natural beauty regarded on the analogy of art 76; conception of an end read into the nature of things by analogy
188; organization of nature has nothing analogous to any causality known to
us 217; geometrical analogy 210; art considered as basis of nature by analogy
217; analogy to artistic instinct in lower animals 270, 293 n; attributes of the
Supreme Being only conceived by analogy 285, 292; inference by analogy
as a theoretical argument 292; nature of arguments from analogy 292 n;
supersensible being conceived on analogy 314
anatomy comparative anatomy 247
Anaxagoras 191
ancients works of the ancients as models 112; a later age will hardly dispense
with works of the 63 n., 183
anthropology rational psychology a mere anthropology of inner sense 289
anthropomorphism latent in our representations of God 285, 288 n
antinomy of judgements of taste 165; solution of this antinomy 166; alternatives for avoiding it 173; forces us to look beyond the sensible world 169;
the three antinomies of pure reason and how they arise 172; the antinomy of
reﬂective judgement 213; exposition of this antinomy 214; its solution 216
apprehension pleasure connected with it when not referable to objects 24; it
precedes any concept 27
archaeologist of nature 248
archaeology as a science 257 n
archetype of taste 62; as set by nature 65
architect God as the supreme architect 238
architectonic the causality of an architectonic understanding 216; the architectonic of an intelligent author of the world 266
architecture as a plastic art 151; design as the essential feature of architecture 56
art judgements on products of art claim universal agreement 26; function of
imagination in 27; as realization of an antecedent concept of an object 28;
application of principle of purposiveness to 31; beauty of art limited by its
required agreement with nature 76; beautiful nature conceived after analogy
of 77; sublime not to be sought in art if judgement to be pure 83; interest
in ﬁne art no evidence of moral disposition 128; delight in ﬁne art not
immediate 128; imitation of nature in art 130; general discussion of 132;

Analytical Index

377

distinguished from nature 131; as skill distinguished from science 133; distinguished from handicraft 133; as free 133; regarded as play 134; requires
a mechanical aspect 133; as merely mechanical 134, 136, 139; general discussion of ﬁne art 134; how far it avails itself of science 134; aesthetic art
deﬁned and distinguished from agreeable art 134; ﬁne art, though devoid
of end, advances interests of social communication 135; reﬂective judgement, not sensation, as its standard 135; only beautiful when it appears like
nature 135; nature only beautiful when it appears like art 135; ﬁne art
pleases in mere act of judgement 136; always aimed at the production of
something 136; how product of art may seem like nature 135; ﬁne art is the
art of genius 136; nature gives rule to art through genius 137; presupposes
rules 137; limit to its progress 138; thought of something as end always
present to 139; genius supplies material for 139; its form depends on discipline 139; genius required for its production 139; beauty of art and nature
contrasted 140; requisites for judging beauty of art and nature 140; involves
reference to perfection 140; superior in its ability to furnish beautiful description of what is ugly in nature 141; requires more than mere conformity to
taste 141; its form must not appear calculated 142; combination of taste and
genius in products of 154; beautiful or inspired art 148; concept of object
necessary in 148; division of ﬁne arts 149; conjunction of understanding
and sensibility in ﬁne art must appear spontaneous 150; combination of ﬁne
arts in the same product 154; its fate if not combined with moral ideas 154;
respective worth of diﬀerent arts 155; the nature of the individual, not a set
purpose, gives the rule to 172; no rule or precept can serve as standard 171;
the purposiveness of 174; attainment of ends only a determining ground of
judgement in mechanical art 178; must derive its rule from aesthetic ideas
178; element of science in art an indispensable condition 182; there is only a
manner, not a method, for teaching art 182; the propaedeutic to ﬁne art 182;
eﬀect in nature regarded as product of art 194; superiority of nature to 202;
natural beauty as analogue of 203; analogy of art does not explain intrinsic
natural perfection 203, 204; organization surpasses art 212; introduced on
an analogy as basis of nature 218; has objective reality as a causality through
ends 224; ﬁne art and sciences as contribution to our higher vocation 262;
on analogy with artistic instinct in animals 270, 292 n; analogy of intelligence as source of works of art 294
artist God as supreme artist 266
assent (see also agreement) necessity of universal in aesthetic judgement 70
assimilation its character as organic process 199
association imagination borrows material supplied according to the law of 143;
laws of 71, 99
assumption matters of faith only an 299; in interests of practical employment
of reason 300
assurance that produced by the teleological proof 290; that produced by a
practical faith 295; that is free 298 n
astonishment deﬁned 193

378

Analytical Index

attributes aesthetic attributes deﬁned 144; logical attributes 144; examples
of the use of aesthetic attributes 145; of deity 273 f., 285, 309 f., 313 f.
autonomy of the higher faculties 31; does not belong to imagination itself 71;
judgement of taste grounded on autonomy 178; mistaken for heteronomy 217
Batteux as art critic 114
beautiful analytic of the 35; deﬁnition of the 97; deﬁnitions resulting from
the moments of taste 42, 56, 66, 71; pleases in the mere judging and reﬂection
122, 135 f.; independent of any determinate concept 39, 60, 122; contrasted
with the agreeable, the sublime, and the good 41, 44–6, 75, 96; points of
agreement and diﬀerence between the beautiful and the sublime 75, 77 f.,
86, 88 f., 94 f.; mind in restful contemplation when judging the beautiful
78, 88, 91; we dwell on the contemplation of it 54; charms compatible with
it 75; one captivated by inclination and appetite cannot judge it 91; delight
in it connected with the representation of quality 75; implies a necessary
reference to delight 67; as presentation of an indeterminate concept of the
understanding 75; delight in it is positive 99; requires a certain quality of
the object 97; its ground as sought in what is external to ourselves 77; mere
formal purposiveness the ground for judging it 57; what is required for
calling an object beautiful 36 f.; diﬀerence of opinion not tolerated when
anything described as 70; no criterion or objective rule for determining
what is 62; no science of the beautiful 134, 182; deduction of judgements
concerning it 109; pleasure in it attends a process of judgement encountered in the commonest experience 122; pleasure in it must depend for
everyone on the same conditions 122; relationship of the faculties requisite
for perception of it 122; mistakes in the judgement of it 122; how far culture is required for its appreciation 95; it cultivates us 97; immediate pleasure in it cultivates liberality of mind 99; its purposiveness with regard to
morality 98; can represent the conformity to law of action done from duty
97; only pleases universally in reference to morality 180; beautiful representation of an object deﬁned 141; beautiful objects distinguished from
beautiful views of objects 74; examples of beautiful objects 39
beauty not a property of the object 51, 111 f.; distinction between free and
dependent 60; as expression of aesthetic ideas 149; purposiveness here
grounded in the form and ﬁgure of the object 109; consists in the form of
mutual subjective purposiveness of the faculties of imagination and understanding 115 f.; why scattered abroad so lavishly 109; intellectual beauty an
inadequate expression 101; the mind cannot dwell on the beauty of nature
without ﬁnding its interest engaged 130; beauty of nature superior to
that of art in that it awakens an immediate interest 128; as symbol of morality 179 f.; has signiﬁcance only for human beings as beings at once rational
and animal 41; of birdsong contrasted with imitation 73 f.; of human
beings 60; as formal subjective purposiveness 189; intellectual beauty
wrongly applied to geometrical properties 193; natural beauty as analogue
of art 203; beauty of nature furthers moral disposition 274, 311 n; moral

Analytical Index

379

interest probably ﬁrst drew attention to 287 f., ends of nature excite admiration for 311 n
beaver constructive work of beavers and human beings compared 293 n
being an intelligent being produces with design 219; an intelligent original
being not objectively substantiated 226; the concept of an absolutely necessary
being 230; concept of a supreme being aﬀords no explanation 238; concept
of an original being and its attributes 265, 272 f.; one that has formed
human beings with an end in view 274; idea of a supreme being rests on the
practical employment of reason 267, 285; moral need for the representation
of a supreme being 274 f.; understanding and will not ascribed to such a
being on theoretical grounds 287; anthropomorphic representation of a
supreme being 288; the possibility of a supersensible being 295
birds as free beauties of nature 60; birdsong 73 f., 131
Blumenbach his theory of epigenesis 253
building 35; palace 36, 60; hut 36; church 60 f.; summer-house 60; temples,
arches, columns, mausoleums 151
Burke views on the sublime 107 f.
Camper 133
caricature 66 n
categories the basis of experience in general 18; no pleasure arises from the
coincidence of our perceptions with categories 22; misapprehension of the
argument of the Critique of Pure Reason with regard to the categories 311;
the category of causality 312
causality ﬁnal and eﬃcient causality the only two kinds of 200 f.; possibility
of causality of ends cannot be perceived a priori 204; teleology does not
introduce special ground of 211, 218; of architectonic understanding 216;
of an understanding 225; of natural causes subordinated to that of ﬁnal
causes 218; special kind of 217 f., 221 f., 224 f., 263; union of two types of
causality 251; causality by means of ideas 281; freedom as a particular kind
of causality 297; category of causality 312 f.
cause ﬁnal and eﬃcient cause contrasted 200 f., 207, 277; intelligent cause 217,
272, 277, 299; organisms judged on principle of ﬁnal cause 217; a world-cause
acting according to ends a mere idea 217; ﬁnal cause as a substance 221; a
cause distinct from nature 225, 245; genesis of organisms unintelligible without ﬁnal cause 249; supreme cause 251, 269, 273, 283; system of ﬁnal causes
272; supreme cause governing the world according to moral laws 275
certainty as a quantum 294
chance blind chance 44, 287
charm dwelling on 54; pure judgement of taste independent of it 54, 154,
156, 182; abstraction from it where judgement is to serve as universal
rule 124; cannot enhance beauty of form 55 f.; may lend further interest
where taste is immature 56; its absence a test of the correctness of ideal
beauty 66; beauty compatible with charm 75; charm repugnant to the sublime 76; charms of nature belong to modiﬁcations of light and sound 131;

380

Analytical Index

charm (cont.): interest in the charm of nature is empirical 128; charms attract
in society before forms 127; taste facilitates transition from charm to habitual moral interest 181 f.
Christianity introduced the idea of faith 300 n; a wonderful religion with
respect to purer conceptions of morality 300 n
circle its formal purposiveness 190
civilization its development connected with the appreciation of beauty 127;
how ﬁne art and the sciences contribute to it 262
co-existence how it may be intuited 89
cognition ﬁeld, territory, and realm of our cognition 10; the one kind of
representation valid for everyone 49
cognitive faculty its bearing on the feeling of pleasure 5; presented with an
unbounded ﬁeld 11; purposiveness in relation to our cognitive faculty 22,
28 f.; pleasure expressing conformity of object to our cognitive faculty 24 f.;
accord of the object with respect to our cognitive faculty is contingent 20 f.;
harmony with the cognitive faculty 27; its harmonious accord 31; table of
the cognitive faculties 32; its free play 49; the accord of the cognitive
powers 69
colossal deﬁned 83
colour as objective sensation 38; diﬀerence of opinions concerning 43; charm
of colour 55; when it is considered beautiful 55; Euler’s theory 55; beautiful
colour in organic nature 175; the seven colours and their associations 131;
names ascribed to colour on analogy with moral considerations 181; the art
of colour 153
Columbus the problem of the egg 133
common sense (see also sensus communis) with respect to the necessity
in aesthetic judgement 68; meaning of common sense 68; ground for supposing such a sense 68; subjective necessity represented as objective on the
presupposition of a common sense 70; not grounded on experience 70; a
mere ideal norm 70; constitutive or regulative 70; elements of the faculty
of taste are united in common sense 70 f.
communicability of sensation 121; of moral feeling 121; of pleasure in the
sublime 122; of pleasure in the beautiful 122; of thoughts 125; of cognitions
and judgements 69; cognition alone capable of universal communicability 48;
of the accord of the cognitive faculties 69; universal communicability of a
feeling presupposes a common sense 68; universal communicability of a
pleasure proves it to be one of reﬂection 135; free play of cognitive faculties
must admit of universal communicability 49; the only feeling which apart
from concepts admits of universal communicability is freedom in the play
of our cognitive faculties 135 f.; this play is purposive 135; pleasure in the
object derives from universal communicability of representational state of
the mind 48; what sensation is universally communicated in judgement of
taste 50; and in the case of the sublime 105; empirical pleasure in communicability deducible from our tendency to sociability 49; universal communicability of our feeling appears to carry an interest 126; universal

Analytical Index

381

communicability a source of interest in society 105, 127; a concern for universal communicability required of everyone 126; value of sensations with
regard to universal communicability 127
communicable the way in which genius arrives at its ideas not communicable 137; artistic skill not communicable 138; what is communicable in the
judgement of taste 48; why this is so 49
communication mode of communication in speech as guiding the division
of the arts 149; power of communicating one’s inmost self implied by
‘humanity’ 183; reciprocal communication between the cultivated and the
uncultivated 183; ﬁne art advances the interest of social communication 135
community symbolic representation of the community as an organic body
179; civil community 261
concept division of concepts into those of nature and those of freedom 7 f.;
their respective ﬁeld, territory, and realm 10; transition from concept of
nature to that of freedom 31; manifold modiﬁcations of transcendental
concepts of nature 15; concepts not required to enable us to perceive
beauty 58 f.; concepts cannot be determining ground of judgements of taste
59; judgement of taste upon object precedes any concept 26, 119; confused
and clear concepts 59; abstraction from concepts 60 f.; material beyond
what is included in a concept 145; presentation of concepts occasioning a
wealth of thought 155; concepts of the understanding are immanent as
opposed to transcendent 169; concepts of the understanding are always
demonstrable 170
conceptus ratiocinans 223
contemplation 41
contingency of nature 188; apparent contingency of what displays formal
purposiveness 192; relative purposiveness contingent with respect to the
thing itself 195 f.; contingency of form makes us look to ends of reason 198;
contingency of coincidence 198; unity of an end not thinkable apart from
contingency 221; natural end implies both contingency and necessity 224;
possibility, necessity, and contingency 230; duty implies contingency 231;
the particular contains something contingent in respect of the universal 232;
conformity to law on the part of the contingent is termed purposiveness
232; contingency of the constitution of our understanding 233, 236 f.; contingency of variety in a given particular 234; contingency makes it diﬃcult
to reduce multiplicity of nature to unity of knowledge 234; contingency of
synthesis 235; contingency of purpose to which empirical ends refer 269;
the contingent points towards an unconditioned ground 277
contradiction principle of 295; what the moral law postulates can be
thought without contradiction 300 n
conversation the art of, described 135
conviction contrasted with persuasion 291; proof tending toward conviction 292
cosmopolitan whole development of civil communities in this direction 261
creation see final end

382

Analytical Index

criterion beauty has no universal 62; universal communicability as 62
critique of pure reason 3 f., 14; in the narrow sense: why judgement and reason
are excluded 3; in the wider sense: why it is incomplete unless judgement
is treated 4; of practical reason 4; of judgement speciﬁcally 4; not directed
to the culture of taste 5; as a theory of judgement 6; it shows how diﬀerent
legislations are compatible 11; critique of judgement connects both parts of
philosophy 12; general statement of its nature and functions 12; has no
realm and is not a doctrine 12; divisions of critique of pure reason 14; why
critique of judgements of taste is necessary 26; ground of the twofold division of such a critique 26 f.; the division between aesthetic and teleological
judgement 28; aesthetic part of the critique of judgement essential 28; position of aesthetic judgement in the critique 29; as propaedeutic 29; critique
of taste as art and as science 116; transcendental critique 116; dialectic
belongs to the critique of taste, not taste itself 165
crustacea as examples of free beauty 60
crystals formation of 248; crystallization as example of the free formation of
nature 176
culture of taste not the object of the critique 5; how far required for judging
the beautiful and the sublime 95; promoted by ﬁne art 135; stability of judgement guarantees progressive culture 148; music more a matter of enjoyment
than culture 157; adopted as standard 158; its progress 183; propaedeutic
to ﬁne art 182 f.; true standard of taste as mean between the higher and
modest worth of nature 183; constraint of culture united with the truth of
nature 183; promoted by beautiful forms 208 n; as an end 258; skill as a
form of culture 260; requires discipline 260; how war serves it 260
cypher through which nature speaks to us ﬁguratively 130
dance its combination of arts 154
decoration 152
deduction of principle of purposiveness 18; of pure aesthetic judgements 109;
where it is obligatory 109; only necessary for judgements on the beautiful
109; what suﬃces for a deduction in aesthetic judgements 110 f.; method of
deduction for judgements of taste 110; the problem of deduction of such
judgements 117; deduction of judgements of taste 119 f.; as principle for
deriving products from their causes 188
deﬁnition transcendental 13 n
Deism 180
deity (see also attributes, being, cause, god) physical teleology cannot
aﬀord adequate conception of deity 265; as supreme cause 273; no theoretical proof of the existence of a deity 295
delight as disinterested 36, 41; comparison of its diﬀerent kinds 41; as related
to inclination, favour and respect 41; as universal 42; taste gains from the
combination of intellectual and aesthetic delight 61; contrasted with that
in the good 71; in the way a ﬁgure strikes the eye 72; as combined with
knowledge 72; not a predicate of the object 118; in moral action 122
Democritus his system of accidentality 219

Analytical Index

383

demonology 288
Descartes his view of animals as machines 293 n
descent of diﬀerent species from a common parent 247; of man in relation to
crude matter 247 f.
design as essential element in formative arts 56 f.; nature not to be credited
with causes acting designedly 187 f.; teleological judgement of nature as a
whole silent on question of design 207; physics ignores the question 210;
the purposiveness of nature considered as if designed 211; in relation to
matter 211; technic of nature as designed and undesigned 219; idealism
denies intentional design 220; Spinoza eliminates all trace of design 220;
problematic character of the concept 224; cause that pursues design 225,
274; design as basic for investigating organized products 255 f.; ends not
observed as designed 229; origin of organisms as referred to design 250
desire faculty of desire deﬁned 13 n; the faculty of principles of desire 4 f.;
its deﬁnition tested by consideration of fantastic wishes 13 n; causal reference of desire 13 n; its reference to interest 36; duty as independent of
desire 299 f.
dialectic of aesthetic judgements 165; belongs to the critique of taste, not
taste itself 165; of reﬂective judgement 213 f.
discipline required by culture 260; of the inclinations 261
disgust what excites disgust cannot be represented in ﬁne art 141
disputes in relation to taste 62, 166
division of philosophy 6; of theoretical and practical 7; why Kant’s divisions
are threefold 32 n; between the beautiful and the sublime 26 f.; between the
mathematically and dynamically sublime 78
doctrine principles belonging to it must be determining 29
dominion deﬁned as might superior to the resistance of that which itself
possesses might 90
drama as rhetoric combined with pictorial representation 154
dreams function of 208
duty implies contingency 231; our disposition towards duty 274 f.; regarded
as a divine command 310
education as ﬁtting us for a higher vocation 262
emotion spirited and tender emotions 102 f.
empiricism in relation to the critique of taste 174
end deﬁned 16; natural end 28; natural beauty and natural ends contrasted 28;
no reason assignable a priori why there should be objective ends of nature 28;
teleological judging of ends of nature 29; actual existence of natural ends
not proved by experience 187; concept of end read into the nature of things
187; where experience leads us to concept of an end of nature 194; when a
thing possible only as an end 197; implies reference to will 198; requisites
for judging a thing in its intrinsic nature as an end 201 f.; nature in general
as system of ends 205, 207, 256; distinction between judging a thing as natural end on account of its form, and regarding its existence as an end of
nature 206; a categorical end 206; divine end in the ordering of nature 210;

384

Analytical Index

end (cont.): idea of end required for cognition of certain objects 211; worldcause acting according to ends a mere idea 216; unity of end not thinkable
apart from contingency 221; mere ontological unity not a unity of 221; as a
special kind of unity 221; unity of end implies cause possessed of intelligence
222; causality of end diﬀerent from mechanism 224; objective reality cannot
be procured for 224; contingency of thing thought as subject to condition
of an 226; end in nature not observed as designed 227; concept of end as
designed read into the facts 227; as designed not given in the object 227;
directed to production, represented as source of accord with judgement
235; deﬁned as product of a cause whose determining ground is merely the
representation of its eﬀect 236; why natural science not satisﬁed with explanation in terms of ends 236; concept of whole as end not derivable from
mechanical generation 236 f.; principle of end does not render production
of organisms comprehensible 239; implies means 242; mechanism ultimately
subordinated to causality according to ends 243 f.; correlation of ends does
not help mechanical explanation 245 f.; where this concept applies to things
246 f.; diﬃculty in question of the genesis of a thing that involves an 249;
relation of substance to consequence regarded as 250; question of end for
which organisms exists 254; origin according to ends not inherently inconsistent with mechanical generation 257 f.; certain laws of unity only be represented through ends 258; nature strives after higher ends than it can itself
aﬀord 262; supreme good of the world as highest end 264; unconditional
legislation in respect of ends 264; end of nature must ﬁrst be given if we are
to infer world-cause 265; ends of nature oblige us to look for ﬁnal end 265;
all ends in the world empirically conditioned 269; of the existence of nature
272; man exists for an end which implies a being with that end in view 274;
moral law directs us to strive towards universal highest end 275; harmony
of the world with moral end 276; relative and absolute end contrasted 278;
ends certainly are found in the world 282; principle that there is nothing in
the world without an end 282; connecting natural and ethical end 283;
ends of nature suﬃciently prove intelligent world-cause for reﬂective judgement 284 f.
enjoyment those intent on it would gladly dispense with all judgement 38;
an obligation to enjoyment is an absurdity 40; the nature of its pleasure
121; pleasure in the beautiful not a pleasure of enjoyment 122; value of life
measured solely by enjoyment 262 n
enlightenment deﬁned 124
ens rationis ratiocinantis 296
ens realissimum as ontological concept 305
entertainment of the mental faculties 72 f.; taste and social entertainment 44
enthusiasm its sublimity 102; compared with fanaticism 105
Epicurus on the corporeal basis of pain and gratiﬁcation 107, 159, 163; on
chance 220; his purely mechanistic concept of nature 220

Analytical Index

385

epigenesis theory of 251; advantages of the theory 253; merits of Blumenbach’s
theory 253
ether example of a matter of opinion in science 296
ethics a theological ethics is impossible 314
Euler his theory of colour 55
evolution organization must be assumed for evolution of new structures 246 f.;
contrasted with theory of individual preformation 251; tracing back from
man to polyp, even to mosses and lichens 247
examples function of illustration by examples 115 f.; as intuitions verifying
reality of empirical concepts 178
existence taste indiﬀerent to the existence of objects 36; ontological argument
for existence of God 302; can only be conceived as magnitude 313
experience cannot prove existence of ends of nature 187; furnishes the occasion for adopting principle of judging internal purposiveness 204
explanation (see also deduction, insight) not provided by teleology 187 f.;
geometrical analogies not a ground of explanation 210; mechanism aﬀords
no explanation of organisms 216, 241 f.; systems attempting an explanation
of the purposiveness of nature 220; how concept of God renders purposiveness intelligible 227; of origin of organized beings without reference to
design 227 f.; general explanatory digression 228; mechanical and teleological modes of explanation are not inconsistent 237; nature not explained by
reference to supreme architect 238; purposiveness not explained by appeal
to ﬁnal cause 238; mechanistic explanation excludes teleological 240; basis
of explanation contrasted with basis of exposition 240; deﬁned as derivation
from a principle 240; we do not know how far mechanical explanation can
reach 243; mechanical explanation not helped by teleology 245 f.; subordination of mechanism to teleology in explanation of natural ends 246; critical
principles bring us no nearer to explanation of origin of things 265
expression nature and function of 146; beauty as expression of aesthetic
ideas 149; in words and tones 149
fact matters of 296 ﬀ., 298 n; object of freedom as matter of fact 297, 302 f.;
philosophy must lay foundations of all assurance here 304; matters of fact
fall under the concepts of nature or the concept of freedom 304
faculty the three faculties of the mind 13; table of the higher faculties 32; of
intellectual and aesthetic judgement compared 129; when faculties can be
considered pure 14; the peculiar constitution of our cognitive faculty 225 f.,
229 f.; as peculiar to the human race 228 f., 231 f.; as source of teleological
representation 265; theological concepts relative to our cognitive faculty 285
faith type of assurance produced by practical faith 295 f.; matters of faith 296 f.;
highest good a matter of faith 297; historical belief 298; faith deﬁned 300;
distinguished from credulity 300 f.; doubtful faith 301; contrasted with
knowledge 304
fanaticism compared with enthusiasm 105
fatality Spinoza’s system of 219

386

Analytical Index

fear of nature 91; access to fear through the imagination 99; contrasted with
awe 99
feeling of pleasure and displeasure the middle term between faculties of
cognition and desire 4; of pleasure and displeasure in relation to the enigma
of judgement 5; constitutive principle in respect of feeling 31; aesthetic
judgement decides questions of taste by reference to feeling 29; the purely
subjective element in a representation of feeling 24 f., 35, 38; the feeling of
respect 53; taste as a faculty of judging the communicability of feeling 130;
lack of taste distinguished from lack of feeling 95; our feeling for beautiful
nature 132
ﬁction logical 223
ﬁeld ﬁeld of concepts deﬁned 10
ﬁgure geometrical ﬁgures 190 ﬀ., 276, 297; geometrical ﬁgures traced in
sand 198
ﬁnal end contrasted with other ends 196 f.; of nature 206; the unconditioned
condition 206; contrasted with ultimate end 255; of creation 263 f.; deﬁned
263; unconditioned 263; of an intelligent cause 264; of creation is not happiness 264 f.; ends of nature oblige us to look for 265; must be presupposed
if world is to have a worth 271; in relation to good will 272; man as subject
to moral laws is 274, 277 f.; proposed by us in the world 276; happiness the
subjective condition of 278; presupposes moral world-cause 279; the furtherance of happiness in agreement with morality 280; existence of God
assumed for us to conceive possibility of ﬁnal end 281; idea of ﬁnal cause
has practical reality 281 f.; not to be found in nature 282; idea of ﬁnal end
resides in reason 282; practicability of 283, 299 f.; nature must assist us to
make its realization possible 283; how far future life required by 290; not
the foundation of duty 299 f.
ﬂower as example of free beauty 39, 60, 63; contrasted with implements 67;
contrasted with fabricated objects 128 f.
form reﬂection on the form of an object apart from any concept 26; form of
aesthetic judgement implies abstraction from all content 111; of subjective
purposiveness 115 f.; character of the pleasing form in works of art 141; the
form of ﬁne art must not appear sought after 142
formative arts division and deﬁnition of 150; analogy to gesture 152; contrasted with arts of tone 158; painting pre-eminent amongst such arts 158 f.
formative impulse in the organized body 253
freedom world of freedom meant to have inﬂuence on that of nature 11 f.;
causality through nature and through freedom 30; imagination regarded in
its 71; ﬁne art impossible without 182; problem of uniting constraining
force and 183; presupposed by reason in practical sphere 231; not objectively determined as a form of causality 232; of political states 261; a supersensible faculty in man 264; nomothetic of 276 f.; harmony of world of nature
and world of 276 f., 282 f.; moral law the formal condition of 278; the highest good possible in the world through 278; as a matter of fact 297, 303;

Analytical Index

387

formerly regarded as mere negative condition 301; a basis of knowledge of
the supersensible from practical point of view 303; concept of freedom contrasted with that of nature 304; how its reality is revealed 304
furniture classed under painting 152
future life (see also immortality, soul) our hope of a future life 289;
Spinoza’s view on 280
gardening as an ornamental art 151
general his aesthetic pre-eminence over the statesman 93
genius deﬁnition of 136, 146, 171; ﬁne art as art of 136; its relation to taste
140 ﬀ., 148 f.; derivation of the word from guardian spirit 137; originality
of 137; its models exemplary 137, 146 f.; cannot indicate how it brings
about its product 137; prescribes rules to art, not to science 137; opposed
to spirit of imitation 137 f.; not something that can be learned 137 f., 146 f.;
its function of supplying material 139; out of place in province of rational
investigation 139; faculties of the mind which constitute 142, 145; freedom
of 147; its union with taste in ﬁne art 148; taste the discipline of 148; to be
sacriﬁced rather than taste 148; poetry owes its origin almost entirely to
155; as the nature of the subject 136, 171; stiﬂed by uncritical imitation of
a master 182; special relation of the mental powers in 66 n
geometry (see also figure) geometrically regular ﬁgures 72; Plato’s conception of its importance 191
gesture in the formative arts 149, 152
God all knowledge of God is symbolic 180; the fear of God 91; our proper attitude before God 93; introduction of the concept into natural science 209;
lifeless or living 220 n; purposiveness made intelligible to us by reference to
227; attributes of 273; moral proof of existence of 276 f.; use of moral argument for the existence of 288; eﬀect of belief that there is no 280; assumption of God’s existence involves no contradiction 281; steps in inference to
existence of 284; objective reality of idea of 285; type of assurance provided
by teleological proof for existence of 290; no theoretical proof of existence of
292; curiosity regarding intrinsic nature of God is senseless 294; existence
of God a matter of faith 298; relativity of concept of God to object of our
duty 299; respective value of moral and other arguments for existence of
304; ontological proof of existence of 304; metaphysical-cosmological argument for existence of 305; teleological argument for existence of God
worthy of our respect 306; physico-teleological proof of existence of 306;
relation of moral and physico-teleological arguments for existence of 307;
how determinate concept of God is obtained 311
good deﬁned 39 f., 41; contrasted with the agreeable, the beautiful, and the sublime 39–41, 43 f.; happiness as a 40; the beautiful independent of representation of the 57; aﬀects purity of judgement of taste 61; union of the beautiful
and the 61; delight in it associated with interest 39; moral good carries with it
the highest interest 40; analogy between beauty and the morally good 181; the
moral good to be aesthetically represented as sublime not beautiful 101

388

Analytical Index

grass possibility of the generation of blade of grass 206, 228, 238; no Newton
to explain it 228
gratiﬁcation the agreeable gratiﬁes 37 f., 39; nature of gratiﬁcation 159; free
play of sensations always a source of gratiﬁcation 159
grotesque taste for what borders on the grotesque 73
ground supersensible ground 30; clear and distinct grounds of judgement 58 f.;
as ultimate and purely negative concept 295
guiding-thread transcendental purposiveness as 20; concept of ﬁnal causes
as 217
habitat of organisms as provided by a teleological system 256
handicraft distinguished from ﬁne art 133
happiness precepts for attaining 9; not unconditionally a good 40; as an
end 258; quite possible as eﬀect of mechanism of nature 264; not ﬁnal end
of creation, or even its ultimate end 264 n; a consequence of harmony 264 n;
absolute worth not to be valued by 271; as subjective condition of ﬁnal
end 279; empirically conditioned 282; its relation to ﬁnal end 279 f., 299 f.
harmony (see also cognitive faculty, imagination) of nature with our
judgement 174 f.; in music 153
health as a good 40; the feeling of health 159 ﬀ.
highest good highest good possible in the world through freedom 278;
concept of the original being in relation to the 273; as matter of faith 298
hindrances opposed by nature 30; on the part of sensibility 97
history natural history of the earth 257; as a matter of fact 298; credulity in
matters of history 300
Homer contrasted as poet with Newton as scientist 138
humanity saved from humiliation by the might of nature 92; concept of
humanity implies feeling of sympathy and power of communication 183;
the development of humanity 262
Hume his comparison of critics and cooks 115; his comparison of English
and French works of art 148 n; his views criticized 249
humility sublimity of humility 94
humour deﬁned 164; examples of jests and amusing tales 161 f.
hybrid cannot be explained by system of preformation 252
hylozoism contrasted with theism 219 f.; does not perform what it
promises 222
hypothesis allowable with respect to nature as a whole 242; of evolution 248;
grounded on theoretical argument 292; possibility of object must be certain
to ground a hypothesis 295
hypotyposis schematic or symbolic 179; examples of the latter 180
idea (see also aesthetic ideas, reality) deﬁned 63, 169 f.; regulative function of 3; have only practical reality 11; the normal idea of the human form
64; presentation of ideas not possible in the logical sense 98; reason interested in the objective reality of 130; terms corresponding to distinction
between an idea and a concept of understanding 169; palm given to painting

Analytical Index

389

because it penetrates far into the region of 158 f.; the underlying possibility
of natural product 205; world-cause acting according to ends a mere 216; of
reason 229, 296; of unconditional necessity of original ground of nature 231;
something to which no commensurate object can be given in experience 232;
diﬀerence between underlying natural end and other ideas 233; of a possible understanding diﬀerent from the human 233; of divine author as
ground 245 f.; underlying idea of ﬁnal cause 254; causality by means of
ideas 281; practical reality of 284; reason restricted in respect of idea of the
supersensible 288; idea of reason incapable of presentation 296; freedom
the only idea of reason the object of which is a matter of fact 297
ideal deﬁned 63; art always has an ideal in view 182; ideal of beauty 62; how
we arrive at the latter 63; objects to which ideal of beauty is or is not applicable 63 f.; testing correctness of this ideal 66; judgements according to the
ideal not pure judgements of taste 66
idealism see purposiveness
ideality of purposiveness 174; of sensuous objects as phenomena 178
idolatry deﬁned 288
illusion produced by dialectic of reﬂective judgement 214
imagination in its harmony with the understanding 25 f., 49 f.; mutual relation
of imagination and understanding requisite for every empirical cognition 26;
as employed in presentation 28; it refers the object to the subject 35; in conjunction with understanding requisite for cognition 49; its power to recall
and reproduce 64; taste is a free conformity of the imagination to law 71;
productive as distinct from reproductive 71; forms such as it would project
in conformity to the law of the understanding 71; the understanding at the
service of imagination 73; its scope for unstudied and purposive play 73;
what it grasps 74; its straining to use nature as a schema for ideas 95; its
function in mathematical representations 192 f., 194
imaginative power what is required for great 66
imitation contrasted with mere following 137 ﬀ.; of nature to the point of
deception 128 f., 131; of nature in ﬁne art 131; spirit of imitation is opposed to
genius 137, 147; learning as mere imitation 137; when it becomes aping 147;
examples of a master not to be imitated without criticism 182
immortality of the soul 298, 301
impression aesthetic judgement should refer to sensuous impressions 100
inclination aroused by what gratiﬁes 38; discipline of the inclinations 261 f.
inﬁnite as the absolutely great 85
insight complete insight only possible into what we can produce through our
own concepts 212; we have none into the nature of things apart from the
mechanistic principle 238; or into the supersensible substrate of nature 277 n
inspiration where it is not required 141
instinct in animals 29
intelligence Spinoza divests original ground of all 221; eﬀect of a ﬁnal cause
must be by virtue of 221; supreme intelligence as cause of the world 222;

390

Analytical Index

intelligence (cont.): existence of intelligent original being cannot be substantiated 226 f.; concept of intelligent world-cause subjective 265; we have no
determinate concept of a higher intelligence 267; art-intelligence controlled
with wisdom 269; determined by simple necessity of its nature by analogy
to art-instinct 270; ﬁnal end of an intelligent cause 274 f.; intelligent worldcause, if there is such 275; highest possible intelligence 309; not ascribed to
ultimate source 313
interest deﬁned 36; delight in the good associated with 39; moral good carries
the highest 40; presupposes a need 42; of inclination in case of the agreeable
42; pure practical laws carry an 43; detachment from 43; contemplative
pleasure does not bring about an 53; vitiates judgements of taste 54; empirical interest in the beautiful 126; cannot be determining ground of pure
judgement of taste though it may be combined with it 126; can only be indirectly combined with it 126; consists in pleasure at existence of the object
126; empirical interest in the beautiful only exists in society 126; empirical
interest in the beautiful aﬀords very doubtful transition from the agreeable
to the good 127; intellectual interest in the beautiful discovers a link in the
chain of our faculties a priori 127; intellectual interest in the beautiful 127 f.;
in the beautiful regarded as mark of good moral character 128; in the beautiful of art no evidence of good moral disposition 128; in charms of nature
no evidence of good moral disposition 128; thought that the object is nature’s
handiwork is basis of intellectual interest in the beautiful 128 f.
intuition contrasted with thought 229 f.; a factor in knowledge 234; intellectual intuition 237; one diﬀerent from our own sensuous intuition 246 f.
involution theory of 252
Iroquois sachem anecdote concerning eating-houses 36
judgement middle term between understanding and reason 4, 13; as synonymous with sound understanding 4; diﬃculty of discovering a priori
principle of 4; especially in case of aesthetic judgements 5; when necessary
as a priori principle in logical judging of nature 5; no reference to feeling of
pleasure in logical judging of nature 5; why the critique needs a separate
division for 5; territory of principle of 13; presumption that judgement eﬀects
transition from realm of nature to that of freedom 14; deﬁned 15; determining and reﬂective judgement contrasted 15; reﬂective judgement compelled to ascend from particular to universal 15; transcendental principle of
reﬂective 15 ﬀ.; maxims of 17, 119; law of speciﬁcation makes us proceed
on principle of conformity of nature to our faculty of cognition 21, 23; aesthetic judgement on purposiveness of the object 24; singular empirical
judgement claims universal assent 26; function of judgement when object is
given 27; connects legislations of understanding and reason 29 ﬀ.; provides
mediating concept 31; provides constitutive a priori principle for feeling of
pleasure and displeasure 31; grounds of judgement as clear or confused 59;
mathematically determining and reﬂective judgement contrasted 80; of
experience 117; cognitive judgement contrasted with aesthetic 118; speciﬁc

Analytical Index

391

distinction between determining and reﬂective 213, 233; teleological judging
is reﬂective not determining 188, 203; teleological judgement not warranted
by relative purposiveness 196; antinomy of 213; transcendental 213; principle of reﬂective judgement not objective 213; maxims of reﬂective judgement 213 ﬀ.; does not need special principle for applying a priori laws 214;
two antithetical maxims of reﬂective judgement 214 f.; maxim of judgement
contrasted with objective principle 218; maxim of judgement indispensable 227; principle of judgement for applying understanding in the abstract
to possible objects of experience 233; accord of things in nature with our
power of 235; method of applying teleological judgement 245 ﬀ.; principles
of reﬂective judgement tell us nothing as to the origin of things 257; no
room for opinion in a priori judgement 294
judgement of taste a subdivision of aesthetic judgements 54 f.; is aesthetic
35; deﬁned 35 n; involves reference to the understanding 35; not a cognitive
judgement 35, 60; aﬀords no knowledge of anything 168; a special faculty
for judging by rule and not by concepts 29; is reﬂective not determining 29;
is contemplative 41; compared with empirical judgements 26; rests on a priori
grounds 53; hence requires a critique 26; is both synthetic and a priori 118 f.;
constitutive principle in respect of feeling of pleasure and displeasure 31;
can only have its ground in the subjective condition of a judgement in general 116; what is asserted in a 119; how we become conscious of accord in
50; relative priority of feeling of pleasure and judgement of the object in 48;
should be grounded on autonomy not heteronomy 178, 181; contrasted
with logical judgements 115 f., 120; logical peculiarities of 111 f., 113 f.; not
determinable by grounds of proof 113, 166; its logical quantity as singular
46, 75, 119; not determined by interest 36, 126; should be disinterested 37;
may be combined with interest 126; what is a priori represented in such a
judgement is not pleasure but its universal validity 119; universality of delight
in such a judgement only represented as subjective 45; speaks with a universal voice 47; the view that it cannot claim any necessity 173; how expected
as a sort of duty 125; as a faculty of communicating even our feelings to
others 126; pure judgement of taste independent of charm or emotion 54;
not pure if conditioned by determinate concept 60; its purity aﬀected by
association with the agreeable or the good 61; pure when judging a free
beauty 60; independent of concept of perfection 57; interest may be combined with a pure 126; how false judgement of taste is possible 47 f.;
conﬂict in relation to 165 f.; deduction of 109; key to enigma of judgement
of taste supplied by indeterminate idea of the supersensible 168; rational
concept of the supersensible underlies 167; its universal validity explained
by reference to rational concept of the supersensible 167; perhaps the
supersensible substrate of humanity is determining ground of 168
knowledge aesthetic judging contributes nothing to 5; dependent upon universal communicability 69; division of matters as possible objects of 295 f.;
theoretical knowledge contrasted with practical faith 304

392

Analytical Index

landscapes see views
laughter in general 160 ﬀ.; physical character of its cause 160; something
absurd always lies behind it 161; agreeable art of inducing air of gaiety with
jest and laughter 135
law contrasted with rules and precepts 8; conformity to law without law 71; the
moral law as our highest vocation 94; ends of nature cannot be conceived as
possible in accordance with natural laws 197
legislation of reason and the understanding 10; the non-interference of
these diﬀerent legislations 11
Lessing as art critic 114
life judgement of taste refers to feeling of life in the subject 36; the technic of
nature as analogue of life 203; value of life measured by enjoyment 262 n;
hope of future life 289; materialism cannot determine question of future
life 289
line aimlessly intertwining lines as example of free beauty 39
link intellectual interest in the beautiful discovers link in the chain of faculties 127; mediating link between concepts of nature and freedom 31
Linné his theory of classiﬁcation 255
logic contrasted with philosophy 7
logical judgement compared with aesthetic judgement 36; analogy of judgement of the beautiful with logical judgement 43; how the former is converted
into the latter 115; only such judgement yields knowledge 59; as distinguished from judgement of taste 116
logical presentation 144
logical quantity of aesthetic judgements 46, 75, 98, 111
logical universality compared with aesthetic universality 45 f.
logical validity deﬁned 24
luxury deﬁned 261
machine 194 n; has only motive, not formative power 202; Descartes’s view
of animals as machines 293
magnitude its mathematical and aesthetic estimation 81 f.; how it is represented 84
man beauty has signiﬁcance only for man as both rational and animal 41; ideal
of beauty only possible in the case of man 64; as ultimate end of creation
255, 258; titular lord of nature 259; only ultimate end by referring to an end
independent of nature 259; as noumenon the ﬁnal end of creation 264; only
as a moral being the ﬁnal end of creation 264 f.; creation would be a wilderness without man 271; the ﬁnal end as subject to moral laws 274, 277 f.
mannerism a mode of aping 147
Marsden his description of Sumatra 73
master can only teach by illustration 182; not to simply be imitated without
criticism 182
materialism cannot determine question of future life 289; psychology saved
from materialism 289
mathematics as pure not concerned with actual existence of things 194

Analytical Index

393

matter organic matter alone involves concept of natural end 207; design as
referred to matter 211; lifelessness its essential characteristic 222; formative force of matter 253
maxims of judgement 17 f., 19; of common human understanding 124; of
unprejudiced thought 124; of broadened thought 124; of consistent
thought 125; of aesthetic judgement 167
mechanism concept of nature as mechanism enlarged to that of nature as
art 77; something mechanical required in ﬁne art 139; of nature 175, 204;
blind mechanism 205; impossibility of production of organisms in accordance with mechanism unprovable 216, 222; unable to furnish explanation of
production of organisms 216; its inner ground beyond our ken 222; distinction between mechanism and technic may arise from our type of understanding 231 f.; conception of whole as end not explicable by reference to
236; union of teleological principle with principle of mechanism in the technic of nature 238; no insight into nature of things apart from 238; its subordination to teleology in explanation of natural end 246; mechanical
explanation to be pursued as far as possible 246 f.; of nature subordinated
to architectonic of an intelligent author of the world 266; possible identity
of ground of mechanism and nexus of ﬁnal causes 218, 241, 250
metaphysics projected system of metaphysics 4; requires a preliminary
critique 4; divisible into that of nature and of morals 6; metaphysical principle 16 f.; universal theory of purposiveness and question of design
belongs to it 210; fundamentally directed to problems of God, freedom, and
immortality 301
method of applying theory of teleological judgement 245 ﬀ.
methodology of taste 182
might power to resist great hindrances 90; sublime represented as might 102
misanthropy when it appears sublime and when not 105 f.
misery splendid 261
modality of judgement of taste 67
models exemplary models 62; in arts of speech 63 n; criticism of models displays taste 62 f.; works of the ancients regarded as models 112; exemplary
models of genius 137; how they aid genius 139; models of the ancients
indispensable 183
moments of judgement of taste grounded on the logical functions of judgements 35 n; why quality considered ﬁrst 35 n; of quality 35; of quantity 42 f;
relation 51; of modality 67; modality of the sublime 94 f.
monstrous deﬁned 83
moral disposition the beautiful and sublime purposive in respect of moral
disposition 95 f.; union of feeling for the beautiful with moral disposition 128; communicability of moral dispositions 121; harmony of moral disposition and sensibility necessary for genuine taste 183; how natural beauty
encourages moral disposition 274
moral ideas alone attended with self-suﬃcing delight 154; respect for them
raises us above necessity for gratiﬁcation 163; taste as faculty of judging the

394

Analytical Index

moral ideas (cont.): rendering of moral ideas in sensuous terms 183; beauty
in human ﬁgure consists in expression of moral ideas 66
moral judgement pleasure in such judgement is practical 53; analogy between
moral judgement and judgement of taste 130
moral law as object of pure intellectual delight 101; as basis of communicability of feeling of the sublime 122; represented as divine command 231;
the formal condition of freedom 278; conﬁdence in the promise of 300 n;
human beings as subject to 274, 277; directs us to strive towards universal
highest end 275; pays no regard to ends 279 f.
morality beauty as symbol of morality 178 f.; taste in relation to morality 42;
absolutely impossible as result of natural causes 264; gains by representation
of a supreme being 275; we are a priori assured of its possibility 282; one of
the factors of ﬁnal end 282; and religion 288 f.; without theology 314
music at banquets 135; nature of 153 f., 157 f.; combined with poetry in
song 154; compared with other arts 158; its lack of urbanity 158; nothing
is thought in music 160; physical character of its enlivening eﬀects 160 f.;
play here proceeds from sensations to aesthetic ideas 160; an agreeable
rather than ﬁne art 158; annoyance caused by hymn-singing 158 n
natural end (see also end, organism) existence of natural ends not proved
by experience 187; distinctive character of things considered as 197; represented as both cause and eﬀect of itself 199; preserves itself generically 199;
produces itself as an individual 199; reciprocal dependence of parts in 199 f.;
things so considered are organisms 200; ﬁrst requisite of thing considered
as 201; distinguished from art-product 201; every part of it an organ 201;
as organized and self-organizing being 202; concept of thing as intrinsically
natural end only available for reﬂective judgement 203; distinction between
judging a thing a natural end on account of its form and regarding its existence as an end of nature 206; mechanism discloses no foundation for distinctive character of 215 f.; this concept a stranger in natural science 218;
concept of natural end subsumes nature under causality only thinkable by
the aid of reason 223; concept of natural end unprovable 224; involves reference to the supersensible 224; why we must judge a natural end in the
light of a causality diﬀerent from mechanism 224; as designed not given in the
object 227; we must ascribe its possibility to an intelligent being 228;
indulging this idea diﬀers from other ideas 233; mechanistic explanation inadequate for 243; mechanism subordinated to teleology in explanation of 246;
autocracy of matter in natural ends is unmeaning 249; how natural ends aﬀord
conﬁrmation to theology 273; end connecting natural and ethical ends 283
nature purposiveness of 16; multiplicity of 18; might bafﬂe our understanding 20; law of speciﬁcation of 21; harmony of nature in its speciﬁc laws
with our cognitive faculties appears contingent 20 f., 23; universal laws of
the understanding necessarily accord with 21 f.; pleasure derived from
uniting empirical laws of 22; extent of its purposiveness indeterminate 23;
aesthetic representation of purposiveness of 23 f.; beauty and purposiveness

Analytical Index

395

of nature deﬁned 28; no a priori grounds why there should be objective
ends of nature 28; only cognized as phenomenon 31; free beauties of 60;
comparison of wild and regular beauty of 73 f.; art restricted by its required
agreement with 76; object of nature may properly be called beautiful but
not sublime 76; its self-subsisting beauty reveals a technic of nature 76 f.;
conception of nature as mechanism enlarged to that of nature as art 77;
which of its phenomena described as sublime 85; why the sublime not to be
sought in nature 80; sublimity applied to it by subreption 87 f.; nature
as might 90; self-preservation that cannot be assailed by 92; in its totality
thought as a presentation of something supersensible 98; phenomenal
nature a presentation of a nature in itself 98; as imitated by art 131; the
language of nature 131; art distinguished from 131 f.; natural beauty distinguished from that of art 140; requisites for judging the beauty of art and of
nature 140 f.; genius as nature in the subject 171; nature in the subject as
supersensible substrate 171 f.; ideality of purposiveness of 174; beautiful
forms in organic nature suggest realism of purposiveness 175; free formations of 176; names given to beautiful objects of nature implying analogy
with the morally good 181; examples of beauty of 60, 175; subjective purposiveness of nature in its particular laws 187; universal idea of nature does
not lead us to assume that things serve one another as means to ends 187;
organizes itself 202; its organization has nothing analogous to any causality
known to us 203; not given as organized as a whole 226; aggregate conceived as an animal 222; aggregate conceived as a system 207; as a teleological system 269; nature as a whole referred to design by an allowable
hypothesis 243; ultimate end of nature as a teleological system 258; ﬁnal
end of 206; we must look beyond nature for the end of its existence 207;
mechanism of 216, 246; hint given by 218; blind necessity of nature in
Spinoza 221; supersensible substrate of 238; intelligible substrate of 247;
strives towards higher ends than it can itself aﬀord 262; teleologically subordinated to ﬁnal end 264; prospect beyond the horizon of 265; accord of
nature with conditions of human happiness 271; ﬁnal end not found in 282;
concept of nature and that of freedom 304
necessity of the reference of the beautiful to delight 67; exemplary 67; subjective necessity of judgement of taste 68; a common sense as ground of
necessity 68; necessity of universal assent subjective, but represented as
objective 70; deduction only required where judgement claims necessity
110; of judgements of taste 111
Newton his work compared with products of artistic genius 138; who would
explain the genesis of a blade of grass 228
noumenon as substrate 85; man as noumenon the ﬁnal end of creation 264
objective subjective necessity represented as 70
occasionalism 251
ontological argument criticized 304 f.; exerts no inﬂuence on popular
thought 305

396

Analytical Index

opera elements of 154
opinion diﬀerence of opinion not tolerated when something described as beautiful 70; as probable 292; no room for opinion in a priori judgements 294;
matters of 296
oratorio 154
organ every part of a natural end is an 201 f., 205
organism (see also natural end) things considered as natural ends are
organisms 200; not a mere machine 202; intrinsic natural perfection of 203;
aﬀords objective reality to concept of an end of nature 204; principle for
judging the intrinsic purposiveness of the organism 204; deﬁnition of 204;
only cognizable on principle of ends 211; mechanism does not aﬀord explanation of 216, 228; judged on principle of ﬁnal causes 217; its possibility
must be referred to causality by ends 237 f.; cannot be subjected to investigation except under concept of end 243 f.; its purposive form unthinkable
without assuming a fundamental organization 248; teleological system in
extrinsic relations of the 253 f.; extrinsic purposiveness implies reference to
organisms as ends 253 f.; question of end for which it exists 254; a creative
understanding taken to account for intrinsic purposiveness of the 254;
design not easily dissociated from concept of 254; idea of ﬁnal cause underlying the organism 254
organization of body politic 203; fundamental 247 f.; inscrutable principle
of primordial 253; of the sexes 254
origin of blade of grass 206, 228; principles of reﬂective judgement say nothing regarding origin of things 257; critical principle brings us no nearer an
explanation of natural things 265
originality is not throwing oﬀ all restraint of rules 139; of genius 137, 139
ornamentation as adjuncts and parerga 57
ought judgement containing an 68, 70
pain 159
painting design the essential thing here 56; contrasted with plastic art 150;
as a formative art 151; aesthetic 151 f.; its superiority amongst the formative arts 158 f.
pantheism 250, 268
patterns in free beauty 39
peace possible degrading eﬀects of continuing peace 93
peculiarity ﬁrst peculiarity of judgement of taste 111 f.; its second peculiarity 113 f.
perfection judgement of taste independent of this concept 57, 167 f.; deﬁned
as internal objective purposiveness 57; held by some to be convertible with
beauty 58; as thought in a confused way 58; qualitative and quantitative
contrasted 58; requires representation of an end 58; beauty involves no
thought of perfection of the object 59; involved in dependent beauty 60;
does not gain by beauty or vice versa 61; deﬁnition of 140; must be considered when judging the beautiful in art 140; antinomy of taste irresolvable if
beauty grounded on 169; also otiose 173

Analytical Index

397

personality continuance after death 289
persuasion as object of rhetoric 155; contrasted with conviction 291
phenomenon legislative authority of understanding conﬁned to 10 f., 14;
contrasted with things in themselves 11; implies possible form of intuition
diﬀerent from ours 233; material world as 237; supersensible the basis of
nature as 241; presupposes supersensible ground 241; self-subsistent being
of which we only know the phenomenon 251
philosophy deﬁned 7; realm of 10; of nature and morals contrasted 7;
divided into theoretical and practical 7–10; this division justiﬁed 12 f.; can
prove but not demonstrate 170; coextensive with applicability of a priori
concepts 10; trichotomous divisions of 32 n; critical duty of 214; schools
have tried every possible solution to problem of purposiveness 220 n; its
concepts enriched by Christianity 300 n; speculative negative results of 303;
foundations of 304; its arguments for the existence of God 304 f.
planets their inhabitation a matter of opinion 296
plastic arts contrasted with painting 150; division of 151
Plato his idea of original constitution of things 191; banished from his school
those ignorant of geometry 191
play of cognitive faculties 31, 48 f., 73, 88 f.; purposive 73; of ﬁgures or sensations 56; is agreeable on its own account 133; free play as source of
gratiﬁcation 159; free play in poetry 71; of cognitive faculties 31, 48 f., 73,
88 f.; purposive 73; of ﬁgures or sensation 56; is agreeable on its own
account 133; art as 133; free play a source of gratiﬁcation 159
pleasure (see also feeling) associated with concept of purposiveness 21; its
subjective quality incapable of becoming a cognition 24; only connected
with representation through reﬂective judgement 25; in judgement of taste
dependent on empirical representation 26; its relative priority in judgement
of taste 48; what it denotes 51; causal connection with representation
not determinable a priori 53; where the mental state is identical with 53; is
contemplative in aesthetic judgements 54; in the consciousness of formal
purposiveness 53 f.; as non-practical 53
poem didactic 154
poetry imagination enjoys free play in 71; requires prosody and measure 134;
faculty of aesthetic ideas best displayed in 143; contrasted with rhetoric 149,
155; combined with music in song 154; compared with other arts 155
Polycletus his Doryphorus 65
possibility deﬁnition of 229; representation of whole as cause of possibility
235; question of possibility must be met sooner or later 239; of things as
natural ends 266; possibility of a thing must be certain to ground hypotheses 295
possible distinguished from actual 229 f.
practical practical philosophy contrasted with theoretical 7–9; misuse of the
word 7 f.; precepts 8 f.; the morally practical compared with the technically
practical 8; reason can only prescribe laws in practical sphere 10; practical
function distinguished from theoretical 10; practical reality of ideas 11;

398

Analytical Index

practical (cont.): practical purposiveness 17; broadening the mind from practical point of view 85
practical point of view verdict on our vocation only valid from a 289; assurance in matters of faith furnished from a purely 298; meaning of 298 f.; all
that is necessary for religion is validity from a 303
prayer superstition at basis of prayer 14 n
predicate pleasure united to concept of object as if it were a predicate 26
pre-establishment theory of pre-established cause 251
prejudice 124
presentation as function of judgement 27; of ideas 98, 143
principle constitutive 3, 31; regulative 3, 31; transcendental or metaphysical 16 f.; principle of judgement independent 4; reference to pleasure the
enigma of principle of judgement 5; as technically or as morally practical 8;
of the purposiveness of nature 16 f.; one more principle for reducing phenomena to rules 188; regulative contrasted with constitutive 188 f.; regulative principle for judging intrinsic purposiveness 204; concept of objective
purposiveness a critical 225; principle of reason as regulative not constitutive 228 f.; subjective principle for use of judgement 232; heuristic 239;
mechanistic and teleological principle not to be applied in conjunction 240;
the supersensible common to mechanistic and teleological derivation 240;
critical principle brings us no nearer explanation of origin of things 265;
principle of harmony of nature with the moral law 287; human reason
prefers one principle instead of several 290
probability a fraction of possible certainty 294
progress limit to that of art 138; of culture 148
proof grounds of judgements of taste admit no 113 f.; ﬁne art does not appeal
to 134; moral 281 f.; should convince us 290; two kinds of 291; theoretical
arguments available for 292
propaedeutic culture propaedeutic to ﬁne art 182 f.; development of moral
ideas propaedeutic to taste 183; to all philosophy 29
prosody required in poetry 134
prudence rules of prudence mere corollaries to theoretical philosophy 8 f.
psychology modality of aesthetic judgements lifts them out of sphere of 96;
critique of taste as an art deals with psychological rules 116; rational
psychology an anthropology of inner sense 289 f.
purposiveness deﬁned 16, 51; practical purposiveness diﬀers from that of
reﬂective judgement 16, 22; as transcendental principle of judgement 16–18,
28; empirical nature must be regarded on a principle of 18; transcendental
concept of purposiveness of nature neither a concept of nature or of freedom
19; principle of purposiveness of nature recognized as objectively contingent 20; feeling of pleasure associated with concept of 21; is determined by
an a priori ground 22; this concept takes no account of faculty of desire 22;
not a quality of the object itself 24; why attributed to the object 24; objective and subjective purposiveness compared 27; subjective purposiveness

Analytical Index

399

rests on pleasure 27; objective purposiveness not concerned with pleasure
27; and natural ends as organic bodies 28; formal purposiveness a principle
without which understanding could not ﬁnd itself in nature 28; leaves question of application in particular cases undetermined 28; as mediating link
31; objective 57; formal 57; of representational state of the subject 58; in
the sublime 83; example of stone implements 66–7 n; ideality of 174; realism and idealism of 174; subjective purposiveness of nature in its particular
laws 187; beauty as formal subjective purposiveness 188; formal distinguished from material objective purposiveness 190; formal purposiveness
of geometrical ﬁgures 190; real purposiveness dependent on concept of end
191; material purposiveness 194; intrinsic compared with relative purposiveness 194; extrinsic purposiveness the advantageousness of a thing for
other things 196; relative purposiveness does not warrant absolute teleological argument 196; principle of judging intrinsic purposiveness 204; systems dealing with purposiveness of nature 217; as a critical principle 225;
rendered intelligible by reference to a God 227; conformity to law on part
of the contingent is termed 232; why a necessary concept for judgement
232; representation of purposiveness results from peculiar character of our
understanding 235; as undeniably pointing to special type of causality 239;
intuition diﬀerent from ours required to derive it from mechanism 246 f.;
extrinsic purposiveness deﬁned 253 f.; extrinsic and intrinsic contrasted 254;
creative understanding represented to account for 254; extrinsic purposiveness in relation of the sexes 254; of nature compels us to think a supreme
cause 313
pyramids as examples of sublimity 82
quality delight in the beautiful associated with representation of 75; quality
of delight in judging the sublime 87; of the feeling of the sublime is a
displeasure 89
quantity delight in the sublime associated with representation of 75
race preservation of 249
rationalism in the critique of taste confuses the good and the beautiful 174
realism of the principle of taste 174
reality practical reality of ideas 11; deduction need not justify objective reality
of a concept 120; reason interested in objective reality of ideas 130; intuitions required to verify the reality of our concepts 178; objective reality of
rational concepts cannot be veriﬁed 178 f.; semblance of objective reality
of ideas 143; organisms ﬁrst aﬀord objective reality to concept of an end of
nature 204; no insight into objective reality of concept of natural end 223;
why objective reality of natural ends not provable 224; necessary to prove
objective reality for determining judgement 225; objective reality must be
given to concepts of the understanding 228; subjectively practical reality
281 f.; practical reality of an idea 284; of the concept of freedom 304
realm of philosophy deﬁned 10; of our faculty of cognition 10; realm of concept of freedom meant to inﬂuence that of concept of nature 12

400

Analytical Index

reason pure reason deﬁned 3; critique of pure reason 3; contains constitutive a priori principles solely for faculty of desire 4; critique of practical
reason 4; can only prescribe laws in practical sphere 10; legislations of reason
and the understanding 10 f.; interest of 54; ideas of reason 87; intervenes
to make sensuous representations adequate to ideas 98; the seat of both
rational and aesthetic ideas 171; a faculty of principles 228; aims at the
unconditional as its goal 228; regulative rather than constitutive principles
of 228 f.; becomes extravagant when it advances beyond the reach of the
understanding 229; displays itself in ideas 229; concept of absolutely necessary being an indispensable idea of 230; must presuppose freedom in the
practical sphere 231; pre-eminent task to prevent poetic extravagance in
ﬁeld of thought 238 f.; how it is sent on a roving expedition 239; demands
absolute unity of principle 268; pure practical reason legislates for itself
alone 275; determines us to further the highest good as far as lies in our
power 282; idea of ﬁnal end resides in 282; as morally practical and technically practical 284; human reason prefers one principle instead of several 290
reﬁnement connected with communication of feeling 127
Reimarus his physical teleology 306
religion as sublime 93; how and why it is favoured by governments 105; example better than precept in matters of 113, and note; how distinguished from
superstition 94; how saved from theurgy and from idolatry 288; true religion
deﬁned 289; theology leads to 310; disposition the essential element in 310;
validity of argument from practical point of view all that is needful for 303
respect deﬁned 87; aroused by the moral good 101; inclination, favour and 41;
the feeling of 53; joined with representation of object as great without
qualiﬁcation 80
rhetoric deﬁned and described 155; contrasted with poetry 149; in drama 154;
contrasted with poetry 149; generally 154 f.
Rousseau 36
rule aesthetic judgement a special faculty for judging according to a rule 29;
diﬀerence of a general and a universal 44; rules for establishing union of
taste with reason 61; no objective rule for determining the beautiful 62;
normal idea as source of possibility of 65; question of taste not to be settled
by appeal to any 114; how a rule is furnished to art 136 f.; Doryphorus of
Polycletus called the 65; technically or morally practical rules 8; emancipation from all constraint of 139; in ﬁne art cannot be set down in a formula,
but must be gathered from the execution of the work 139
sacriﬁce in representation of the sublime 101; by the imagination 99
sadness insipid contrasted with interesting 106
St. Peter’s aesthetic eﬀect of 83
Saussure his reference to insipid sadness 95
Savary his account of Egypt 82
scepticism 69
schema the imagination strains to use nature as schema for ideas 95; contrasted with examples and symbols 179 f.

Analytical Index

401

schematism of judgement 99; objective schematism 50
scholastics their deﬁnition of transcendental perfection 221
school origin of a 147; leaders of a newer school 134
science art distinguished from 133; genius prescribes the rule to art not
science 137; relative merits of art and 138
sculpture design the essential thing in 56; may only represent unpleasing
things indirectly 141; described and contrasted with architecture 151
Segner his use of inscription over the Temple of Isis 145 n
sensation is subjective but belongs to cognition of things 24; double meaning of the term 37; communicability of 121; as the real in perception 121;
diﬀerence in sensation of diﬀerent persons 121; passivity of 121; through
which we are conscious of reciprocal activity of cognitive powers 50
senses in relation to feeling of pleasure 125; functions of imagination, understanding, and the senses 69
sensus communis (see also common sense) reason for supposing such a thing
69; taste as a kind of 123; a name given to common human understanding
123; as a public sense 123
sentimentality is a tendency to indulge in tender emotions 103
series progressive and regressive contrasted 200
sex organization of the sexes 254
simplicity of nature in the sublime 105
skill and culture 260; can hardly be developed without inequality among
human beings 261
sociability judgement in reference to 44; properties constituting sociability
of mankind 183
society sublime not introduced in a mere conventional way into society 95;
universal communicability a source of interest in 105; isolation from
society regarded as sublime 105; empirical interest in the beautiful only
exists in 126
soldier reverence for 93
solitude attractions of 106
soul properties ﬁguratively ascribed to the 286; no theoretical proof of its
existence 295; its immortality a matter of faith 298; immortality of the soul
in metaphysics and psychology 301
space subjective, but constituent of the knowledge of things 24; measurement
of 89; delimitations of space in accordance with arbitrary rules 192; not a
quality of things 192; not a real ground of the generation of things 237
species origin of 247 f.
speech division of arts of 149 f.
Spinoza his system of fatality 219; eliminates design 220 f.; criticized 250;
his belief that there is no God 280
spirit the animating principle of the mind 142; the faculty of presenting
aesthetic ideas 142, 146
spontaneity in the play of the cognitive faculties 31; of some cause 239
statesman compared with a general 93

402

Analytical Index

subjective purposiveness contrasted with objective 27; necessity represented
as objective 70; subjective purposiveness necessary if anything is to please
disinterestedly 84
sublime ground of the division between the beautiful and the 26 f.; points
of agreement and diﬀerence between them 75 ﬀ., 86; contrasted with the
good 75, 97; delight in it combined with representation of quantity 75;
presents an indeterminate concept of reason 76; charms repugnant to the 76;
a negative pleasure 76; object of nature not itself 80; concerns ideas of
reason 76 f.; theory of the sublime an appendage to the aesthetic judging of
nature 77; concerns nature in its chaos 77; distinction of the mathematically and dynamically 78; moments of judgement on the 77 f.; movement
of the mind connected with the 78; deﬁnition of the 78 f.; feeling of respect
produced by the 80; its reference to the supersensible faculty within us 81;
estimation of magnitude requisite for the mathematically 81 f.; not to be
sought in works of art if judgement is to be pure 83; not based on purposiveness of the form of the object 84; examples of the mathematically 86;
quality of our delight in the 87 f.; applied to the object by subreption 87 f.;
involves feeling of pleasure and displeasure 88; examples of the dynamically 90 f.; we must be safe to respond to the 92; sublimity of war 93; of a
religion 93; of humility 94; culture requisite for appreciation of the 95;
modality of judgement on the 78; deﬁned 97 f.; its purposiveness in connection with moral disposition 98; moral disposition required for feeling of
the 99; cultivates liberality in our mental attitude 99; delight in it is negative 99; as the might to overcome hindrances 101; freedom from aﬀects
represented as 102; isolation from society regarded as 105; no deduction
of judgements required 109; exposition suﬃces 110; nature only supplies
the occasion for judgement on the 109 f.; brought into union with beauty in
tragedy 154
substance unity of end referred to simple 249 f.; original source of things
must be pictured as simple substance 251; causal dependence on one substance changed to unity of inherence in one substance 268
substrate intelligible substrate of nature 247; supersensible 251, 277 n;
representation based on ﬁnal causes refers phenomena to 258
subsumption logical and aesthetic contrasted 120; mistakes in 120 f.
Sumatra Marsden’s description of 73
supersensible introduction of idea of the 11; practical reality of concept of
freedom brings us no nearer to knowledge of the 11; gulf between the sensible and the 11, 30; ground of unity of the supersensible at basis of nature
with freedom 12; in the subject 30; substrate of nature 30 n, 238, 251; freedom a supersensible attribute of the subject 53; reference of sublime to the
supersensible faculty in us 81; rational idea of 88; as substrate of nature,
principle of purposiveness, and principle of ends of freedom 173 f.; nature
employed as schema for 155; union of mechanistic and teleological principles must be placed in the 241; all determination of it purely negative 289

Analytical Index

403

superstition 124; distinguished from religion 94
symbol beauty as symbol of morality 178 f.; contrasted with schema 179
symbolic all knowledge of God is 180
symbolism nature of 179
symmetry 72
sympathy the word humanity implies sense of 183
system of ends 205 f.; every science a 209; dealing with the purposiveness of
nature 220 f.; two kinds of system dealing with purposiveness 218 f.; nature
in its entirety as a 237; nature as a 241; of sciences 245; teleological system
in extrinsic relations of organisms 253 f.; of whole of nature following ﬁnal
causes 256; ultimate end of nature as a teleological system 258, 272 f..
taste (see also judgement of taste) principle that everyone has his own
taste 44, 166; disputes about taste 62; archetype of 63; whether an original
faculty 70; English taste in gardens 73; reason for the name 114; a judging
not a producing faculty 141 f.; the saying that there is no disputing about
taste 165 f.; stiﬀ regularity repugnant to 73
technic of nature 27; nature regarded as possessing capacity for acting technically 188; of nature cannot be treated dogmatically 223; type of our
understanding as source of distinction between mechanism and 232; union
of mechanistic and teleological principles in the technic of nature 238
technically practical see practical
teleological judgement contrasted with aesthetic 28 f.; not a special faculty 29
teleology for science organisms suggest concept of 204; as inherent principle
of natural science 209; natural teleology as part of physics 210; function of
teleological judging in natural science 211; does not convert nature into
an intelligent being 211; whether must be treated as branch of natural science 245; not a branch of doctrine but only of critique 246; contains a priori
principles 246; principle of 249; ethico-teleology does what physical teleology could not 272 f.; moral and teleological arguments cannot be combined
in one 308; concept of supreme cause deﬁned by moral 310; moral teleology alone furnishes concept of a unique author of nature 310
Temple of Isis 145 n
territory of concepts deﬁned 10; none in ﬁeld of the supersensible 11
testimony as ground of belief 298
theism contrasted with hylozoism 219 f.
theology teleology not a branch of 245; physico-theology deﬁned 265; moral
or ethico-theology deﬁned 265; physical teleology aﬀords no basis for 266;
physico-theology is physical teleology misunderstood 270; ethico-theology
271; how reason advances from teleology to 277; transition from moral
teleology to 282; how saved from theosophy and demonology 288; leads to
religion 311; ethical theology quite possible 314
theosophy 288
thought all our thoughts associated with bodily movements 162; contrasted
with intuition 230

404

Analytical Index

tone art of tone described 156; charm of 55; when to be regarded as
beautiful 55
totality required by reason 85
tragedy sublime and the beautiful united in 154
transcendental principle 16 f.; general problem of transcendental philosophy 118; principle of judgement 15; transcendental aesthetic deals with
pure judgements 100
transition between the two parts of philosophy 12; concept of purposiveness
aﬀords 31; judgement eﬀects a 31; none from concepts to feeling of pleasure 43; intellectual interest in the beautiful discovers transition from sensuous enjoyment to moral disposition 127; that from the agreeable to the
good is ambiguous 127; taste makes possible transition from sensuous
charm to habitual moral interest 181 f.
ugliness capacity of art for dealing with 141
ultimate end contrasted with ﬁnal end 255; of nature as a teleological
system 258 f.
unbelief dogmatic unbelief not consistent with moral maxim 301
understanding its pretensions restrained by critique 3; comparison of
functions of reason and the 29, 30 f., 228; its legislation conﬁned to phenomena 10 f.; supplies constitutive principles for faculty of cognition 3; its
pure concepts only touch the possibility of nature 15; an architectonic 216;
unable to keep pace with reason 229; why it cannot rival reason 230; our
understanding must move from universal to particular 232; idea of a possible understanding diﬀering from the human 233; a faculty of concepts 234;
as discursive 234; concept of an intuitive 234; our understanding must
advance from the parts 235; discursive understanding needs images 236;
original understanding as cause of the world 238; the constitution of our
human 242
universal particular not determined by 234; analytic contrasted with synthetic 235
universal validity deduction only necessary where judgement claims such
validity 110; of judgements of taste 25; nature of such validity in judgements of taste 111; of pleasure 119
universality of delight in judgement of taste only subjective 45; when it is
aesthetic 45 f.; dialectic only arises where judgements lay claim to 165
utility deﬁned as objective external purposiveness 57; delight in the beautiful cannot rest on 57 f.; a relative purposiveness 195
validity (see also universal validity) exemplary 70
views of nature 74, 151 f.
virtuosi moral character of 128
Voltaire his remarks on hope and sleep 162 f.
war sublimity of war and its eﬀect on character 93; how it serves culture 261 f.
watch used as illustration of a machine 202

Analytical Index

405

whole representation of a whole as source of possibility of form 235 f.;
mechanical generation of 236; as end 236; parts of space only determinable
in relation to 237; a cosmopolitan 261
Wieland Homer and Wieland contrasted with scientists 138
will as a cause 8; deﬁned 51; respect as determination of the will derived
from the idea of the moral law 53; end implies reference to a 198; faculty
of acting according to ends 198; absolute worth only exists by reference to
the good will 272; will and understanding not ascribed theoretically to the
supreme being 286
world intelligible world where everything is actual 231; moral author of the 283
worth how absolute worth given to the existence of a person 40; object of ﬁne
art must have a certain intrinsic worth 164; assigned to life 262 n; presupposes a ﬁnal end 271; absolute worth only exists by reference to the good
will 272; man alone has a concept of worth 278; intrinsic moral worth
depends on formal character of our actions 299

