This entirely new translation of the Critique ofPure Reason is the most
accurate and informative English translation ever produced of this
epochal philosophical text. Though its simple and direct style will make
it suitable for all new readers of Kant, the translation displays an un­
precedented philosophical and textual sophistication that will enlighten
Kant scholars as well.
Through the comparison of the best modern German editions to the
original 1 78 I and 1 787 versions of the text, and careful attention to the
precise translation of Kant's terminology, as well as the faithful render­
ing of the structure and syntax of Kant's prose, this translation recreates
as far as possible a text with the same interpretative nuances and rich­
ness as the original. Moreover, by including the complete text of the
handwritten emendations and marginal notes made by Kant in his own
personal copy of the first edition, this volume does what even no
German edition has ever done: furnish the reader with a text as close as
possible to the one present in Kant's own library.
The Cambridge Edition places the reader in the most independent
yet best informed interpretative position by presenting entirely sepa­
rate (though meticulously cross-referenced) versions of all the portions
of the work that Kant revised heavily for the second edition: the pref­
aces, the introduction, Transcendental Aesthetic, Transcendental De­
duction, the chapter on Phenomena and Noumena, and the Paralo­
gisms of Pure Reason.
The extensive editorial apparatus includes informative annotation,
detailed glossaries, a thorough but perspicuous index, and a large-scale
general introduction in which two of the world's preeminent Kant schol­
ars provide a succinct summary of the structure and argument of the
Critique as well as a detailed account of its long and complex genesis.

)

THE CAM B RI D GE E D ITION O F TJ::IE WORKS
O F IMMANUEL KANT
Theoretical Philosophy, 1755-1770
Critique ofPure Reason
Theoretical Philosophy After 1781
Practical Philosophy
Critique ofJudgment
Religion and Rational Theology
Anthropology, History, and Education
Natural Science
Lectures on Logic
Lectures on Metaphysics
Lectures on Ethics
Opus postumum
Notes and Fragments
Correspondence

IMMANUEL KANT

Critique of
pure reason
TRANS LAT E D AND E D ITED BY

PAUL GUYER
Untverslty ofPennsylvanta
ALLEN W. WOOD
Yale Untverslty

CAMBRIDGE
UNIVERSITY PRESS

PUBLISHED BY THE PRESS SYNDICATE OF THE UNlVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE

The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, CB2 IRP, United Kingdom
CAMBRIDGE UNlVERSITY PRESS

The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CBz zRU, United Kingdom
40 West 20th Street, New York, NY 1001 1-42 I I , USA

IO Stamford Road, Oakleigh, Melbourne 3 166, Australia
© Cambridge University Press I998

This book is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception

and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without
the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published I998
Printed in the United States of America
Typeset in Janson

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Kant, Immanuel, I724-1 804.
[Kritik der reinen Vernunft:. English]
The critique of pure reason / edited [and translated] by Paul
Guyer, Allen W Wood.
p. cm. - (The Cambridge edition of the works of Immanuel Kant)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-5 2 1-35402-1 (hardcover)
1. Knowledge, Theory of.
2. Causation.
3 . Reason.
1. Guyer,
Paul, 1948II. Wood, Allen W III. Title. IV: Series: Kant,
Immanuel, I 7 2 4-1 804. Works. English. I 992.
B2778.E5G89
I998
97-2959
1 2 I - dc2 1

A catalog recordfor this book is available from
the British Library
ISBN ° 5 2 I 3 5402 I hardback

Contents

page vii

General editors' preface

xi

Acknowledgments
Introduction, by Paul Guyer and Allen W. Wood

I

Note on translation
Bibliography

73
77

Immanuel Kant, Critique ofPure Reason

81

Editorial Notes
Glossary

757

Index

775

v

....

General editors' preface

Within a few years of the publication of his Critique of Pure Reason in
1 7 8 1 , Immanuel Kant (1 724-18°4) was recognized by his contempo­
raries as one of the seminal philosophers of modern times - indeed as
one of the great philosophers of all time. This renown soon spread be­
yond German-speaking lands, and translations of Kant's work into
English were published even before 1 800. Since then, interpretations of
Kant's views have come and gone and loyalty to his positions has waxed
and waned, but his importance has not diminished. Generations of
scholars have devoted their efforts to producing reliable translations of
Kant into English as well as into other languages.
There are four main reasons for the present edition of Kant's writings:
1. Completeness. Although most of the works published in Kant's life­
time have been translated before, the most important ones more than
once, only fragments of Kant's many important unpublished works
have ever been translated. These include the Opus postumum, Kant's un­
finished magnum opus on the transition from philosophy to physics;
transcriptions of his classroom lectures; his correspondence; and his
marginalia and other notes. One aim of this edition is to make a com­
prehensive sampling of these materials available in English for the first
time.

2. Availability. Many English translations of Kant's works, especially
those that have not individually played a large role in the subsequent
development of philosophy, have long been inaccessible or out of print.
Many of them, however, are crucial for the understanding of Kant's
philosophical development, and the absence of some from English­
language bibliographies may be responsible for erroneous or blink­
ered traditional interpretations of his doctrines by English-speaking
philosophers.

Organization. Another aim of the present edition is to make all Kant's
published work, both major and minor, available in comprehensive vol­
umes organized both chronologically and topically, so as to facilitate the
serious study of his philosophy by English-speaking readers.

3·

vii

General editors' preface
4.

Consistency of translation. Although many of Kant's major works have
been translated by the most distinguished scholars of their day, some of
these translations are now dated, and there is considerable terminolog­
ical disparity among them. Our aim has been to enlist some of the most
accomplished Kant scholars and translators to produce new transla­
tions, freeing readers from both the philosophical and literary precon­
ceptions of previous generations and allowing them to ,approach texts,
as far as possible, with the same directness as present-day readers of the
German or Latin originals.
In pursuit of these goals, our editors and translators attempt to fol­
low several fundamental principles:
I. As far as seems advisable, the edition employs a single general glos­
sary, especially for Kant's technical terms. Although we have not at­
tempted to restrict the prerogative of editors and translators in choice
of terminology, we have maximized consistency by putting a single ed­
itor or editorial team in charge of each of the main groupings of Kant's
writings, such as his work in practical philosophy, philosophy of reli­
gion, or natural science, so that there will be a high degree of termino­
logical consistency, at least in dealing with the same subject matter.
2. Our translators try to avoid sacrificing literalness to readability.
We hope to produce translations that approximate the originals in the
sense that they leave as much of the interpretive work as possible to the
reader.
3 . The paragraph, and even more the sentence, is often Kant's unit of
argument, and one can easily transform what Kant intends as a contin­
uous argument into a mere series of assertions by breaking up a sen­
tence so as to make it more readable. Therefore, we try to preserve
Kant's own divisions of sentences and paragraphs wherever possible.
4. Earlier editions often attempted to improve Kant's texts on the
basis of controversial conceptions about their proper interpretation. In
our translations, emendation or improvement of the original edition is
kept to the minimum necessary to correct obvious typographical errors.
5 . Our editors and translators try to minimize interpretation in other
ways as well, for example, by rigorously segregating Kant's own foot­
notes, the editors' purely linguistic notes, and their more explanatory or
informational notes; notes in this last category are treated as endnotes
rather than footnotes.
We have not attempted to standardize completely the format of indi­
vidual volumes. Each, however, includes information about the context
in which Kant wrote the translated works, a German-English glossary,
an English-German glossary, an index, and other aids to comprehen­
sion. The general introduction to each volume includes an explanation
of specific principles of translation and, where necessary, principles of
selection of works included in that volume. The pagination of the stanVlli

General editors' preface

dard German edition of Kant's works, Knnt's Gesammelte Schriften, edited
by the Royal Prussian (later German) Academy of Sciences (Berlin:
Georg Reimer, later Walter de Gruyter & Co., 1900- ) , is indicated
throughout by means of marginal numbers.
Our aim is to produce a comprehensive edition of Kant's writings,
embodying and displaying the high standards attained by Kant scholar­
ship in the English-speaking world during the second half of the twen­
tieth century, and serving as both an instrument and a stimulus for the
further development of Kant studies by English-speaking readers in the
century to come. Because of our emphasis on literalness of translation
and on information rather than interpretation in editorial practices, we
hope our edition will continue to be usable despite the inevitable evo­
lution and occasional revolutions in Kant scholarship.
PAUL GUYER

ALLENW WOOD

IX

Acknowledgments

This translation of Kant's Critique ofPure Reason is the work of both of
us over many years, during which we have had the helpful input of
many students, friends, and colleagues. Those who have been especially
generous of their time and effort are owed special thanks. Those who
helped us in one way or another in the preparation and revision of the
translation are Gunter Zoller, Charles Parsons, Stephan Wagner, the
students in Paul Guyer's Kant classes at the University of Pennsylvania
in I 994-95, and the students in Allen Wood's "German Philosophical
Texts" classes at Cornell University in 1 990 and 1 992. Jens Timmer­
man made available to us detailed corrections of the Raymund Schmidt
(Meiner) edition of the German text, and Georg Mohr provided us with
corrections of the Ingeborg Heidemann (Reclam) edition. Several peo­
ple, including Lewis White Beck, Rolf George and Martin Weatherston,
offered us corrections of earlier English translations. John Cooper and
Rega Wood helped us with the identification and attribution of classi­
cal quotations. The trustees of the Florence R. C. Murray Trust en­
dowed the research fund that paid for facsimiles of the original editions
of the Critique and other research materials. Finally, special thanks to
Allison Crapo and Cynthia Schossberger for their generous and metic­
ulous help with the proofreading.

xi

Introduction to the
Critique of Pure Reason

P A UL G UYER A ND

ALLEN

W O OD

Immanuel Kant's Critique of Pure Reason is one of the seminal and
monumental works in the history of Western philosophy. Published in
May I 78 I , when its author was already fifty-seven years old, and sub­
stantially revised for its second edition six years later, the book was both
the culmination of three decades of its author's often very private work
and the starting-point for nearly two more decades of his rapidly evolv­
ing but now very public philosophical thought. In the more than two
centuries since the book was first published, it has been the constant ob­
ject of scholarly interpretation and a continuous source of inspiration to
inventive philosophers. To tell the whole story of the book's influence
would be to write the history of philosophy since Kant, and that is be­
yond our intention here. Mter a summary of the Critique's structure and
argument, this introduction will sketch its genesis and evolution from
Kant's earliest metaphysical treatise in I 7 5 5 to the publication of the
first edition of the Critique in I 78I and its revision for the second edi­
tion of I 787.
I.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE

CRITIQUE

The strategy of the Critique. In the conclusion to his second critique,
the Critique of Practical Reason of I 788, Kant famously wrote, "Two
things fill the mind with ever new and increasing admiration and awe
the more often and more enduringly reflection is occupied with them:
the starry heavens above me and the moral law within me.'" This
motto could just as well have served for virtually all of Kant's philo­
sophical works, and certainly for the Critique of Pure Reason. From the
outset of his career, Kant had been concerned to resolve a number of
the most fundamental scientific controversies of his epoch and to es­
tablish once and for all the basic principles of scientific knowledge of
the world, thereby explaining our knowledge of the "starry heavens."

Introduction

I r

Almost as early in his career, Kant was intent on showing that human
freedom, understood not only as the presupposition of morality but also
as the ultimate value served and advanced by the moral law, is compat­
ible with the truth of modern science. The Critique of Pure Reason was
the work in which Kant attempted to lay the foundations both for the
certainty of modern science and for the possibility of human freedom.
The book is complex, however, not just because of the complexity of
Kant's own position, but also because he argues on several fronts against
several different alternative positions represented in early modern phi­
losophy generally and within the German Enlightenment in particular.
In order to make room for his own dualistic defense of both modern sci­
ence and human autonomy, Kant, like Descartes, Locke, and Hume, felt
he had to rein in the pretensions of traditional metaphysics, which was
represented for him by the school of Christian Wolff (r679- 1 754) and
his followers, especially Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten ( 1 7 14-1 762).2
Their position, which Kant called "dogmatism," was compared in the
Preface to the Critique to the despotic ministry of an absolute monar­
chy - Kant held dogmatism to be capricious, opinionated, faction­
ridden and consequently unstable and open to the contempt of rational
observers.
Yet Kant wanted to distinguish his own critical stance toward dogma­
Y.!'m from several other ways of rejecting it, which he regarded as them­
selves equally dangerous to the cause of reason. The first of these is
skepticism, the position Kant took David Hume (r 7 II -r 776) to advo­
cate) Another position Kant rejected was emthe "way of ideas" described in John Locke's (163 2-1 7°4) Essay concern­
ing Human Understanding ( 1 790) as grounding knowledge solely on
ideas acquired in the course of individual experience. Yet another philo­
sophical stance Kant encountered was what he called indifef ren
which did not reject metaphysical assertions themselves but did reject
any attempt to argue for them systematically and rigorously. Here he
had in mind a number of popular philosophers who were often in sub­
stantive agreement with dogmatists on metaphysical issues such as the
existence of God and the immortality of the soul, but who were uncon­
vinced by the scholastic subtlety of the dogmatists' propositions and
proofs, holding instead that the beliefs on these matters that we need
for the successful conduct of human life are simply given through
"healthy understanding" or common sense.4
Yet while he attempted to criticize and limit the scope of traditional
metaphysics, Kant also sought to defend against empiricists its underly­
ing claim of the possibility of universal and necessary knowledge - what
Kant called a priori knowledge, knowledge originating independently of
experience, because no knowledge derived from any particular experi­
ence, or a posteriori knowledge, could justify a claim to universal and
2

Introduction

necessary validity. He sought likewise to defend its scientific character
against skeptics who dismiss its rigorous arguments as insufficient and
against proponents of "common sense" who regard them as pedantic
and superfluous. As Kant compared dogmatic metaphysicians to de­
fenders of despotism, so he likened skeptics to nomads who abhor any
form of permanent civil society and are prepared to disrupt or over­
throw the monarchy of metaphysics, and Lockeans to calumniators who
would foist a false and degrading genealogy on the monarch. Those
who would pretend indifference to metaphysical inquiries he charged
with being closet dogmatists, like supporters of a corrupt regime who
scoff at its defects and feign ironic detachment from it but have no in­
dependent convictions of their own.
Kant's position thus required him not only to undermine the argu­
ments of traditional metaphysics but also to put in their place a scien­
tific metaphysics of his own, which establishes what can be known
a priori but also limits it to that which is required for ordinary experi­
ence and its extension into natural science. Kant therefore had to find a
way to limit the pretensions of the dogmatists while still defending
metaphysics as a science which is both possible (as was denied by the
skeptics) and necessary (as was denied by the indifferentists). Thus Kant
had to fight a war on several different fronts,S in which he had to es­
tablish the unanswerability of many metaphysical questions against
both dogmatists and empiricists but also defend parts of the positions
he was attacking, such as the possibility of a priori cognition of the fun­
damental principles of natural science, against both empiricists and
skeptics. And while he wanted to prove to the indifferentists that a sci­
ence of metaphysics is important, he also wanted to embrace part of
their position, since he thought that in regard to some insoluble meta­
physical questions, indeed the most important of them, we can defend
a kind of commonsense belief - in God, freedom and immortality - be­
cause our moral outlook has an inescapable stake in them.
The structure of the Critique. This complex program led to the
enormous complexity of the structure and argument of the Critique of
Pure Reason. To many readers, the elaborate structure or "architectonic"
of the Critique has been a barrier to understanding it, but a brief ac­
count of the origin of the main divisions of the book can illuminate its
contents. Although these contents are profoundly original, Kant actu­
ally borrowed much of the book's structure from well-known models.
After the preface (which was completely rewritten for the second edi­
tion) and the introduction, the Critique is divided into two main parts,
the "Doctrine of Elements" and the "Doctrine of Method." This dis­
tinction is a variation on a distinction common in German logic text­
books between "general logic" and "special" or applied 10gic;6 in Kant's
hands, it becomes a rubric to distinguish between his fundamental ex3

Introduction

posltlOn of his theory of a priori cognition and its limits, in the
"Doctrine of Elements," and his own reflections on the methodological
implications of that theory, under the rubric of the "Doctrine of
Method," where he provides contrasts between mathematical and
philosophical proof and between theoretical and practical reasoning, as
well as contrasts between his own critical method and dogmatic, em­
pirical, and skeptical methods of philosophy.
The "Doctrine of Elements" in turn is divided into two main (al­
though very disproportionately sized) parts, the "Transcendental
Aesthetic" and the "Transcendental Logic," the first of which considers
the a priori contributions of the fundamental forms of our sensibility,
namely space and time, to our knowledge, and the second of which con­
siders the a priori contributions of the intellect, both genuine and spu­
rious, to our knowledge. This division is derived from Baumgarten's
introduction of "aesthetics" as the title for the science of "lower" or
"sensitive cognition" in contrast to logic as the science ofhigher or con­
ceptual cognition;7 at the time of writing the Critique, however, Kant
rejected Baumgarten's supposition that there could be a science of taste
(what we now call "aesthetics"), and instead appropriated the term for
his theory of the contribution of the forms of sensibility to knowledge
in general.s After a brief explanation of the distinction between "gen­
eral logic" and "transcendental logic" - the former being the basic sci­
ence of the forms of thought regardless of its object and the latter being
the science of the basic forms for the thought of objects (A 50-5 7/
B 74-82) - Kant then splits the "Transcendental Logic" into two main
divisions, the "Transcendental Analytic" and the "Transcendental
Dialectic." Kant uses this distinction, which derives from a sixteenth­
century Aristotelian distinction between the logic of truth and the logic
of probability, represented in eighteenth-century Germany by the Jena
professor Joachim Georg Darjes ( 1 7 1 4-1 792),9 to distinguish between
the positive contributions of the understanding, working in cooperation
with sensibility, to the conditions of the possibility of experience and
knowledge (the "Transcendental Analytic") and the spurious attempt of
reason working independently of sensibility to provide metaphysical in­
sight into things as they are in themselves (the "Transcendental
Dialectic"). The "Transcendental Analytic" is in turn divided into two
books, the "Analytic of Concepts" and the "Analytic of Principles," the
first of which argues for the ulllversal and necessary validity of the pure
concepts of the understanding, or the categories, such as the concepts of
substance and causation, and the second of which argues for the valid­
ity of fundamental principles of empirical judgment employing those
categories, such as the principles of the conservation of substance and
the universality of causation.
The "Transcendental Dialectic" is also divided into two books, "On
4

Introduction

the Concepts of Pure Reason" and "On the Dialectical Inferences of
Pure Reason," in which Kant explains how pure reason generates ideas
of metaphysical entities such as the soul, the world as a whole, and God
and then attempts to prove the reality of those ideas by extending pat­
terns of inference which are valid within the limits of human sensibility
beyond those limits. But it should be noted that the combination of the
twofold division of the "Transcendental Analytic" into the "Analytic of
Concepts" and "Analytic of Principles" with the main part of the
Dialectic, the "Dialectical Inferences of Pure Reason," replicates the
traditional division of logic textbooks into three sections on concepts,
judgments, and inferences:IO Kant uses this structure to argue that the con­
cepts of pure understanding, when applied to the forms of sensibility, give
rise to sound principles of judgment, which constitute the heart of his
critical metaphysics, but that inferences of pure reason performed with­
out respect to the limits of sensibility give rise only to metaphysical il­
lusion. The treatment of inferences is in turn divided into three
sections, "The Paralogisms of Pure Reason," "The Antinomy of Pure
Reason," and "The Ideal of Pure Reason," which expose metaphysically
fallacious arguments about the nature of the soul, about the size and ori­
gin of the world as a whole, and about the existence of God, respectively.
These divisions are also derived from Kant's predecessors: Wolff and
Baumgarten divided metaphysics into "general metaphysics," or "ontol­
ogy," and "special metaphysics," in turn divided into "rational psychol­
ogy," "rational cosmology," and "rational theology." Kant replaces their
"ontology" with the constructive doctrine of his own "Transcendental
Analytic" (see A 247 / B 3 0 3 ), and then presents his criticism of dogmatic
metaphysics based on pure reason alone by demolishing the special
metaphysics of rational psychology, cosmology, and theology.
Finally, Kant divides the "Doctrine of Method," in which he reflects
on the consequences of his demolition of traditional metaphysics and
reconstruction of some parts of it, into four chapters, the "Discipline,"
the "Canon," the "Architectonic," and the "History of Pure Reason.""
The first two of these sections are much more detailed than the last
two. In the "Discipline of Pure Reason," Kant provides an extended
contrast between the nature of mathematical proof and philosophical
argument, and offers important commentary on his own new critical or
"transcendental" method. In the "Canon of Pure Reason," he prepares
the way for his subsequent moral philosophy by contrasting the method
of theoretical philosophy to that of practical philosophy, and giving the
first outline of the argument that runs through all three critiques,
namely that practical reason can justify metaphysical beliefs about Gqd
and the freedom and immortality of the human soul although theoreti­
cal reason can never yield knowledge of such things. The last two parts of
the "Doctrine of Method," the "Architectonic of Pure Reason" and the
5

Introduction

"History of Pure Reason," recapitulate the contrasts between Kant's
own critical philosophical method and those of the dogmatists, empiri­
cists, and skeptics with which he began, treating these contrasts in both
systematic and historical terms. Indeed, although Kant himself never
cared much about the history of philosophy as a scholarly discipline, in
the few pages of his "History of Pure Reason" he outlined the history
of modern philosophy as the transcendence of empiricism and rational­
ism by his own critical philosophy, the pattern that we still use, al­
though of course we also have to add room to this pattern for the heirs
and successors of Kant's own philosophy.
With this analysis of the organization of the Critique ofPure Reason in
hand, we now provide a brief resume of its contents.
"Introduction": the idea of transcendental philosophy. Although
Kant himself often suggests that the negative side of his project, the cri­
tique of dogmatic metaphysics, is the most important, the Critique pre­
sents Kant's positive doctrine of the a priori elements of human
knowledge first. In the introduction, Kant argues that our mathemati­
cal, physical, and quotidian knowledge of nature requires certain judg­
ments that are "synthetic" rather than "analytic," that is, going beyond
what can be known solely in virtue of the contents of the concepts in­
volved in them and the application of the logical principles of identity
and contradiction to these concepts, and yet also knowable a priori, that
is, independently of any particular experience since no particular expe­
rience could ever be sufficient to establish the universal and necessary
validity of these judgments. He entitles the question of how synthetic
a priori judgments are possible the "general problem of pure reason"
(B 1 9), and proposes an entirely new science in order to answer it
(A IO-16/B 24-3 0).
This new science, which Kant calls "transcendental" (A 1 1 I B 2 5), does
not deal directly with objects of empirical cognition, but investigates the
conditions of the possibility of our experience of them by examining the
mental capacities that are required for us to have any cognition of ob­
jects at all. Kant agrees with Locke that we have no innate knowledge,
that is, no knowledge of any particular propositions implanted in us by
God or nature prior to the commencement of our individual experi­
ence. I2 But experience is the product both of external objects affecting
our sensibility and of the operation of our cognitive faculties in response
to this effect (A I, B I), and Kant's claim is that we can have "pure" or a
priori cognition of the contributions to experience made by the opera­
tion of these faculties themselves, rather than of the effect of external
objects on us in experience. Kant divides our cognitive capacities into
our receptivity to the effects of external objects acting on us and giving
us sensations, through which these objects are given to us in empirical
intuition, and our active faculty for relating the data of intuition by
6

Introduction

thinking them under concepts, which is called understanding (A 191
B 3 3), and forming judgments about them. As already suggested, this di­
vision is the basis for Kant's division of the "Transcendental Doctrine of
Elements" into the "Transcendental Aesthetic," which deals with sensi­
bility and its pure form, and the "Transcendental Logic," which deals
with the operations of the understanding and judgment as well as both
the spurious and the legitimate activities of theoretical reason.
"Transcendental Aesthetic": space, time, and transcendental
idealism. Despite its brevity - a mere thirty pages in the first edition
and forty in the second - the "Transcendental Aesthetic" argues for a
series of striking, paradoxical and even revolutionary theses that deter­
mine the course of the whole remainder of the Critique and that have
been the subject of a very large proportion of the scholarly work de­
voted to the Critique in the last two centuries. '3 In this section, Kant at­
tempts to distinguish the contribution to cognition made by our
receptive faculty of sensibility from that made solely by the objects that
affect us (A 2 1-2 /B 3 6), and argues that space and time are pure forms of
all intuition contributed by our own faculty of sensibility, and therefore
forms of which we can have a priori knowledge. This is the basis for
Kant's resolution of the debate about space and time that had raged be­
tween the Newtonians, who held space and time to be self-subsisting
entities existing independently of the objects that occupy them, and the
Leibnizians, who held space and time to be systems of relations, con­
ceptual constructs based on non-relational properties inhering in the
things we think of as spatiotemporally related. '4 Kant's alternative to
both of these positions is that space and time are neither subsistent be­
ings nor inherent in things as they are in themselves, but are rather only
forms of our sensibility, hence conditions under which objects of expe­
rience can be given at all and the fundamental principle of their repre­
sentation and individuation. Only in this way, Kant argues, can we
adequately account for the necessary manifestation of space and time
throughout all experience as single but infinite magnitudes - the fea­
ture of experience that Newton attempted to account for with his meta­
physically incoherent notion of absolute space and time as the sensorium
dei - and also explain the a priori yet synthetic character of the mathe­
matical propositions expressing our cognition of the physical properties
of quantities and shapes given in space and time - the epistemological
certainty undercut by Leibniz's account of space and time as mere rela­
tions abstracted from antecedently existing objects (A 2 2-5 I B 3 7-41 ,
A 30--2 IB 46-9).
Kant's thesis that space and time are pure forms of intuition leads him
to the paradoxical conclusion that although space and time are empiri­
cally real, they are transcendentally ideal, and so are the objects given in
!hem. Although the precise meaning of this claim remains subject to de7

Introduction

bate,'5 in general terms it is the claim that it is only from the human
standpoint that we can speak of space, time, and the spatiotemporality
of the objects of experience, thus that we cognize these things not as
they are in themselves but only as they appear under the conditions of
our sensibility (A 26-30/B 42-5, A 3 2-48 /B 49-73). This is Kant's famous
doctrine of transcendental idealism, which is employed throughout the
Critique ofPure Reason (and the two subsequent critiques) in a variety of
ways, both positively, as in the "Transcendental Aesthetic" and "Dis­
cipline of Pure Reason," to account for the possibility of synthetic a pri­
ori cognition in mathematics, and negatively, as in the "Transcendental
Dialectic," to limit the scope of our cognition to the appearances given
to our sensibility, while denying that we can have any cognition of
things as they are in themselves, that is, as transcendent realities con­
stituted as they are independently of the constitution of our cognitive
capacities.
"Transcendental Analytic": the metaphysical and transcenden­
tal deductions. The longest and most varied part of the Critique is the
"Transcendental Logic," containing the two main divisions: the con­
structive "Transcendental Analytic," which considers the understanding
as the source of a priori concepts that yield a priori cognitions in con­
junction with the forms of intuition already analyzed; and the primarily
destructive "Transcendental Dialectic," which investigates the faculty of
reason, in the first instance as a source of illusory arguments and meta­
physical pseudo-sciences, although in the end also as the source of valu­
able regulative principles for the conduct of human inquiry and
practical reasoning. The "Transcendental Analytic," as we saw, is in
turn divided into two books, the "Analytic of Concepts," dealing with
the concepts of the understanding, and the "Analytic of Principles," con­
cerning the principles of the understanding that arise from the applica­
tion of those concepts to the forms of intuition.
In the "Analytic of Concepts," Kant presents the understanding as
the source of certain concepts that are a priori and are conditions of the
possibility of any experience whatever. These twelve basic concepts,
which Kant calls the categories, are fundamental concepts of an object in
general, or the forms for any particular concepts of objects, and in con­
junction with the a priori forms of intuition are the basis of all synthetic
a priori cognition. In an initial section of the "Transcendental Analytic"
(A66-8 1 /B 9 1 -I I 6), which he named in the second edition of the
Critique the "metaphysical deduction" of the categories (B 1 59), Kant
derives the twelve categories from a table of the twelve logical functions
or forms of judgments, the logically significant aspects of all judg­
ments. Kant's idea is that just as there are certain essential features of
all judgments, so there must be certain corresponding ways in which we
form the concepts of objects so that judgments may be about objects.
8

Introduction

There are four main logical features of judgments: their quantity, or the
scope of their subject-terms; the quality of their predicate-terms, whose
contents are realities and negations; their relation, or whether they as­
sert a relation just between a subject and predicate or between two or
more subject-predicate judgments; and their modality, or whether they
assert a possible, actual, or necessary truth. Under each of these four
headings there are supposed to be three different options: a judgment
may be universal, particular or singular; affirmative, negative or infi­
nite; categorical, hypothetical or disjunctive; and problematic, asser­
toric, or apodictic. Corresponding to these twelve logical possibilities,
Kant holds there to be twelve fundamental categories for conceiving of
the quantity, quality, relation, and modali ty of objects (A 7 0 / B 95,
A 80 / B 1 06). The plausibility of Kant's claim that there are exactly
twelve logical functions of judgment and twelve corresponding cate­
gories for conceiving of objects has remained controversial since Kant
first made it. ,6
Even if Kant establishes by this argument that we have certain con­
cepts a priori, it is a more ambitious claim that all of these concepts
apply universally and necessarily to the objects that are given in our ex­
perience. Kant takes on this more ambitious project in the "Transcen­
dental Deduction of the Categories," the chapter which he says in the
first edition of the Critique cost him the most labor (A xvi), but which he
then rewrote almost in its entirety for the second edition (A 84-1 301
B I I6-69) after other attempts in the intervening works, the Prolegomena
to Any Future Metaphysics (1 783) and Metaphysical Foundations ofNatural
Science (1 786). In both versions of the Critique, although not in the in­
tervening works, Kant centers his argument on the premise that our ex­
perience can be ascribed to a single identical subject, via what he calls
the "transcendental unity of apperception," only if the elements of ex­
perience given in intuition are synthetically combined so as to present
us with objects that are thought through the categories. The categories
are held to apply to objects, therefore, not because these objects make
the categories possible, but rather because the categories themselves
constitute necessary conditions for the representation of all possible ob­
jects of experience. Precisely what is entailed by the idea of the unity of
apperception, however, and what the exact relation between appercep­
tion and the representation of objects is, are obscure and controversial,
and continue to generate lively philosophical discussion even after two
centuries of interpretation. '7
Principles of pure understanding. Even if the transcendental de­
duction does establish that the categories do apply to all possible data
for experience, or (in Kant's terms) all manifolds of intuition, it does so
only abstractly and collectively - that is, it does not specify how each
category applies necessarily to the objects given in experience or show
9

Introduction

that all of the categories must be applied to those objects. This is Kant's
task in Book II of the "Transcendental Analytic," the "Analytic of
Principles. " This book is in turn divided into three chapters, "The
Schematism of the Pure Concepts of the Understanding," the "System
of All Principles of Pure Understanding," and "On the Ground of the
Distinction of All Objects in General into Phenomena and Noumena."
In the first of these chapters Kant shows how the logical content of the
categories derived from the metaphysical deduction is to be trans­
formed into a content applicable to the data of our senses; in the sec­
ond, he demonstrates principles of judgment showing that all of the
categories must be applied to our experience by means of arguments
that are sometimes held to prove the objective validity of the categories
independently of the prior transcendental deduction; and in the third
chapter Kant draws out the consequences of the preceding two, argu­
ing that because the categories have a determinate use only when ap­
plied to spatiotemporal data and yet the forms of space and time
themselves are transcendentally ideal, the categories also have a deter­
minate cognitive use only when applied to appearances ("phenomena"),
and therefore that by means of the categories things as they are in
themselves ("noumena") might be thought but not known.
In the "Schematism," Kant argues that the categories, whose content
has thus far been derived solely from the logical structure of judgments,
must be made applicable to objects whose form has thus far been spec­
ified solely by the pure forms of space and time. He argues that this can
be done by associating each category with a "transcendental schema," a
form or relation in intuition that is an appropriate representation of a
logical form or relation. In particular, Kant argues that each category
must be associated with a temporal schema, since time is the form of
every sensible intuition whatever, while space is the form of outer intu­
itions only. For example, the schema of the logical conception of ground
and consequence is the concept of causality as rule-governed temporal
succession: the concept of a cause, as opposed to that of a mere ground, is
the concept of "the real upon which, whenever it is posited, something
else always follows," or "the succession of the manifold insofar as it is
subject to a rule" (A 144/B 1 8 3). As Kant will make clearer in the second
edition, however, the subsequent chapter on the "Principles" will show
that although the content of the transcendental schemata for the cate­
gories may be explicated in purely temporal terms, the use of these
schemata in turn depends upon judgments about the spatial properties
and relations of at least some objects of empirical judgment. Thus the
argument of the "Analytic of Principles" as a whole is that the categories
both must and can only be used to yield knowledge of objects in space
and time. The principles expressing the universal and necessary appli­
cation of the categories to objects given in space and time are precisely
10

Introduction

the synthetic a priori judgments that are to be demonstrated by Kant's
critical replacement for traditional metaphysics.
In the second chapter of the "Analytic of Principles," the "System of
All Principles," Kant organizes the principles of pure understanding
under four headings corresponding to the four groups of categories.
For each of the first two groups of categories, those listed under
"Quantity" and "Quality," Kant supplies a single "mathematical" prin­
ciple meant to guarantee the application to empirical objects of certain
parts of mathematics, which are in turn supposed to be associated with
certain parts of the logic of judgment. The first principle, under the
title "Axioms of Intuition," guarantees that the a priori mathematics of
>
extensive magnitudes, where wholes are measured by their discrete
parts, applies to empirical objects because these are given in space and
time which are themselves extensive magnitudes (A I 62-6 I B 202-7).
The general implication of this argument is that the empirical use of the
logical quantifiers (one, some, all) depends on the division of the em­
pirical manifold into distinct spatiotemporal regions. The second prin­
ciple, under the title of the "Anticipations of Perception," guarantees
that the mathematics of intensive magnitudes applies to the "real in
space," or that properties such as color or heat, or material forces such
as weight or impenetrability, must exist in a continuum of degrees be­
cause our sensations of them are continuously variable (A 1 66-7 6 1
B 207-18). Here Kant's argument i s that since the use o f the logical
functions of affirmation and negation is dependent on the presence or
absence of sensations that come in continuously varying degrees, the
empirical use of the categories of "Quality" is connected with the math­
ematics of intensive magnitudes in a way that could not have been pre­
dicted from an analysis of the logical content of these categories
themselves (another example of how a synthetic a priori rather than
merely analytic judgment arises).
Switching from "mathematical" to "dynamical" principles, the third
section of the "System," the "Analogies of Experience," concerns the
necessary relations among what is given in space and time, and thus gives
expression to the necessary conditions for the application of the cate­
gories of "Relation" to empirical objects. Many interpreters consider
this the most important section of the Critique. In the first analogy, Kant
argues that the unity of time implies that all change must consist in the
alteration of states in an underlying substance, whose existence and
quantity must be unchangeable or conserved (A 1 82-6iB 2 24-3 2). In the
second analogy, Kant argues that we can make determinate judgments
about the objective succession of events as contrasted to merely sub­
jective successions of representations only if every objective alteration
follows a necessary rule of succession, or a causal law (A 1 86-2 I I I
B 2 3 2'- 56). In the third analogy, Kant argues that determinate judgments
11

Introduction

that objects (or states of substance) in different regions of space exist si­
multaneously are possible only if such objects stand in the mutual causal
relation of community or reciprocal interaction (A 2 I I-1 5 / B 2 5 6-62).
The second analogy is generally supposed to supply Kant's answer to
Hume's skeptical doubts about causality, while the third analogy is the
basis for Kant's refutation of Leibniz's rejection of real interaction be­
tween independent substances - an essential thesis of Leibniz's "mon­
adology." In particular, both what the second analogy is intended to
prove and how the proof is supposed to proceed have been matters of
exegetical controversy; they have been disputed almost as intensely as
the philosophical question whether Kant's reply to Hume is successful.
In the first edition of the Critique, the final section of the "System of
Principles," the "Postulates of Empirical Thought," provides conditions
for the empirical use of the modal categori�s of possibility, existence,
and necessity, and argues that our determinate use of the categories of
both possibility and necessity is in fact confined to the sphere of the actual,
that is, that which is actually given in experience (A 2 1 8-35 IB 265-74,
2 79-87). In the second edition, however, Kant inserted a new argument,
the "Refutation of Idealism" (B 2 74-9), which attempts to show that the
very possibility of our consciousness of ourselves presupposes the exis­
tence of an external world of objects that are not only represented as
spatially outside us but are also conceived to exist independently of our
subjective representations of them. Although the implications of this ar­
gument have been intensely debated, it seems to confirm Kant's claim in
the Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics that his "transcendental ideal­
ism" is a "critical" or "formal" idealism that, unlike traditional idealism,
implies the subjectivity of space and time as forms of intuition without
denying the real existence of the objects distinct from ourselves that are
represented as being in space and time. 18
In the third chapter of the "Analytic of Principles," on phenomena
and noumena, Kant emphasizes that because the categories must always
be applied to data provided by sensibility in order to provide cognition,
and because the data of sensibility are structured by the transcenden­
tally ideal forms of intuition, the categories give us knowledge only of
things as they appear with sensibility ("phenomena," literally "that
which appears"). Although through pure understanding (noils in Greek)
we may think of objects independently of their being given in sensibil­
ity, we can never cognize them as such non-sensible entities ("noumena,"
literally "that which is thought") (A 2 3 5-6o / B 294-3 1 5). The meaning
of Kant's use of the term "phenomena" is self-evident, but the meaning
of "noumena" is not, since it literally means not "things as they are in­
dependently of appearing to us" but something more like "things as
they are understood by pure thought." Yet Kant appears to deny that
the human understanding can comprehend things in the latter way. For
12

Introduction

this reason, Kant says it is legitimate for us to speak of noumena only
"in a negative sense," meaning things as they may be in themselves in­
dependently of our representation of them, but not noumena "in a pos­
itive sense," which would be things known through pure reason alone.
A fundamental point of the Critique is to deny that we ever have knowl­
edge of things through pure reason alone, but only by applying the cat­
egories to pure or empirical data structured by the forms of intuition.
At this point in the Critique Kant has completed the largest part of his
constructive project, showing how synthetic a priori principles of theo­
retical cognition are the necessary conditions of the application of the
categories to sensible data structured by the pure forms of intuition.
The next part of his argument is the critical demonstration that tradi­
tional metaphysics consists largely of illusions arising from the attempt
to acquire knowledge of all things (the soul, the world as a whole, and
God) as they are in themselves by the use of reason alone regardless of
the limits of sensibility. The bulk of this argument is reserved for the
"Transcendental Dialectic," but Kant makes a start on it with the inter­
esting appendix that completes the "Transcendental Analytic" entitled
the "Amphiboly of Concepts of Reflection" (AI6o-92 / B 3 16-49). In
this appendix Kant presents his criticism of Leibniz's monadology by
arguing that through a confusion (or "amphiboly") Leibniz has taken
mere features of concepts through which we think things, specifically
concepts of comparison or reflection such as "same" and "different" or
"inner" and "outer," which are in fact never applied directly to things
but only applied to them through more determinate concepts, as if they
were features of the objects themselves. Kant thereby rejects the
Leibnizian-Wolffian account of such metaphysical concepts as essence,
identity, and possibility, and reinforces his own insistence that empiri­
cal individual judgments of real possibility require sensible conditions
in addition to logical intelligibility and non-contradictoriness.
The "Transcendental Dialectic": the critique of metaphysics.
The second division of the "Transcendental Logic" turns to the main
destructive task of the Critique ofPure Reason, and that which gives it its
name, the task of discrediting dogmatism and displaying the limits of
metaphysics. The "Transcendental Analytic" has prepared the way for
this critique of traditional metaphysics and its foundations by its argu­
ment that synthetic a priori principles can be established only within the
limited domain of sensible experience. But Kant's aim in the "Dialectic"
is not only to show the failure of a metaphysics that transcends the
boundaries of possible experience. At the same time, he also wants to
demonstrate that the questions that preoccupy metaphysics are in­
evitable, and that the arguments of metaphysics, although deceptive,
should not be dismissed without sympathetic comprehension (as they
are by the tr,�ditional skeptic). Kant argues that they tempt us for gen13

Introduction

uine reasons, inherent in the nature of human reason itself, and when
these grounds are properly understood they can be put to good use for
the causes of both human knowledge and human morality. This argu­
ment is the basis for Kant's theory of the regulative use of the ideas of
reason in scientific inquiry, which Kant first suggests in the final ap­
pendix to the "Transcendental Dialectic" and then elaborates in the
Critique ofJudgment, and for his theory of the foundation of morality in
the practical use of pure reason, which he first describes in the "Doc­
trine of Method" and elaborates in many subsequent works, but espe­
cially in the Groundwork of the Metaphysics ofMorals and the Critique of

Practical Reason.
The Leibnizian-Wolffian tradition, as presented in Alexander Gott­
lieb Baumgarten's Metaphysica (first edition, 1 73 8), which Kant used as
the textbook for his lectures on metaphysics for virtually his entire ca­
reer, was divided into four parts: ontology, psychology, cosmology, and
theology. The "Transcendental Aesthetic" and "Analytic" are Kant's
critical replacement for traditional ontology. The "Transcendental
Dialectic," however, is dedicated to arguing that the other three parts
of the rationalist system are pseudo-sciences founded on inevitable illu­
sions of human reason attempting to extend itself beyond the limits of
sensibility. Kant does not present the three rationalistic pseudo-sciences
as mere historical artifacts, but attempts to display them as inevitable
products of human reason by associating them with the unconditioned
use of the three traditional forms of syllogism: categorical, hypotheti­
cal, and disjunctive. Seeking the unconditioned subject to which all our
thoughts relate as predicates, we generate the idea of the soul as a sim­
ple, non-empirical substance; seeking the unconditioned in respect of
any of several hypothetical series arising in the world (of composition
or extension, of decomposition or division, of cause and effect) leads to
ideas such as that of a first event in time, an outer limit to space, a sim­
ple substance and a first cause. Finally, Kant derives the idea of a most
real being or God as the ideal ground of the real properties constitut­
ing all other things. Kant's overall argument is that although these ra­
tionalist doctrines are inevitable illusions they are still pseudo-sciences,
and must give way to doctrines remaining within the limits of sensibil­
ity: rational psychology gives way to empirical psychology, which Kant
expounded in his lectures in the form of "anthropology"; rational cos­
mology gives way to the metaphysical foundations of natural science,
which Kant derives by adding the sole empirical concept of motion to
the principles of judgment; and rational theology gives way to what
Kant will call moral theology, the doctrine that God and immortality
are postulated, along with freedom of the will, solely as conditions of
the possibility of human morality.
The opening book of the "Transcendental Dialectic" is therefore a
14

Introduction

derivation and even a limited defense of the transcendental ideas, such as
the immortal soul, free will, and God, with which dogmatic meta­
physics has always been preoccupied (Az93-3 3 8 / B 349-96). Reason, tra­
ditionally thought to be the highest of our cognitive faculties, has a
"logical use" in which it simply draws inferences from principles, but
also a "real use" in which it seeks to base series of ordinary inferences,
such as those from cause to effect, in ultimate, foundational principles,
such as the idea of an uncaused first cause. The ideas of such ultimate
principles are generated a priori by the faculty of reason when it seeks,
through regressive syllogistic reasoning, for what is unconditioned in re­
spect of the objects given in experience, according to the principles of
understanding that govern these objects. In particular, it is the three
categories of relation when used without regard to the limits of sensibil­
ity that give rise to the chief ideas of metaphysics: the concept of sub­
stance giving rise to the idea of the soul as the ultimate subject, the
concept of causation giving rise to the idea of the world-whole as a
completed series of conditions, and the concept of community giving
rise to the idea of God as the common ground of all possibilities. Kant
suggests that each of the three relational categories gives rise to a dis­
tinctive form of syllogistic inference, series of which can only be termi­
nated by the idea of an unconditioned ground, but also that the attempt
to acquire knowledge by means of the relational categories without sen­
sibility gives rise directly to the idea of an unconditioned subject, series,
and set of all possibilities.
The second and by far the larger book of the "Dialectic" expounds
"The Dialectical Inferences of Pure Reason" in great detail. The errors
of rational psychology are diagnosed under the rubric of "The Para­
logisms of Pure Reason," those of rational cosmology under the rubric
of "The Antinomy of Pure Reason," and those of rational theology
under the rubric of "The Ideal of Pure Reason."
The "Paralogisms." Rational psychology is the topic of the "Para­
logisms" (or fallacious inferences) of pure reason, which argue invalidly
from the formal unity, simplicity, and identity of the thought of the sub­
ject of thinking or the "I" to the conclusion that the soul is a real and
simple (hence indestructible) substance that is self-identical throughout
all experience (A 34I-66). In the first edition, the "Paralogisms" in­
cluded a fourth part, which defends the reality of external appearance in
space simply by reducing objects in space to one form of immediate
representation (A 3 66-4°5). This response to idealism appears to pro­
vide only a Pyrrhic victory over it, which provoked charges of
Berkeleianism against Kant, and was therefore replaced in the second
edition with the "Refutation of Idealism," which as we saw argues for
the real existence of objects in space and time although for the tran­
scendental ideality of their spatial and temporal form. In the second
15

Introduction

edition, the entire chapter on the paralogisms was rewritten and sim­
plified (B 406-22); to fill the place of the superseded fourth paralogism,
Kant adds an argument that his dualism of appearance and reality un­
dercuts the traditional dualism of mind and body, with its problem
about the possibility of interaction between two fundamentally distinct
kind of substances, by opening up the possibility that both mind and
body are different appearances of some single though unknown kind of
substance.
The "Antinomies." The longest and most painstaking part of the
"Transcendental Dialectic" is the "Antinomy of Pure Reason," which
deals with the topics of rational cosmology (A40 S -S 8 3 / B 43 2-6 I I); in­
deed, as we will show below, Kant originally thought that all of the er­
rors of metaphysics could be diagnosed in the form of these antinomies.
Here Kant argues that reason's natural illusions are not merely revealed
by subtle philosophical analysis but unavoidably manifest themselves in
the form of actual contradictions each side of which seems naturally
plausible. Kant argues that unless we accept the transcendental idealist
distinction between appearances and things in themselves, we will be
committed to accepting mutually incompatible arguments, arguments
both that there must be a first beginning of the world in time and that
there cannot be, that there must be limits to the world in space and that
there cannot be (the two halves of the first antinomy), both that there
must be a simple substance and that there cannot be (the second antin­
omy), both that there must be at least one first or uncaused cause and
that there cannot be (the third antinomy), and that there must be a
being whose necessary existence is the ground of all contingent beings
and that there can be no necessary being (the fourth antinomy).
The only way of resolving these contradictions, Kant argues, is by ac­
cepting that the natural world is a realm of appearances constituted by
the application of the categories to sensible intuitions, and not a realm
of things in themselves. Regarding the first two antinomies, which he
calls "mathematical" antinomies because they have to do with size and
duration, Kant argues that there is no fact of the matter about the size
of the world as a whole, because the natural world is never present in
experience as a whole, but rather is given to us only through the pro­
gressive or regressive synthesis of spatiotemporal intuitions. We can al­
ways proceed indefinitely far in the progressive composition of spaces
and times into ever larger or longer realms or in the regressive decom­
position of space and time into ever smaller regions, but we can never
reach a beginning or an end to such series, as would be possible if they
were finite, nor complete any synthesis of them as infinite either. Both
sides of the mathematical antinomies, therefore, turn out to be false, be­
cause both rest on the common - and false - assumption that the world
is given independently of our ongoing synthesis in its representation,
16

)

I

,I

Introduction

and that it therefore has a determinate magnitude, which must be either
finite or infinite. For the third and fourth antinomies, which he calls
"dynamical" because they have to do with the causation of the world
and its events, Kant proposes a different solution. Here he argues that
both sides may be true, if the denial of a free cause or necessary being
is restricted to the natural and sensible world and their affirmation is
taken to refer to what might exist in a noumenal or supersensible world
of things in themselves. Just as his thinking about the antinomies gen­
erally shaped his thinking about the structure and outcome of the en­
tire "Transcendental Dialectic," so Kant's resolution of the third
antinomy will go on to play an important role in his moral philosophy
and in his ultimate account of the relation between theoretical and
moral philosophy.
The "Ideal of Pure Reason." Rational theology, the third and last
of the metaphysical pseudo-sciences, is taken up by Kant in the final
chapter of the "Transcendental Dialectic" (A 567-642 /B 595-67°). If an
"idea" is a pure concept generated by reason, then an "ideal" is the con­
cept of an individual thing as exemplifying an idea of pure reason. It
would not be natural to think of the idea of the soul, for example, as giv­
ing rise to an ideal, because we naturally think there are many souls; but
it is natural (at least in the Judaeo-Christian tradition) to think of the
idea of God as the idea of a single thing, and thus the idea of God is the
ideal of pure reason. Kant argues for the inevitability of the idea of God
as an ens realissimum, or supreme individual thing possessing all realities
or perfections and thus also grounding all the possibilities realized by
other particular things. Much of Kant's argument here makes use of a
line of thought he developed nearly twenty years before the publication
of the Critique in The Only Possible Ground ofProoffor a Demonstration of
the Existence of God ( 1 763)' But now Kant subjects to withering criticism
his own earlier attempt to prove the existence of God as such an ens re­
alissimum 3S well as the other traditional attempts to prove the existence
of God, which were already criticized in Kant's earliest philosophical
writing, the New Elucidation of the First Principles of Metaphysical Cogni­
tion (1 7 5 5) as well as in The Only Possible Ground.
Kant organizes the traditional proofs of the existence of God (with­
out attempting to explain why there should only be these three) into
the ontological proof, based solely on the concept of God, the cosmological
proof, based on the sheer fact of the existence of a world, and the
physico-theological proof, based on the particular constitution of the ac­
tual world, especially its alleged exhibition of purposive design. The
first of these is Kant's representation of the proof favored by St.
Anselm and revived by Descartes; the second is his name for an argu­
ment from contingent existents to their necessary ground favored by
Wolff and his followers; and the third is what Kant calls the argument
17

Introduction

from design favored by so many thinkers of the early Enlightenment,
especially in Britain (where Hume had already subjected it to tren­
chant criticism in his Dialogues concerning Natural Religion, which, be­
cause of the delay of their translation into German, Kant had not yet
seen at the time he published the Critique). First Kant attacks the on­
tological argument, holding that since existence is not a property and
therefore not itself a perfection, it cannot be included among the con­
tents of the idea of God, and cannot be inferred from that idea alone.
Instead, Kant argues, the existence of an object is always the presup­
position of the truth of any assertion about it, and cannot itself be as­
sumed for the proof of such an assertion. Kant then argues that even if
the cosmological and physico-theological proofs could establish the
existence of some necessary and purposive being (which they cannot),
they still could not establish the existence of a supremely perfect Deity
unless the ontological proof also succeeded. Since the ontological
proof is unsound, the entire metaphysical enterprise of proving the ex­
istence of God - as an object of theoretical cognition must be given up
as hopeless.
Regulative use of the ideas. The outcome of the "Transcendental
Dialectic," therefore, seems to be entirely negative. This is a mislead­
ing conclusion, however. In an appendix to the "Dialectic," Kant begins
a limited rehabilitation of the ideas of traditional metaphysics by argu­
ing that the ideas of reason have an important function in the conduct
of natural science if they are understood regulatively, that is, if they are
taken to represent not metaphysical beings or entities whose reality is
supposed to be demonstrable, but rather goals and directions of inquiry
that mark out the ways in which our knowledge is to be sought for and
organized. This is true of the idea of a simple soul, which stimulates us
to search for a unified psychology; of the idea of a complete world­
whole, which leads us constantly to expand the domain of our scientific
investigations; and above all of the idea of God, for regarding the world
as if it were the product of a highest intelligence leads us to look for the
maximum in order and connectedness, which is beneficial for the orga­
nization of whatever empirical knowledge we do acquire. This argu­
ment, which Kant continues in the Critique ofJudgment, is the first of
Kant's constructive arguments that reason can be misleading but if
wisely used is far from idle or even unnecessary. Kant's second con­
structive argument about reason, that its ideas have a profound practi­
cal use for the guidance and regulation of conduct, is begun in the final
part of the Critique, the "Doctrine of Method."
"The Doctrine of Method." The second major division of the
Critique, the "Doctrine of Method," tends to be neglected by its read­
ers, perhaps because the "Doctrine of Elements" is so long and the ar­
guments already surveyed are so exhaustine- P · , t the "Doctrine of
-

18

Introduction
Method," in which Kant reflects upon the potential and the limits of his
critical philosophy by comparing it with other methods - he compares
the method of philosophy with the method of mathematics, the method
of theoretical philosophy with the method of practical philosophy, and
the method of critical philosophy with the methods of dogmatic, em­
pirical, and skeptical philosophy - includes some extremely important
discussions. Its first chapter, the "Discipline of Pure Reason," provides
Kant's most mature treatment of the difference between philosophy and
mathematics, arguing that both provide synthetic a priori cognition, but
that mathematics provides determinate answers to its problems because
its objects can be constructed in pure intuition, whereas philosophy pro­
vides only general principles because what it can construct are the con­
ditions of possibility for the experience of objects, not particular objects
(A 7 1 2-38 / B 74o-69). Then it provides an ardent defense of freedom of
public communication as well as of open-mindedness in the discussion
of metaphysical issues, arguing that the very existence of reason itself
depends on the free give-and-take of controversy between rational be­
ings, which requires the liberty to come to one's own conclusions hon­
estly and to express them openly to others (A 738-69/B 766-97). This
discussion presages Kant's impassioned defense of freedom of thought
in his political writings of the 1 790S. The chapter concludes with a dis­
cussion of the contrasting roles of hypotheses in science and philosophy
(A 769-8 2 /B 798-8IO) and then with a reflection upon his own style of
philosophical argumentation, what he calls "transcendental proofs"

(A 782-941 B 8 IO-2 2).
The second chapter of the "Doctrine of Method," the "Canon of
Pure Reason," contrasts the epistemological status of theoretical cogni­
tion with that of the principles and presuppositions of practical reason,
or morality, and in so doing provides Kant's most systematic discussion
of moral philosophy prior to the Groundwork of the Metaphysics ofMorals
(1 785) and Kant's first systematic statement of his argument for rational
faith in God on moral grounds (A 795-83 I I B 82 3-59), an argument that
Kant was to restate and refine in the subsequent two critiques and to
continue to work on until the end of his life. The third chapter, the
"Architectonic of Pure Reason," continues the discussion of the contrast
between philosophy and other forms of cognition, such as historical
knowledge, as well as of .the contrast within philosophy between theo­
retical and practical reason (A8 3 2-5 I 1B 860-79), while the final chapter
of the "Doctrine of Method," and of the whole Critique, the "History of
Pure Reason," orients the critical philosophy clearly in relation to the
competing positions of dogmatism, empiricism, skepticism, and indif­
ferentism, the discussion of which had opened the Critique (A 852-561
B 880-84). For all its brevity, this section has had considerable influence
on subsequent conceptions of the history of philosophy.
19

Introduction
II.
THE ME S S A GE O F T H E

CRITIQUE

The Critique ofPure Reason is complex and many-sided. Both its overall
message and its meaning for the subsequent history of philosophy defy
any easy summary. The Critique has perhaps most often been seen as
marking out a third way that combines the virtues, while avoiding the
pitfalls, of both the "rationalism" of Descartes and Leibniz and the
"empiricism" of Locke and Hume. This way of reading the Critique,
however, even though to some extent suggested by Kant himself, de­
pends on a simplified reading of the history of modern philosophy and
at the very least on an incomplete assessment of the strengths and weak­
nesses of Kant's modern predecessors. Less controversial is the obser­
vation that the Critique's main intention is to find a middle way between
traditional metaphysics, especially its attempts to bolster a theistic view
of the world with a priori rational arguments, and a skepticism that
would undercut the claims of modern natural science along with those
of religious metaphysics.
We see this clearly in the way that Kant defines the position of criti­
cal philosophy in contrast to dogmatism, empiricism, skepticism, and
indifferentism. He seeks to carve out for theoretical philosophy a sig­
nificant but limited domain, distinct from that of empirical knowledge
and the opinions of common sense, but excluding the exaggerated
claims that have brought metaphysics into disrepute. In this way, the
Critique of Pure Reason belongs to a main tradition in modern philoso­
phy, beginning with Descartes, that tries to provide an a priori philo­
sophical foundation for the methods and broad features of a modern
scientific view of nature by an examination of the suitability of human
cognitive faculties for the kind of knowledge of nature that modern sci­
ence aims to achieve. At the same time, Kant tries to save precisely what
the dogmatic metaphysicians cannot, by connecting the claims of reli­
gious metaphysics not to the sphere of theory but to the sphere of moral
practice, and, in the famous words of the second-edition preface, by
limiting knowledge in order to make room for faith (BXXX) . But Kant
tries to accomplish all these goals, especially the last, in an authentically
Enlightenment manner, always giving first place to our rational capacity
to reflect on our cognitive abilities and achievements, to correct them,
and to subject the pretensions of reason to self-limitation, so that human
reason itself retains ultimate authority over all matters of human knowl­
edge, belief, and action. The ultimate autonomy of human thought lies
in the fact that it neither can nor must answer to any authority outside
itself.
The originality of the Critique can be indicated by focusing on the
way it attempts simultaneously to resolve two of the most intractable
20

Introduction
problems of early modern philosophy, the simultaneous vindication of
the principle of universal causality and of the freedom of the human
will. The great idea of the Critique ofPure Reason is that the very thing
that explains the possibility of our knowledge of the fundamental
principles grounding a scientific view of nature is also the key to the
possibility of our freedom in both intention and action, which seems
threatened by the rule of causality in that natural world. Kant argues
that the principles of the scientific worldview can be known with cer­
tainty because they express the structure of our own thought. They are
therefore conditions of the possibility of our experience, which we im­
pose upon the raw data of sensation. Thus, there is a sense in which cer­
titude about the principles of science is possible only because of human
autonomy: we are not merely passive perceivers of sensible information
flowing into us from external objects, but also cognitive agents who
structure what we perceive in accordance with the necessary conditions
of our active thought. Thus Kant argues that we can be certain of the
fundamental principles of science - above all the universal law of causa­
tion, the assumption underlying all scientific inquiry that every event
has a cause and can therefore be explained in accordance with a law of
nature - precisely because this law is a condition of the possibility of the
thought that we must impose upon our perceptions in order to have any
experience at all.
In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the principle of causa­
tion had been put into ever more successful use by practicing scientists,
but at the same time doubt had been cast upon it by philosophers. First
the principle had been supported upon theological foundations by
Descartes and his follower Nicolas Malebranche, and then reduced to a
mere phenomenon, as by Leibniz, or finally exposed by Hume as sim­
ply the result of mere custom. Kant, however, argues that a genuine
necessary connection between events is required for their objective suc­
cession in time, and that the concept of causality in which this connec­
tion is expressed is imposed on experience by our own thought as an
indispensable condition of its possibility. The human understanding,
therefore, is the true lawgiver of nature, and the successes of modern
science are due to its conduct of its inquiries in accordance with a plan
whose ground lies a priori in the structure of human thought (B xii­
xviii). At the same time, nature is to be regarded as essentially an object
of human sensation and thinking, and the validity of the causal princi­
ple is to be restricted to the world as it appears under the conditions of
our experience of it. In this way, the same account that guarantees the
certitude of the principle of causation also guarantees the freedom of
the human will, which is precisely what was typically thought to be ex­
cluded by the universality of causation.
According to Kant, if we understand the principle of causality and the
21

Introduction
fundamental principles of the scientific worldview as products of our
own thought imposed upon experience, this leaves open the possibility
of a radical self-determination of human action when the human will is
considered not as it appears but as it is in itself. In later works, such as
the Critique of Practical Reason ( 1 788) and the Religion within the
Boundaries of Mere Reason ( 1 793), Kant completes this theory with the
further argument that only the inexorable awareness of our obligation
to live up to the moral law, which is given spontaneously by our own
reason and which we all acknowledge (even if only in the breach), can
prove the reality of our freedom, which is the necessary condition of the
possibility of the moral demand we make upon ourselves. Yet this fur­
ther argument presupposes the first Critique's argument that we cannot
ground the principles of natural science themselves without at the same
time revealing that their scope is limited to mere appearances.
Kant's bold attempt to resolve with one stroke two of the most press­
ing problems of modern philosophy has seldom been accepted by his
successors without qualification. Some feel that Kant's identification of
the basic principles of science with the fundamental principles of
human understanding itself betrays too much confidence in the specif­
ically Newtonian mechanistic physics that prevailed at his time, leaving
too little room for subsequent scientific developments, such as the the­
ory of general relativity and quantum mechanics. Others have felt that
Kant's reduction of the laws of science to the laws of human thought is
not an adequate account of the truly objective validity of science. Few
have felt comfortable with the idea that the possibility of freedom could
be defended by placing the real arena of human decision making behind
a veil of ignorance, and many have felt that the idea that human free­
dom is our ultimate value but that it can be realized only through ad­
herence to law is a strange and paradoxical one. Yet at the same time,
broad elements of Kant's philosophy have become indispensable and
therefore often almost invisible assumptions of the modern frame of
mind. No modern thinker can believe that the human mind is merely a
passive recorder of external fact, or a "mirror of nature."'9 But although
many hold that since we have no way of stepping outside the human
point of view, it may not be as easy as Kant thought to separate out our
subjective contributions to the constitution of nature, yet every modern
philosophy holds in some form or other the Kantian thesis that human
beings make an active contribution to their knowledge. And although
few defend human freedom through a rigid Kantian distinction be­
tween phenomenal appearance and noumenal reality, even fewer have
thought that the assumption of causal determinism in science precludes
conceiving of ourselves as agents who make decisions according to what
seem to us to be the most rational principles of value. Thus many have
accepted in some form the Kantian idea that there is a fundamental dif22

Introduction

ference between the standpoints of the actor and the spectator,20 and
that this difference is crucial to the solution of the problem of free will.
Even those who reject Kant's solutions to the problems of grounding
natural science and making sense of our moral agency must solve these
problems and find a way to avoid what they find objectionable in Kant's
solution to them. In this way, all modern thinkers are children of Kant,
whether they are happy or bitter about their paternity.
III.
THE EVOLUT I O N O F T H E

CRITI Q UE

The Critique of Pure Reason has often been represented as the product
of a violent revolution in Kant's thought that took place around
I 7 7 2 - a midlife crisis in which the forty-eight-year-old thinker re­
jected his previous adherence to the Leibnizian-Wolffian philosophy,
the systematic philosophy that Christian Wolff (I 679-I 754) had cre­
ated out of the brilliant fragments that were all that was then known of
the philosophy of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1 646-I 7 I 6) and that had
become the dominant philosophy in enlightened German universities
after the I 7 20S. Kant himself gave rise to this legend with several of his
own remarks, above all his comment in the introduction to his
Prolegomena to Any Futu1'e Metaphysics - the short work that Kant pub­
lished in 1 78 3 to try to overcome the initially indifferent or hostile re­
ception of the Critique - that "it was the recollection of David Hume
that many years ago first interrupted my dogmatic slumber and gave an
entirely different direction to my investigations in the field of spec­
ulative philosophy. "2! There were certainly major changes in Kant's
thought both before and after the publication of his inaugural disserta­
tion, De mundi sensibilis atque intelligibilis forma et principiis (On the
Form and Principles of the Sensible and Intelligible World) in I 770, the
last publication preceding the years of intense but unpublished work
leading up to the publication of the Critique in I 7 8 I . Nevertheless,
Kant has misled those who have supposed that all his work in the years
preceding this point was slumbering in Wolffian dogmatism, and that
he awoke from this slumber only through some sudden recollection of
the skepticism of David Hume ( I 7 I I-I 7 76).
In fact, Kant had been chipping away at fundamental tenets of the
Leibnizian-Wolffian synthesis at least since the publication of his first
exclusively philosophical work, his M.A. thesis Principiorum primorum
cognitionis metaphysicae nova dilucidatio (A New Elucidation of the First
Principles of Metaphysical Cognition) in I 7 5 5 . There were certainly
major developments in the content of Kant's philosophical views in the
period around I 769-70 leading to the publication of the inaugural dis­
sertation, and then further developments in Kant's doctrines and his
23

Introduction
conception of philosophical method in the period beginning in 1 7 7 2
and culminating in the publication of the Critique. Many of these were
revolutionary developments both in Kant's own thought and in the his­
tory of Western philosophy. Even so, the Critique ofPure Reason, as well
as the further "critical" works that were to follow it, have to be seen as
the product of a continuous evolution at least since 1 75 5 , a process in
which Kant never fully subscribed to the Wolffian orthodoxy and in
which he continued revising his position both substantively and
methodologically until he arrived at the Critique.
Moreover, even after the Critique was first published, Kant's thought
continued to evolve: as we will see below, there are major differences
between the first and second editions of the work (both presented in
their entirety in the present translation). Indeed, even after the publi­
cation of the second edition, Kant continued to revise and refine both
his views and his arguments, in published work such as the Critique of
Judgment and in the manuscripts on which he was still working at the
end of his life (later published as the Opus postumum).22 Further, it
should by no means be thought that Kant's mature philosophy, as first
expressed in the Critique ofPure Reason, represents an outright rejection
of the philosophy of his predecessors, above all of the original philoso­
phy of Leibniz. On the contrary, Kant's philosophy can be thought of
as an attempt to synthesize Leibniz's vision of the preestablished har­
mony of the principles of nature and the principles of grace3 with the
substance of Newtonian science and the moral and political insights of
Jean-Jacques Rousseau ( 1 7 1 2-1 778). To the extent that Kant was a
critic of the Leibnizian-Wolffian philosophy, his criticisms came not
only from Hume but even more from 'Volff's Pietist critic Christian
August Crusius (1 7 1 5- 1 7 7 5) . These critical forerunners led Kant to
transform Leibniz's vision of a harmonious world of monads under the
rule of God and Rousseau's vision of a social contract expressing a gen­
eral will into ideals of human reason, neither of which can simply be as­
serted to exist in well-founded cognitive judgments made within the
limits of human sensibility and understanding, but both of which can
and must represent the ultimate even if never completely attainable
goals of human theoretical and practical thought and conduct.
We cannot offer here a full account of Kant's intellectual develop­
ment. But we will comment briefly on a number of the works Kant pub­
lished through 1 770, in order to point out some of the ideas that were
incorporated into the Critique ofPure Reason as well as some that had to
be rejected or overcome before the Critique could take shape. We will
then comment equally briefly on some of the evidence for the develop­
ment of Kant's thought in the so-called "silent decade" between 1 7 70
and 1 7 8 1 . This discussion of the genesis of the Critique is provided to

24

Introduction
help interpret the intentions of the work as well as to cast some light on
the complexities of its organization and argumentation.
Nova dilucidatio (1 755). In his first treatise on metaphysics, Kant al­
ready took issue with some of the most fundamental tenets of the
Leibnizian-Wolffian philosophy, while expressing his continued alle­
giance to other aspects of it. Several of the most important criticisms
that Kant made in this first philosophical work will reappear in the
Critique. The most important critical points made in the Nova dilucida­
tio are four. First, Kant rejects the assumption, to which Wolff may have
been more clearly committed than Leibniz, that there is a "unique, ab­
solutely first, universal principle of all truths."24 What Kant argues here
is a logical point, that affirmative truths rest on the principle "whatever
is, is" and that negative truths rest on the principle "whatever is not, is
not."25 That is, he argues that the assumption that the negation of a true
proposition is false is itself a substantive presupposition of a logical sys­
tem and not something provable by any logical system itself. This is not
yet the argument that there are some truths that can be demonstrated
from adequate definitions by logic alone and others that require going
beyond logic, which will become the distinction between analytic and
synthetic judgments. But it shows that from the outset of his career Kant
was dubious of the supposition that all philosophical truth could in prin­
ciple be derived from a single principle that lay beneath Leibniz's the­
ory that all true propositions can be proved by the analysis of concepts.
Second, Kant rejected the proof of the principle of sufficient reason
offered by both Wolff and his disciple Baumgarten. According to Kant,
their proof was that if it were assumed that something did not have a
sufficient ground, then its sufficient ground would be nothing, which
would then mean that nothing was something;" 6 this is both circular, as­
suming precisely what is in question (that everything does have a
ground), and also a mere play on words. Kant's alternative argument is
that in every true proposition the subject must be determinate with re­
spect to any predicate that might be asserted of an object, so that there
must always be something that determines whether a given predicate is
true of it. 27 This is not adequate either, since it fails to see that nothing
more than the properties of an object are necessary to determine what
predicates should be asserted of it. But it already reveals Kant's charac­
teristic tendency to convert ontological questions into epistemological
questions - that is, the transformation of questions about what sorts of
things there must be into questions about the conditions under which
it is possible for us to make claims to knowledge about things. The de­
velopment of this tendency into a full-blown philosophical method will
be the key to the Critique of Pure Reason, in which, as Kant is to say,
"The proud name of ontology, which presumes to offer synthetic a pri-

25

Introduction

ori cognition of things in general in a systematic doctrine . . . must give
way to the modest one of a mere analytic of pure understanding"
(A 247/B 303) ·
Third, Kant rejected the argument which he was later famously to
dub the "ontological" argument for the existence of God. This was the
proof of St. Anselm, revived by Descartes and refined by Leibniz, that
the existence of God could be inferred from predicates necessarily in­
cluded in the concept of God. Kant's rejection of it was based on the
supposition that its proof is "ideal" rather than "real": that is, that it
only unpacks what we may have included in the concept of God but can­
not establish that there is any object answering to that concept.28 At this
stage, Kant offered an alternative argument that the real existence of
God must be accepted as the ground of all possibility. He was later to re­
ject this argument too in the Critique of Pure Reason,29 but his hostility
to the ontological argument and his analysis of its defect were to remain
essentially unchanged. His criticism of the ontological argument was
another precursor of the Critique of Pure Reason's foundational distinc­
tion between analytic and synthetic judgments. In the Critique, Kant
will argue that all substantive truths in mathematics, physical science,
and philosophy itself, although necessarily true and knowable inde­
pendently of appeal to any particular experience (what he will call "a
priori"), go beyond what can be derived from the mere analysis of con­
cepts, and therefore require the discovery of a whole new method of
thought beyond the method of analysis employed by his predecessors
Leibniz, Wolff, and Baumgarten.
Finally, in the Nova dilucidatio Kant rejects the basic principle of the
monadology maintained by Leibniz and, following him, Baumgarten.
This is the principle that everything true of a substance is true in virtue
of the inherent nature of that substance itself, so that what would ap­
pear to be real interactions between substances are only reflections of
the harmonious plan God has chosen to follow as the creator of all sub­
stances in a world that is the best of all possible ones precisely because
it is harmonious. Kant maintains what he calls the "Principle of Suc­
cession," that "No change can happen to substances except insofar as
they are connected with other substances; their reciprocal dependency
on each other determines their reciprocal changes of state. "30 Kant used
this principle to argue for the system of "physical influx," which his
teacher Martin Knutzen ( 1 7 1 3 - 1 7 5 1) had employed against the mon­
adology. The argument for a system of real interaction among all phys­
ical objects in space and time was to be a crucial part of the "principles
of empirical thought" for which Kant would argue in the Critique.
Further, Kant also derived from this "principle of succession" a special
argument that all changes among perceptions would have to be explained
as due to changes in bodies, and thus a proof of the "real existence of
26

Introduction

bodies."F Changed from an ontological to an epistemological key, this
argument would become the basis of the "Refutation of Idealism" in the
second edition of the Critique ofPure Reason.
So Kant's first piece of philosophy already contained some of Kant's
most characteristic criticisms of his predecessors as well as some of the
substantive conclusions of his mature work. What was still needed was
a new philosophical method that could get him beyond his own still
shaky arguments for these conclusions to a totally new foundation for
them. That would take at least two more decades to discover.
Before leaving the Nova dilucidatio, however, we should also mention
several points at which Kant still agreed with his predecessors, above all
Leibniz, and that would only subsequently come in for serious criti­
cism. The first point concerns Kant's early treatment of the freedom of
the will, to which he devoted an extensive dialogue within the Nova
dilucidatioY At this stage, Kant recognized only the two traditional al­
ternatives of determinism, according to which any event, including a
human action, is entirely determined by an antecedent sequence of
events, which in the case of a human action may go all the way back to
earlier involuntary events in the agent's life or even to events prior to
that life, and indeterminism, according to which a free human choice is
in no way determined by any prior history. The latter position, which
Kant called the "indifference of equilibrium," was represented for him
by Crusius,33 and firmly rejected on the ground that this position would
undermine any reasonable conception of responsibility. Instead, he
opted for Leibniz's position, which was a form of determinism now usu­
ally known as "compatibilism" : all events, including human actions,
admit of causal explanation, but some human actions are due to an inner
rather than an outer cause or principle, and among those some are due
to the representation of the chosen action as what would be best for the
agent to do. Actions caused in this way, even though they might be nec­
essary and predictable, are still entitled to be called spontaneous, vol­
untary, or free.34 By the time of the Critique ofPractical Reason, Kant was
to reject this Leibnizian conception of freedom as the "freedom of a
turnspit,"35 and it was to be a fundamental task of the Critique of Pure
Reason, not yet foreseen in 1 7 5 5 , to make way for a third alternative be­
tween traditional determinism and indeterminism. Kant was to do this
by means of his "transcendental idealism," his distinction between the
necessary appearance of things to human cognition and how those
things, including human agents themselves, might be in themselves:
this would allow him to reconcile the Leibnizian and Crusian positions
by maintaining the Leibnizian position as the truth about appearances
or "phenomena" while holding that the Crusian position might be true
about things in themselves or "noumena."
The second point concerns another retention of Leibnizian theory.
27

Introduction
This is what Kant calls the "Principle of Coexistence," or the thesis that
"Finite substances do not, in virtue of their existence alone, stand in a
relationship with each other, nor are they linked together by any inter­
action at all, except insofar as the common principle of their existence,
namely the divine understanding, maintains them in a state of harmony
in their reciprocal relations."3 6 Even though the rejection of this prin­
ciple follows from his "Principle of Succession," Kant did not yet rec­
ognize this, and would continue to maintain this part of Leibnizian
metaphysics through the inaugural dissertation, even though that work
would reject fundamental aspects of Leibniz's theory of space and time
and introduce Kant's own mature theory of space and time. It would not
be until the Critique ofPure Reason itself that Kant would recognize that
thoroughgoing interaction among physical objects is a necessary condi­
tion of the unity of our own spatiotemporal experience, and that the
unity of the physical world admits of no other ground than the unity of
our experience; coming to this recognition would be one of the major
accomplishments of the I 77 os leading up to the Critique.
The philosophical works of 1762-6+ Around the time of the Nova
dilw:idatio, Kant published two other works in natural science that would
help to provide a foundation for his later philosophy. These are the
Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens (1 755) and the

Metaphysicae cum geometria junctae usus in philosophia naturalis, cuius
Specimem I continet Monadologiam Physicam (The Employment in Natu­
ral Philosophy of Metaphysics combined with Geometry, of which Sam­
ple I contains the Physical Monadology) (1 756). However, the next
period of major philosophical publication for Kant was the years 1 762
to 1 764, during which time Kant published four philosophical works all
of which are important stepping stones to the Critique of Pure Reason.
Three of these works appear to have been completed in the fall of 1 762,
possibly in this order: the False Subtlety of the Four Syllogistic Figures,
published in 1 762; The Only Possible Basisfor a Demonstration of the Exis­
tence ofGod, published in 1 763; and the Inquiry concerning the Distinctness
ofthe Principles ofNatural Theology and Morality, the second-prize winner
in a competition held by the Berlin Academy of Sciences, in which an
"Essay on Evidence" by Moses Mendelssohn ( 1 7 2 9-1 785) won first
prize. Finally, the Attempt to Introduce the Concept ofNegative Magnitudes
into Philosophy was completed and published by the summer of 1 763.
The essay on False Subtlety, which is primarily concerned to effect
a simplification of the many classes of syllogism recognized in
Aristotelian logic, would seem to contribute the least to the emergence
of the Critique of Pure Reason. But in its "Concluding Reflection" Kant
touches on one theme that will be crucial for both the formulation as
well as the solution of virtually all the philosophical problems dealt with
in the Critique. This is the claim that the fundamental notion in formal
28

Introduction

logic and in the analysis of the powers of the human capacity for cog­
nition is the notion ofjudgment. Concepts, he argues, which link pred­
icates to one another, can become distinct only by means of judgments;
and inferences, which might have been thought to call upon additional
powers of mind beyond the power of judgment, are in fact complex or
iterated judgments)7 Thus Kant concludes that "understanding and rea­
son, that is to say, the faculty of cognizing distinctly and the faculty of
syllogistic reasoning, are not different fundamentalfaculties. Both consist
in the capacity to judge . . . "38
The recognition that judgment is the fundamental form of all cogni­
tive acts will be crucial to the Critique in three ways: Kant will formu­
late the problem of the very possibility of philosophy as the problem of
the possibility of synthetic a priori judgment, or the problem of how
judgments can go beyond what can be derived from the mere analysis
of concepts yet also claim universal and necessary validity. He will argue
that the necessary conditions for the application of categories derived
from the logical forms of judgment to the spatiotemporal form of
human experience are the source of all those synthetic a priori judg­
ments that theoretical (as contrasted to practical or moral) philosophy
can actually prove. And he will argue, in the "Transcendental Dialectic"
of the first Critique, that the fundamental illusion of traditional meta­
physics is to think that human reason gives direct theoretical insight
into the constitution of things as they are in themselves instead of sim­
ply concatenating simpler judgments of the understanding into the
more complex judgments we call syllogisms or inferences. Kant's insis­
tence on the primacy of judgment in human thought is a first step to­
ward all these critical theses.
In a longer work, indeed a small book, The Only Possible Basis for a
Demonstration of the Existence of God, Kant's thought advanced toward
the Critique from a different direction. The argument of the book di­
vides into two main parts. In the first section, as the title suggests, Kant
discusses proofs of the existence of God. On the one hand, he refines
his original criticism of the ontological argument, and adds to it criti­
cisms of two other traditional arguments, the argument from the con­
tingency of the world to the necessity of its cause, which had been
popularized by Leibniz and which Kant was to dub the "cosmological"
argument, and the argument from the order of the world to an intelli­
gent author of it, or the argument from design, which was widely pop­
ular among eighteenth-century thinkers and which Kant was to call the
"physico-theological" argument.39 On the other hand, Kant refines and
extends his own argument that the existence of God can be demon­
strated as an actual and necessary condition of the existence of any other
possibility, an argument that appeals to the premise that it would be im­
possible to deny that anything is possible.40 From the concept of God
29

Introduction

as the necessary ground of possibility, Kant then proceeds to derive tra­
ditional predicates of God such as uniqueness, simplicity, immutability,
and indeed even the claim that the necessary being is a mind.4'
The introduction of God as the ground Qf all possibility must have
seemed to Kant logically sounder than the ontological argument and the­
ologically more orthodox than the Leibnizian conception, on which the
power of God in the creation of the universe is constrained by the an­
tecedent existence of determinate possible worlds. But in the Critique of
Pure Reason Kant was ultimately to reject this argument as well as the
three traditional ones, and to argue that both the existence and predicates
of God could only be demonstrated on moral grounds, as practical be­
liefs rather than theoretical dogmas (A 8 r o-r 6 / B 8 3 8-44; A 8 2 8-9 /
B 856-7). Nevertheless, the underlying idea of Kant's argument, that a
genuine or "real possibility" is not established just by demonstrating that
a concept is free from contradiction but must have some sort of affirma­
tive ground in actual existence, was remarkably deep-seated in Kant's
thought, and would manifest itself again not just in the structure of
Kant's theoretical philosophy but at crucial points in his practical philos­
ophy as well.
The second main section of the Only Possible Basis shows Kant's early
concern to find a proper characterization of scientific laws of nature, and
reveals that Kant's complex view of teleology, or final causes, which
seems to be a late accretion to the Critique of Pure Reason, touched on
only in the appendix to the "Transcendental Dialectic" (A 642-704 /
B 670-73 2) and fully developed only in the Critique ofJudgment, was ac­
tually a longstanding part of his thought. Against the background of the
debate between occasionalism and preestablished harmony, Kant argues
that God's purposes for the world would be expressed through unchang­
ing natural laws valid throughout its entire history, and not through any
miraculous episodic interventions: "Where nature operates in accor­
dance with necessary laws, there will be no need for God to correct the
course of events by direct intervention; for, in virtue of the necessity of
the effects that occur in accordance with the order of nature, that which
is displeasing to God cannot occur."42 Thus Kant argues "That in the
procedure of purified philosophy there prevails a rule which, even if it is
not formally stated, is nonetheless always observed in practice . . . that in
investigating the causes of certain effects one must pay careful attention
to maintaining the unity of nature as far as possible."43
Here Kant defined an ideal of human knowledge that was to be cen­
tral to the Critique ofPure Reason and all of his subsequent works, even
as its theological foundation in a conception of God became ever more
attenuated. To have knowledge of the events of an objective world be­
yond one's own consciousness is to subsume those events under causal
laws, and to have knowledge of causal laws is to conceive of those laws
30

Introduction

as themselves part of a system of laws that, if not actually created by
God, can nevertheless only be conceived by us as if they had been cre­
ated by an intelligence like but more powerful than ours.44 Though
Kant did not yet see how much effort this would involve, his task in the
Critique of Pure Reason and subsequent works would be precisely to
show that knowledge of the "unity of nature" or of constant laws of na­
ture is the necessary condition of the unity of our own experience, and
to explain how knowledge of such laws of nature itself is possible.
Kant's thought about the problem of causal laws would be advanced
further in the last of the four key works of 1 762-6 3 , the essay on
Negative Magnitudes. But before we turn to that, we will consider the
different steps in the direction of the Critique that Kant took in the
third of these works, the Inquiry concerning the Distinctness of the
Principles of Natural Theology and Morality. Kant wrote this work in
the late fall of 1 762 and submitted it to the Academy of Sciences in
Berlin by I January 176 3 , the deadline for the Academy's competition
on the question of whether metaphysics, conceived to include natural
theology and ethics, had the same prospects for certitude as mathemat­
ics and could use the same method. The Academy, still dominated by
Wolffians, preferred Moses Mendelssohn's elegant restatement of the
fundamental tenets of Wolffianism for the first prize, but recognized
the merits of Kant's essay with an honorable mention and publication
along with Mendelssohn's essay (which did not take place until I 764).
In the rationalist tradition, Mendelssohn argued for the similarity of
the methods of mathematics and philosophy - although with a twist,
the suggestion that the certitude of metaphysics is even greater than
that of mathematics. In an account of the epistemology of mathematics
that would still be acceptable to many philosophers, he argued that the
proof of mathematical theorems from their premises depends solely on
the application of logical principles to mathematical concepts, but that
the truth of mathematical propositions is an empirical matter, depend­
ing upon the incontestable but still observational fact that the basic
concepts of our mathematics fit our experience. Mendelssohn then held
that metaphysical argumentation proceeds for the most part along the
same lines as mathematical proof, with the one difference that in two
key cases the connection of the formal system of proof to reality does
not have to be made empirically but is also secured on purely concep­
tual grounds. These two cases are the metaphysics of the soul (what
Kant would later label "rational psychology") where the Cartesian cog­
ito proves the existence of the soul in a non-empirical way, and the
metaphysics of God (or "rational theology"), where Mendelssohn ac­
cepted the ontological argument as proving the existence of God from
the mere concept of God. Since in these two paradigmatic parts of phi­
losophy existence claims could be proved without recourse even to the
31

Introduction
most secure observation, Mendelssohn judged philosophy to have the
potential for even greater certainty than mathematics.45
Although he wrote without prior knowledge of Mendelssohn's essay,
Kant was of course familiar with the Wolffian background on which
Mendelssohn was drawing, and in criticizing the methodological as­
sumptions of Wolffianism more firmly than he had ever done before,
Kant wrote an essay diametrically opposed to that of his competitor.
This essay takes major steps toward the position of the Critique ofPure
Reason, although crucial differences still remain. Kant's most radical de­
parture from prevailing orthodoxy and his biggest step toward the
Critique comes in his account of mathematical certainty. Instead of
holding that mathematics proceeds by the two-front process of analyz­
ing concepts on the one hand and confirming the results of those analy­
ses by comparison with our experience on the other hand, Kant argues
that in mathematics definitions of concepts, no matter how similar they
may seem to those current in ordinary use, are artificially constructed
by a process which he for the first time calls "synthesis," and that math­
ematical thinking gives itself objects "in concreto" for these definitions,
or constructs objects for its own concepts from their definitions. Thus,
whatever exactly the concept of a cone might signify in ordinary dis­
course, in mathematics the concept of a cone "is the product of the ar­
bitrary representation of a right-angled triangle which is rotated on
one of its sides."46 Thus, we can have certain knowledge of the defini­
tion because we ourselves construct it; and we can have certain knowl­
edge that the definition correctly applies to its objects because the true
objects of mathematics are nothing but objects constructed, however
that may be, in accordance with the definitions that we ourselves have
constructed.
In philosophy, however, things are quite different. Philosophy does
not begin from self-constructed and well-defined definitions, but from
concepts, which are already given but are also given in a confused man­
ner. Complete definitions of philosophical concepts come, if they come
at all, at the end of philosophical inquiry. In fact, Kant insists, the goal
of defining concepts - so central to the academic philosophy of the
time - is not the goal of philosophy at all. Instead, Kant compares the
proper method for philosophy to what he takes to be the method "in­
troduced by Newton into natural science" : obtaining certainty not
about complete definitions but about "those characteristic marks that
are certainly to be found in the concept of any general property" and
can lead to "judgments about the object that are true and completely
certain. " The certainty of such judgments has to be grounded in some­
thing other than definitions, in the case of metaphysics in "an immedi­
ate and self-evident inner consciousness."47 Such sources of evidence
then have to be carefully analyzed for their implications , so while
32

Introduction
"geometers acquire their concepts by means of synthesis . . . Philoso­
phers can acquire their concepts only by means of analysis - and that
completely changes the method of thought."48 Further, while from the
definitions introduced into mathematics determinate objects can be
constructed, this is not the case in philosophy, where the objects of
knowledge are not our own constructs, and where our concepts give us
only abstract and indeterminate knowledge of objects rather than de­
terminate and concrete objects themselves. Thus "in mathematics, the
object is considered under sensible signs in concreto, whereas in philos­
ophy the object is only ever considered in universal abstracted con­
cepts. "49 So mathematical knowledge is certain because it is grounded
on definitions of our own construction and fully determinate because
concrete objects can be constructed from those definitions, whereas
philosophical knowledge is less certain because it is dependent on the
analysis of given concepts and less determinate because it yields only
general judgments about objects.
Kant illustrates the differences between mathematical and philo­
sophical method with three examples. First, following Crusius, he ar­
gues that metaphysics depends not only on two distinct formal or
logical principles (as Kant had already argued in 1 7 5 5), but also on
many "first material principles of human reason" that are "indemon­
strable," such as "a body is compound. "50 Second, he reiterates his argu­
ment of the Only Possible Basis that from the argument for the existence
of God as the ground of all possibility other predicates of God can be
derived - this is supposed to show how from a certain though incom­
plete consciousness of some of a thing's characteristics other certain
judgments can be derived - but also adds that in further judgments,
about God's justice and goodness, only an "approximation to certainty"
is possibleY Finally, about morality Kant argues that although we may
easily be able to identify some formal principles of obligation, such as "I
ought to advance the total greatest perfection," such principles are use­
less without material principles of obligation, which tell us what the ex­
tension of an abstract concept like perfection actually is - what courses
of action actually contribute to perfection - and such material princi­
ples are themselves indemonstrableY
Kant is here clearly working his way toward several of the central
ideas of the Critique ofPure Reason. Although he does not yet speak of
analytic or synthetic judg;ments, his distinction between analytic and
synthetic methods is leading in that direction: whereas traditionally this
contrast between methods was merely a contrast between direction in
causal or syllogistic inference,53 for Kant the difference has become one
between constructing concepts or their definitions (the synthetic
method) and unpacking concepts to get to definitions (the analytical
method). This will lead to the distinction between judgments that con33

Introduction
struct fuller concepts by amplifying what is given (synthetic judgments)
and those that merely explicate given concepts by showing what predi­
cates they already contain (analytic judgments) (see A6-7 I B I O-I I ) .
Further, Kant's argument that both metaphysics and morality depend
upon indemonstrable material principles, and not just formal or logical
principles, is clearly preparing the way for the fundamental tenet of his
mature theoretical and practical philosophy that the basic propositions
of both are synthetic yet a priori judgments. But Kant's conception of
philosophical method in the Inquiry has not yet caught up to this recog­
nition: he is at a loss to explain how we know these "indemonstrable"
principles when the method of philosophy is still considered to be ana­
lytic, rather than synthetic like the method of mathematics. Before
Kant's mature work could be written, he would have to discover a philo­
sophical method that could yield "material" or synthetic judgments.
This would be the philosophical work of the I 7 70S that would finally
pave the way for the Critique of Pure Reason.
Once Kant takes this further step, however, the contrast between
mathematics and philosophy provided in the Inquiry will have to be re­
vised. The difference between mathematics and philosophy will no
longer simply be that the former uses the synthetic method and the lat­
ter the analytical method. On Kant's mature account, both mathemat­
ics and philosophy must use a synthetic method. This does not mean
that the account of the Inquiry will be completely surrendered, but
rather that the difference between the concrete constructions of math­
ematics and the abstract results of philosophy will have to be recast as a
difference within the synthetic method: The use of the synthetic
method in mathematics will yield synthetic yet certain results about de­
terminate objects, whereas the use of the synthetic method in philosophy
will yield synthetic yet certain principles for the experience of objects, or
what Kant will call "schemata" of the pure concepts of the understand­
ing, "the true and sole conditions for providing [these concepts] with a
relation to objects" (A I 46 / B 1 85). Thus the Inquiry already contains key
aspects of Kant's mature theory of mathematics, but does not yet see
that both mathematics and philosophy must use synthetic methods.
Once Kant sees this, however, then the Inquiry's distinction between the
concrete results of mathematics and the abstract results of philosophy
can be retained as the difference between the construction of determi­
nate mathematical objects and the construction of philosophical princi­
ples for the possibility of the experience of objects in general.S4
The last of the essays of 1 762-63, the Attempt to Introduce the Concept
of Negative Magnitudes into Philosophy, focuses on a substantive rather
than a methodological issue. Kant considers a variety of relationships
that must be construed as real opposition rather than logical contradic­
tion: positive and negative numbers, motion in opposite directions,
34

Introduction
pleasure and pain. Asserting a proposition and its contradictory results
in a contradiction, which asserts nothing at all. Combining equal mo­
tions in opposite directions does not result in a logical nonentity, but in
a state of rest that is a real state of affairs. So all sorts of sciences need
room for the concept of positive and negative magnitudes, not just the
logical notion of contradiction. Kant's underlying thought then, already
hinted at in the last part of the Inquiry, is that the formal, logical laws
of identity and contradiction are not sufficient principles for knowledge
of the objective world, and that philosophy must find room for mater­
ial principles. He concludes by noting that the relation between cause
and effect, although it is not a relation of opposition, is also a real rather
than a logical relation, and cannot be justified by any mere analysis of
concepts showing that the consequence is contained in the ground.
This raises the fundamental question, "How am I to understand the
fact that, because something is, something else is?"55 The problem
of understanding real opposition, real causation, and more generally
real relations becomes the fundamental substantive problem of theoret­
ical philosophy. Kant rejects Crusius's attempt to solve this problem, 56
and makes no mention of Hume's formulation of an empirical solution
to this problem, which was already available to him in the German
translation of the first Enquiry ( I 755). But he concludes with these
prophetic words:
Let us see whether we can offer a distinct explanation of how it is that, because
something is, something else i.f canceled, and whether we can say anything more
than I have already said on the matter, namely that it simply does not take place
in virtue of the law of contradiction. I have reflected upon the nature of our
cognition with respect to our judgment concerning grounds and consequences,
and one day I shall present a detailed account of the fruits of my reflections. 57
This day was not to come until the publication of the Critique of Pure
Reason in May I 78 I ; Kant had identified a problem to which he did not
yet possess a solution. But he clearly was not waiting for a recollection
of Burne to awake him from dogmatic slumbers.
Kant published three more significant works during the 1 760s: the
Observations on the Beautiful and Sublime in 1 764; Dreams ofa Spirit-Seer
in 1 766, a devastating critique of the pretensions of Swedenborgian
spiritualism as an extreme example of metaphysics that also contained
some interesting anticipations of his later moral theory; and a short
essay, On the Differentiation of Directions in Space, in 1 768, which used
the existence of incongruent counterparts (for example, right- and left­
handed gloves or screws) to argue for a Newtonian conception of ab­
solute space against a Leibnizian conception of space as a repre­
sentation of a system of relations among objects that could in principle
be captured by purely conceptual relations, which would supposedly
35

Introduction

leave out differences of direction between otherwise identical objects
such as gloves or screws. Once again, Kant was worrying about the dif­
ference between logical and real relations, but in this brief essay he did
not yet have his own theory of how we could know something like ab­
solute space, or draw any general philosophical conclusions from this
specific issue about the nature of space.
The Inaugural Dissertation (1770). This was to change in Kant's
next work, also the last of his publications on the way to the Critique be­
fore the "silent decade" of the I 7 7os. This was Kant's inaugural disser­
tation, De Mundi Sensibilis atque Intelligibilis Forma et Principiis (On the
Form and Principles of the Sensible and Intelligible World), defended
and published in August 1 7 70, after Kant's long-awaited ascension to
the chair of logic and metaphysics in Konigsberg on March 3 I of that
year. The work is presumed to have been written between March and
August, although Kant had begun to mention the possibility of writing
a systematic work on new foundations for metaphysics as early as 1 765,
and his publisher had even listed a forthcoming book on The Proper
Method ofMetaphysics in the autumn book fair catalogue of that year.58
But whatever plan he may have had at that time had come to naught,
and it was not until occasion demanded it in 1 7 70 that Kant wrote an­
other systematic work, though as it turned out an essay on the substance
rather than the method of metaphysics.
This work is a milestone in Kant's progress toward the Critique of
Pure Reason because it introduces the fundamental distinction between
the sensible and the intellectual capacities of the mind, the capacity, on
the one hand, to have singular and immediate representations of par­
ticular objects by means of the senses, which Kant henceforth calls "in­
tuition";59 and, on the other hand, the capacity to form abstract and
general representations, or concepts, by means of the intellect. Further,
as his title suggests, Kant argues that our capacities for intuition and
conceptualization each have their own characteristic forms, principles,
or laws, which can be known by us and which constitute the basis of
metaphysical cognition. Moreover, Kant argues, introducing the doc­
trine that he will later name "transcendental idealism," the "laws of in­
tuitive cognition, " 60 or the laws of the representation of things by means
of the senses, characterize how things necessarily appear to us, but not
how they actually are in themselves. 6 1 By contrast, at this stage, al­
though not later, Kant holds that intellectual representations of things,
or concepts, present things "as they are." Thus, sensibility and intellect
present us with two different accounts of objects: "phenomena," things
as they appear to the senses, and "noumena," things as they really are
and are known to be by the intellect (nous).62
On this account, sensibility and the intellect operate essentially inde­
pendently of one another. The fundamental stimulus to this radical dis36

Introduction
tinction seems to have been Kant's discovery, perhaps made in 1 769,
that several paradoxes about the infinite (long known and prominently
discussed by a number of eighteenth-century philosophers),6 3 such as
the conflict between the supposition that time appears to have no be­
ginning yet any object and thus any universe of objects must have had
a beginning, could be resolved by distinguishing between the forms of
intuition as forms of appearance, on the one hand, and the forms of
thought as the forms of reality, on the other: thus it could be argued, for
example, that there is no contradiction between the sensible appearance
that time has no beginning and the reality, known by the intellect, that
all existence must have some beginning, for sensibility and intellect do
not present the same things. In the Critique ofPure Reason, Kant was to
call the set of such paradoxes, to be resolved by the distinction between
phenomena and noumena, the antinomies of pure reason.
However, there is also a crucial difference between Kant's treatment
of the antinomies in 1 7 70 and his eventual treatment of them in 1 78 I .
This i s connected with an equally fundamental difference i n Kant's
conception of the relation between the two basic mental capacities of
intuition and conceptualization in the inaugural dissertation and the
Critique. In the dissertation, Kant supposes that the intellect alone re­
veals the true nature of reality, and that the antinomies are to be re­
solved by preventing any limits inherent in the laws of sensibility from
being misconstrued as limits on purely intellectual knowledge of real­
ity. But he has in fact no adequate account of the role of concepts in
knowledge of ordinary objects in space and time, and once he real­
izes - as he will after 1 7 7 2 - that concepts of the understanding must
be used in conjunction with the intuitions or data supplied by sens­
ibility to account for the possibility of such knowledge, not indepen­
dently, then he will also have to revise his account of the antinomies.
He will have to revise his resolution of them by arguing that there can
be no knowledge of any spatiotemporal reality at all beyond the limits
of sensibility, although in cases where concepts of the understanding
can be used to formulate coherent conceptions of non-spatiotemporal
entities, above all God, there may be coherent belief, even if not any

knowledge.
In sum, in the inaugural dissertation Kant introduces his fundamen­
tal distinction between intuitions and concepts, and uses that distinc­
tion for a resolution of the antinomies, but does not yet realize that
knowledge can arise only from the conjoint use of intuitions and con­
cepts to yield a unified experience. Once he comes to that realization,
he will have to transform his resolution of the antinomies, surrendering
the view that sensibility gives us knowledge of appearances and the in­
tellect metaphysical knowledge of things as they are in themselves.
Only then will the way be open for Kant's fully mature position that the
37

Introduction
limits of knowledge leave room for certain beliefs that cannot become
knowledge but that can be justified on practical grounds. 64
We will describe the contents of the inaugural dissertation in some
detail, since it will be helpful in reading the Critique to see exactly what
Kant could retain from the earlier work and what had to be fundamen­
tally revised. Kant signals the importance of the problem of the antino­
mies from the outset, opening the work with the statement that "just as
analysis does not come to an end until a part is reached which is not a
whole, that is to say a SIMPLE, so likewise synthesis does not come to
an end until we reach a whole which is not a part, that is to say a
WORLD."6s He then argues that since the world of appearances is
given with space and time as its form, and space and time are continu­
ous quantities, there can be "no limit" in analysis or the "regression from
the whole to the parts" nor in synthesis or composition, "the progression
from the parts to the given whole,"66 and thus no satisfaction of the
opening definition of a simple and a world; but since the pure concepts
of the intellect give us access to a realm of things with their own princi­
ples of form, where parts are not spatiotemporal regions and the princi­
ple of composition is not that of spatiotemporal extension, but where
instead the parts are substances and the principle of composition is the
common dependence of substances upon God, the conditions for meta­
physical knowledge of both simples and a single world of them can be
satisfied. The remainder of the work is then divided into a fuller state­
ment of the distinctions between intuition and concept and phenomena
and noumena (Section 2); separate expositions of the fundamental forms
of intuition or sensibility (Section 3) and of the laws of understanding
(Section 4); and the concluding argument that the limits of sensibility
must not be mistaken to preclude metaphysical knowledge through the
intellect (Section 5). Section 3 is taken over into the Critique of Pure
Reason without essential modification, but Section 4 will be radically re­
vised by the mature theory of the function of the understanding in the
Critique, and once that revision is made there must also be fundamental
revision in the treatment of the antinomies in Section 5 .
In Section 2 , Kant first introduces his distinction between sensi­
bility, which is characterized as the "receptivity of the subject in virtue of
which it is possible for the subject's own representative state to be af­
fected in a definite way by the presence of some object," and what he
here calls "intelligence (or rationality)," "the faculty of a subject in virtue
of which it has the power to represent things which cannot by their own
quality come before the senses";6 7 he also calls this faculty "intellect"
(intellectus).68 Next, he argues "that things which are thought sensitively
are representations of things as they appear, while things which are in­
tellectual are representations of things as they are."69 Kant's reasons
for this momentous claim are far from clear. He suggests two reasons:
38

Introduction
first, that "whatever in cognition is sensitive" should be considered as
"dependent upon the subject insofar as the subject is capable of this or
that modification by the presence of objects," where it is assumed that
different subjects may be modified by or respond to the same objects in
different ways, and thus cannot all represent the objects as they really
are; and second, that " objects do not strike the senses in virtue of their
form or aspect," but only in virtue of their matter, thus "the form
of . . . representation . . . is not an outline or any kind of schema of the
object, but only a certain law, which is inherent in the mind and by
means of which it coordinates for itself that which is sensed from the
presence of the object."70
Next, Kant argues that there are two uses of the intellect, a "logical"
use in which it subordinates concepts, "no matter whence they are
given," to one another in accord with logical rules (e.g., "the principle
of contradiction"), and a "real" use, in which concepts themselves,
"whether of things or relations," are given. Kant suggests that the logi­
cal use of intellect, or " the reflective cognition, which arises when sev­
eral appearances are compared by the intellect" to produce empirical
concepts, is sufficient to transform mere appearance into experience. 7'
Finally, he argues that in its real use the intellect produces concepts,
such as "possibility, existence, necessity, substance, cause, etc.," which
"never enter into any sensory representation as parts," but that can in­
stead be used "dogmatically" to lead to a "paradigm" of "NOUME­
NAL PERFECTION," which in the theoretical context is God and in
the practical context is moral perfectionJ2 Thus in its merely logical
use, intellect supplies no unique concepts of its own, and merely orga­
nizes data supplied by the senses into experience or empirical knowl­
edge; in its real use, it does supply original concepts of its own, and uses
them to know a non-sensible reality as it really is or to define a non-sen­
sible goal for our action.
This series of claims throws light on doctrines of the subsequent
Critique, but also raises problems that the later work will need to solve.
First, the characterization of sensibility as a passive power of the mind
and intellect as active will remain central to many arguments in the
Critique;73 but Kant will also subsume sensibility under the "cognitive
faculties" (Erkenntnisvermiigen) generally, and since the term "faculty"
(jacultas, for which Kant's German equivalent is Vermiigen) implies ac­
tivity, this means that there is an active element in sensibility as well,
which fits Kant's claim that the form of sensibility is in fact supplied by
the mind. So it will be important to see that even sensibility has both a
passive and an active element: our senses are acted upon by external ob­
jects, but we act upon the sensations so induced to give them form.
Further, the two arguments that Kant here gives for his claim that
sensibility represents the mere appearance of things - his eventual
39

Introduction
"transcendental idealism" - are both problematic. His first argument is
that different subjects might represent outer objects in different ways;
but from this it does not follow that all those subjects represent objects
other than they actually are - maybe there is one sort of subject who
represents objects correctly while others do not, and maybe indeed that
one sort of subject is us. His second argument is that the form of the
representation of objects cannot represent the objects as they are in
themselves because this form represents a "law inherent in the mind. "
But there are two issues here: first, there i s a n unstated and unargued
assumption that a "law inherent in the mind" cannot also represent a
form inherent in objects themselves; and second, since intellectual con­
cepts also are laws inherent in the mind used to give form to our repre­
sentations of things, it would seem to follow that they too give
knowledge of objects only as they appear to us and not as they really
are. We will see that Kant supplies further arguments for transcenden­
tal idealism both later in the dissertation and in the Critique; whether
these arguments are independent of the initial assumptions that what­
ever is receptive and whatever is formal are inherently subjective rather
than objectively valid will be an important question.
Finally, there are major questions about Kant's characterization of the
"intellect" here. As we saw, he supposes that we need only the "logical"
use of the intellect to generate empirical concepts and experience out of
mere appearance, and the "real" use of the intellect, in which it gener­
ates non-empirical concepts, is sufficient to furnish knowledge of non­
empirical objects. Both assumptions will be rejected after 1 772. On the
one hand, Kant will recognize that non-empirical concepts generated
by the intellect - in fact, a list of non-empirical concepts including
those mentioned here such as "possibility, existence, necessity, sub­
stance, cause, etc." - must be applied to the data given by sensibility in
order to arrive at experience or empirical knowledge; mere abstraction
and reflective comparison will not suffice for this purpose. On the other
hand, Kant will also conclude that those concepts by themselves cannot
be used to obtain theoretical knowledge about objects we do not sense,
such as God, although they can ultimately be used to form coherent
conceptions of such objects that can be validated on moral grounds.
These profound revisions in Kant's thought will call for terminologi­
cal revisions as well. Here Kant speaks of a single faculty, "intelligence"
or "intellect," which has both a real and a logical use. In the Critique,
Kant will distinguish between understanding and reason as two parts or
perhaps better aspects of the higher cognitive faculties of the mind.74
Understanding will be the source of non-empirical categories or "pure
concepts of the understanding" that must be applied to data furnished by
the senses to yield empirical knowledge, and thus have a real use but only
for empirical objects; further, since Kant continues to believe that sensi40

Introduction
bility furnishes mere appearance, the real use of the understanding will
also be confined to appearance. Reason will be a further faculty, which
has a legitimate logical use insofar as it links judgments constituted with
concepts of the understanding into more complex, inferential structures,
but has a mistaken real use if it is thought that either by means of infer­
ence or by the use of concepts of the understanding without accompa­
nying data from sensibility it can obtain knowledge of non-empirical
objects such as God. The only legitimate real use of reason will be to for­
mulate conceptions of non-empirical objects that may be validated by
moral considerations; that is, reason has a real use only as practical rea­
son. Thus, reason will be denied the power of introducing a "paradigm"
of "noumenal perfection" on theoretical grounds, though it will retain
the power of introducing the practical paradigm of "moral perfection"
and will be able to justify a certain non-cognitive use of theoretical ideas
as what Kant will come to call "postulates of practical reason."75
The few paragraphs of Section 2, then, introduce fundamental as­
sumptions of the Critique ofPure Reason as well as positions that will be
radically revised. The three paragraphs of Section 3 , by contrast, pre­
sent a treatment of the forms of intuition, space, and time, that will be
carried over into the Critique largely unaltered, though (especially in
the second edition of the Critique) somewhat amplified. Here Kant
claims that the principle of form of the world as appearance or phe­
nomenon is "a fixed law of the mind, in virtue of which it is necessary
that all the things that can be objects of the senses . . . are seen as neces­
sarily belonging to the same whole."76 He then argues that there are in
fact two such laws or principles, time, the form of all that we sense,
whether inner or outer, and space, the form of our outer sense, or our
sensory perception of objects we take to be distinct from ourselves.
Kant argues that space and time are both the pureforms of all intuitions,
or ''formal principle[sJ of the sensible world,"77 and themselves pure intu­
itions:78 They are the forms in which particular objects are presented to
us by the senses, but also themselves unique particulars of which we can
have a priori knowledge, the basis of our a priori knowledge of both
mathematics and physics.79 But the embrace of space and time "is lim­
ited to actual things, insofar as they are thought capable ofjalting under
the senses" we have no ground for asserting that space and time char­
acterize things that we are incapable of sensing.80
Kant makes the following claims about time: 8 1 (I) "The idea of time
does not arise from but is presupposed by the senses": this is because any con­
cepts we can form from our experience of things already presupposes
that we can represent them as either simultaneous or successive. (2)
" The idea of time is singular and not general": this is because all particu­
lar times, say two particular years, are thought of as part of a single
larger time, in which they each occupy a determinate position, and are
-

41

Introduction
not just unrelated tokens of a similar type. (3) "The idea of time is an in­
tuition, " and indeed a "pure intuition," precisely because it is both singu1ar and immediately given to us in all our experience, which makes it an
intuition, but also given to us as presupposed by rather than abstracted
from all our experience, which makes it pure. All of these claims will be
reiterated in the Critique of Pure Reason without revision, although the
exposition of them will be somewhat amplified.82
Next, Kant asserts a claim that is not explicitly made in the initial dis­
cussion of time in the Critique but is presupposed in a number of later
important parts of the work: the claim that (4) "Time is a continuous mag­
nitude," or that it consists of no simple parts but instead that between
any two times, no matter how small, there is always another, smaller in­
terval of time. Then Kant adds to the reasons already given in Section
2 for the claim that (5) "Time is not something objective and real, nor is it a
substance, nor an accident, nor a relation." It is important to see that
there is both a positive and a negative aspect to this claim (5). The pos­
itive side is the argument that we must have a pure intuition of time be­
cause it is presupposed by our perception of any particular objects or
states as simultaneous or successive, the argument (r) which Kant now
reiterates. This implies that we must have a pure representation of time
independent of any particular empirical perception, but does not imply
that time is not also "objective and real," that is, nothing but a form of
representation. For that further, negative claim Kant suggests two sorts
of reasons: a metaphysical reason, aimed against Newton and "the
English philosophers," that the idea of absolute time as a substance or a
property of any substance (such as the sensorium dei) is absurd; and an
epistemological argument, aimed against Leibniz, that conceiving of
time as something we abstract from perceived relations of objects would
render our knowledge of it merely empirical and therefore "completely
destroy" all the certitude of the fundamental rules of mathematics and
physics. The full premises of this epistemological argument, however,
are not spelled out before the Critique, and even there are only hinted
at.83 Finally, Kant adds that although (6) "time, posited in itself and ab­
solutely, would be an imaginary being," nevertheless, as "the universal
form of phenomena," whether inner or outer, it is "to the highest de­
gree true" and (7) "an absolutely firstformal principle ofthe sensible world. "
Kant makes a series of parallel claims about space.84 He claims (r)
"The concept of space is not abstracted from outer sensations," because I can
"only conceive of something as placed outside me [extra me] by repre­
senting it as in a place which is different from [in loco . . . diverso] the place
in which I am myself"; in other words, I cannot abstract the concept of
space from my experience of objects distinct from myself because I can­
not experience them as distinct without already representing them as in
space. (2) Like that of time, "the concept ofspace is a singular representation,"
42

Introduction
because all regions of space are represented as parts of a single, bound­
less space rather than as instances of some general sort. As before, Kant
infers from these two arguments that (3) "The concept ofspace is thus a pure
intuition," an intuition because it is singular and pure because it is not
"compounded from sensations" but presupposed by all "outer sensation"
or experience of objects as distinct from ourselves. Here Kant skips an
argument that space is a continuous quantity, though he will also assume
that in the Critique, and instead inserts the argument from 1 768 about
incongruent counterparts, using it now to show that since features of di­
rectionality such as a right- and left-handedness are not inferable from
the concepts of objects they must be "apprehended by a certain pure in­
tuition." (This argument will be omitted from the Critique.) Now, as in
the case of time, Kant infers from these results that " Space is not something
objective and real, nor is it a substance, nor an accident, nor a relation; it
is rather, subjective and ideal; it issues from the nature of the mind."
Again, he infers this from the prior arguments that it is "the scheme . . .
for coordinating everything that it senses externally" and also from the
two additional claims, the metaphysical claim made against "the
English" that the idea of "an absolute and boundless receptacle of possi­
ble things is absurd" and the epistemological argument made against
Leibniz that conceiving of the propositions of geometry, which are taken
to describe space, as merely abstracted from an experience of relations
among objects would "cast geometry down from the summit of cer­
tainty, and thrust it back into the rank of those sciences of which the
principles are empirical." Finally, Kant again concludes that (5) even
though "the concept ofspace as some objective and real being or property
be imaginary, nonetheless, relatively to all sensible things whatever, it is not
only a concept that is in the highest degree true, it is also the foundation
of all truth in outer sensibility." This is as good a statement of the doc­
trine of transcendental idealism as we will find in the Critique itself, in­
sisting on both the subjectivity yet also universality and necessity of
space as a form of representation. 8 5
This account of space and time as the forms and principles of the sen­
sible world, as we have said, remains essentially unchanged in the
Critique. In Section 4 of the dissertation, however, Kant gives an ac­
count of the "principle of the form of the intelligible world" that is still
largely unchanged from his earliest work but will disappear from the
Critique. The content of this section is basically just the Leibnizian ar­
gument that a multitude of substances can constitute a single world only
in virtue of their common dependence on a single cause. This argument
is based on the thoroughly Leibnizian premise that "the existence of
each [necessary] substance is fully established without appealing to any
dependence on anything else whatsoever," 86 and the further inference
that contingent substances, the only kind which might therefore con43

Introduction
stitute an interrelated whole, are characterized precisely by their de­
pendence on a cause, and therefore constitute a single world in virtue
of their dependence on a common cause. 8 7 Kant's attempt to reconcile
this argument with his longstanding attraction to the theory of physical
influx, or real interaction between distinct objects, is unavailing. 88
However, not only this argument but also the underlying assumption
that pure concepts of the intellect, such as the concept of substance, can
be used on their own to provide knowledge of things as they are in
themselves will disappear from the Critique. This particular argument
will be replaced by the argument that interaction among physical ob­
jects is a necessary condition for experiencing them as simultaneously
occupying different yet determinate positions in a single space (Kant's
important "Third Analogy"), 89 and the underlying metaphysics will be
replaced by Kant's critical position that pure categories of the under­
standing lead to ideas of reason that are illusory if used for theoretical
knowledge on their own, though they can serve as postulates of practi­
cal reason.
The same transformation awaits Kant's treatment of "method in
metaphysics" in the concluding Section 5 of the inaugural dissertation.
Kant begins by arguing that philosophy has no special method to pre­
scribe to ordinary science, because here the use of the intellect is only
logical, organizing concepts that are not themselves provided by the in­
tellect but are instead abstracted from experience. In the case of meta­
physics, however, where the intellect does have a real use, supplying
original concepts, "method precedes all science. "90 The method of meta­
physics, Kant then maintains, "amounts to this prescription: great care
must be taken lest the principles that are native to sensitive cognition trans­
gress their limits, and affect what belongs to the understanding. "91 The fun­
damental obstacle to progress in metaphysics, that is, comes from
assuming that the necessary conditions and inherent limits of sensibil­
ity are limits on the possibility of intellectual knowledge as well. Kant
lists three "subreptic axioms" that arise from this confusion. These un­
warranted assumptions are:

I. The same sensitive condition, under which alone the intuition of an
object is possible, is a condition of the possibility itself of the object.
2 . The same sensitive condition, under which alone it is possible to
compare what is given so as to form a concept ofthe understanding of the
object, is also a condition of the possibility itself of the object.
3 . The same sensitive condition, under which alone some object met
with can be subsumed under a given concept of the understanding, is

also the condition of the possibility itself of the object.92

In other words, at this stage Kant holds that it is a mistake to assume
that the characteristic forms and limits of sensible representations and
44

Introduction
the conditions for the application of concepts to sensible representa­
tions limit our metaphysical cognition of objects as they really are. Kant
gives examples of the errors that arise from this assumption: It is an
error to assume that whatever exists is located in space and timej93 it is
an error to assume that "every actual multiplicity can be given numerically, "
as multiplicities given in space and time are, and thus that "every mag­
nitude is finitej"94 and it is a mistake to assume that what may be an em­
pirical criterion for the application of a concept, as non-existence at
some time is a sensible criterion for the modal concept of contingency,
is actually a necessary feature for any use of the concept at al1.95 The im­
plication of Kant's argument is that paradoxes may arise in the attempt
to derive metaphysical knowledge from the conditions of sensibility.
One such paradox is that if the world is represented as existing in space
and time, then the world must be both finite and infinite. Now Kant's
argument further implies that such paradoxes can be avoided because
we can have intellectual knowledge of reality independently of the con­
cepts of space and time as conditions of "sensitive cognition."
Finally, Kant concludes the section by mentioning, almost as an af­
terthought, that there are certain "principles of convenience" (principia
convenientiae) that are not principles of sensitive cognition but rather
rules by means of which "it seems to the intellect itself easy and practi­
cal to deploy its own perspicacity. " These are the principles that "all
things in the universe take place in accordance with the order ofnature," that
"principles are not to be multiplied beyond what is absolutely necessary, " and
that "nothing material at all comes into being or passes away. "96 This is a
striking list, because it includes two principles - the principle of univer­
sal causation and the principle of the conservation of (material) sub­
stance - that Kant will later identify as "constitutive" or necessary
conditions of the possibility of the experience of objects at all, but an­
other one - the principle traditionally called "Ockham's razor" - that is
more like what he will later identify as a "regulative" principle, which is
not a necessary condition of the possibility of any experience at all but
an assumption we make for various subjective reasons.
The fact that Kant could indiscriminately mix what he would later
distinguish as constitutive and regulative principles shows that he did
not yet have a clear conception of the function of the former as neces­
sary conditions of the possibility of experience, a consequence of the
fact that he did not yet have a clear understanding that the pure con­
cepts of the understanding (such as the concepts of causation and sub­
stance mentioned in these principles) can yield knowledge only when
applied to data furnished by the faculty of sensibility. Likewise, that he
could argue at this stage that metaphysical illusion can be avoided by
not letting the conditions of sensibility limit the use of concepts of the
intellect shoTYS that he did not yet see that the concepts of the under45

Introduction
standing have a cognitive use only in application to sensibility and
therefore within its limits, and beyond that can have only a practical
use. Before he could progress from the inaugural dissertation to the
Critique of Pure Reason, Kant would have to develop a new conception
of the use of the intellect with distinctions among the sensible use of the
understanding, the illusory use of pure theoretical reason, and the reli­
able use of pure practical reason.
IV.
T H E G E NE S I S

OF

T H E CRITIQUE

1770-72. After the publication of the dissertation, Kant fell into a pro­
longed silence broken only by a few minor essays97 and a series of let­
ters to his student Marcus Herz. Herz had participated in the public
defense of Kant's dissertation98 and was now in Berlin, studying medi­
cine but also in contact with the prominent philosophers of the capital.
Aside from what little can be gleaned from these letters, our primary
source of information about Kant's thought in these years comes from
surviving marginalia and notes, though presumably these are only a
fragment of what Kant actually wrote during this period and have to be
used with caution.99 Fragmentary as they are, however, these materials
cast considerable light on the emergence of some of the most important
new arguments of the Critique and also explain some of its most trou­
blesome obscurities.
In the fall of 1 7 70, Herz went off to Berlin with copies of the disser­
tation for leading intellectuals such as Mendelssohn, Johann Heinrich
Lambert ( 1 7 2 8- 1 7 7 7) and Johann Georg Sulzer (1 7 20-1 7 79), and ac­
companying letters, of which only the letter to Lambert survives. In this
letter Kant apologizes for the lapse of a prior promise of collaboration,
makes a promise for the rapid publication of a work on the metaphysics
of morals (a promise that would not even begin to be redeemed for an­
other fifteen years) 1 00 and otherwise evinces his continuing commit­
ment to the view of metaphysics enunciated in the dissertation. l O r By
Christmas, all three Berlin philosophers had replied with letters con­
taining essentially the same objection: how could Kant hold time to be
a mere appearance with no objective reality when time is the form of
inner sense and we all have immediate experience of changes in inner
sense regardless of whatever external significance we might impute to
those changing internal senses? 1 02
Lambert initially raises a question about whether Kant's "two ways of
knowing," from the senses and the intellect, "are so completely sepa­
rated that they never come together," 103 but then discusses in detail only
Kant's treatment of time, accepting Kant's arguments that time is sin-

46

Introduction
gular, continuous, and the object of a pure intuition but objecting to
Kant's idealism about time:
All changes are bound to time and are inconceivable without time. Ifchanges are
real, then time is real, whatever it may be. If time is unreal, then no change can be
real. I think, though, that even an idealist must grant at least that changes really
exist and occur in his representations, for example, their beginning and ending.
Thus time cannot be regarded as something unreal. 104
Sulzer's briefer letter also raises a problem about time, asserting the po­
sition that duration must have "a true reality" even if the formal concept
of time is some sort of abstraction from our experience of real dura­
tion; I OS and Mendelssohn too objects that
For several reasons I cannot convince myself that time is something merely sub­
jective. Succession is after all at least a necessary condition of the representa­
tions that finite minds have . . . . Since we have to grant the reality of succession
in a representing creature and in its alternations, why not also in the sensible
objects, which are the models and prototypes of representations in the world? I06
Kant made no immediate reply to this objection, as we know from his
letter to Herz of 7 June 1 7 7 I . I 07 He merely asked Herz to apologize to
his correspondents by saying that their letters had set him off on a long
series of investigations, and then told Herz that he was now occupied
with a work that "under the title The Bounds of Sensibility and Reason
would work out in some detail the relationship of the concepts and laws
determined for the sensible world together with the outline of what the
nature of the theory of taste, metaphysics, and morality should con­
tain." I 08 In his next pledge, Kant said that he expected to complete the
plan of the work shortly.
Kant does not appear to have written to Herz again until 2 1 February
1 77 2 , when he wrote what has become his most famous letter. Here
Kant reviewed his plan for the work mentioned the previous June, stat­
ing that it was to consist of "two parts, a theoretical and a practical," the
first of which in turn would consist of "(I) a general phenomenology
and (2) metaphysics, but this only with regard to its nature and method,"
while the second part was to deal with "(I) the universal principles of
feeling, taste, and sensuous desire and (2 ) the basic principles of moral­
ity. " I 09 However, Kant says, as he thought about the theoretical
part - where the "phenomenology" was to have dealt with the limits of
sensitive cognition before the purely intellectual foundations of meta­
physics were expounded - "I noticed that I still lacked something essen­
tial, something that in my long metaphysical studies I, as well as others,
had failed to pay attention to and that, in fact, constitutes the key to the
whole secret of hitherto still obscure metaphysics." But the fundamen­
tal problem that Kant now announced had nothing to with the objec-

47

Introduction
tion to his idealism regarding time that the Berlin savants had raised; in­
deed, although Kant would eventually acknowledge that objection, I I O he
would in no way rethink his position about the ideality of time.
Instead, Kant raises a completely different question: "What is the
ground of the relation of that in us which we call representation to the
object? " I l I This is a puzzle precisely in the case of the relationship of
pure concepts of the understanding to objects presented by sensible ex­
perience. It is not a puzzle in the case of entirely empirical representa­
tions, which are merely caused by their external objects, nor in the case
of divine archetypes (or, we may add, human intentions), where the ob­
ject is merely caused by the antecedent representation. But, Kant now
holds, "the pure concepts of the understanding . . . though they must
have their origin in the nature of the soul" because they are formulated
by us and known "completely a priori," must yet apply to objects of sen­
sible experience even though they are neither caused by nor cause the
latter. I I 2 Kant now admits that he had completely passed over this ques­
tion in the inaugural dissertation because he there failed to realize that
our pure concepts as well as forms of intuition must be applied to the
same objects, the objects of our experience. Thus what must now be ex­
plained is "the possibility of such concepts, with which . . . experience
must be in exact agreement and which nevertheless are independent of
experience. " The idea that the pure concepts of the understanding pro­
vide knowledge of entities other than the spatiotemporal objects of sen­
sibility suddenly disappears.
Kant did not describe how the possibility and necessity of the agree­
ment of experience with pure concepts of the understanding is to be
explained, beyond suggesting that a systematic classification of these
"concepts belonging to complete pure reason" or "categories" can
be reached by "following a few fundamental laws of the understanding. "
In spite of this obscurity, Kant was confident that he would be ready to
publish the work, which he now for the first time entitled a Critique of
Pure Reason, in only three months! " 3 In fact, it would be almost nine
years before the work with that title appeared . Much of this delay was
due to the fact that Kant did not yet have a clear idea of why the cate­
gories necessarily apply to objects of experience.
As Kant thinks further about this problem, a problem about time will
play a key role, though not the problem about the reality of time but
rather a problem about how we can make determinate judgments about
the order of objective states of affairs or even our own experiences in
time . This problem will become the focus of Kant's attention in the sev­
eral years following the letter to Herz, especially in 1 7 74-75, and will
remain central in the Critique.
Kant's next report on his progress is in another letter to Herz, this
one written toward the end of 1 7 7 3 . I I4 Kant writes that he will not "be
48

Introduction
seduced by any author's itch into seeking fame," suggests that he is still
working on "a principle that will completely solve what has hitherto
been a riddle and that will bring the misleading qualities of the self­
alienating understanding under certain and easily applied rules," but
nevertheless promises that he will have his book, which he continues to
call "a critique of pure reason," ready by the following Easter or shortly
after, ' I S that is, in the spring of 1 7 74. In Kant's next surviving letter to
Herz, however, written three years later in November 1 776, I 1 6 we again
find him suggesting that he has been held up by difficulties surround­
ing the fundamental principle of his new position, though he says that
he made progress with it the previous September and once again
promises the completed book by the following Easter. Yet the following
August still finds Kant reporting "a stone in the way of the Critique of
Pure Reason," though once again he is optimistic that he can get by this
obstacle during the following winter (1 778). But April 1 778 finds Kant
writing that the rumor that some pages of his book are already at the
press is premature, and in August of that year Kant will only say he is
"still working indefatigably" on his "handbook."
So for at least five years the completion of the promised book con­
tinues to be put off, and there are repeated hints that Kant has still not
found the fundamental principle he needs, presumably the one that
would answer the fundamental question of 1 77 2 . From the letters to
Herz, the only one of his known correspondents in this period to whom
Kant says anything at all about his planned book, it might seem as if
Kant was making no progress at all. But our other sources reveal that
he was indeed working "indefatigably" on the Critique throughout this
period, and that beginning by April 1 7 74 - in other words, in the vicin­
ity of his first promised Easter completion date - Kant did begin to ex­
plore a solution to his puzzle about why a priori concepts of the
understanding should necessarily apply to the data presented to us by
sensibility and not have any constitutive, theoretical use outside of that
application.
1 774-75. Using a letter sent to him on 2 8 April 1 774 as scrap paper,
Kant wrote a series of notes that were clearly part of his work on the
Critique. Much of the material goes over claims about space and time al­
ready established in the inaugural dissertation, but Kant now adds a line
of thought that had not previously appeared. He says that the unity of
time implies the unity of the self and the determinate position of all ob­
jects in time; even more explicitly that the unity of space depends on the
unity of the subject and on the ability of the subject to assign represen­
tations of objects determinate positions in space; and then suggests that
the concepts of the understanding are necessary precisely to achieve
such unification of and order among the intuitions of objects presented
in the form of time and space. In his words, he asserts first:
49

Introduction
1 . Time is unique [einig] . Which means this: I can intuit all objects only in my­
self and in representations found in my own subject, and all possible objects of
my intuition stand in relation to each other in accordance with the special form
of this intuition . . .
4. All things and all states of things have their determinate position in time. For
through the unity of inner sense they must have their determinate relation to
all other putative objects of intuition. I '7

He then makes parallel claims about space - space is not only our
unique form for representing objects external to ourselves, but also uni­
fied in the sense that every object must be assigned a determinate posi­
tion in relation to all others in it:
Space is nothing but the intuition of mere form even without given matter, thus
pure intuition. It is a single [einzelne] representation on account of the unity of
the subject (and the capability), in which all representations of outer objects can'
be placed next to one another. l I S
Finally, Kant suggests that the use of concepts of the understanding or
rules associated with them is the necessary condition of assigning rep­
resentations or their objects their determinate positions in a unified
space and/or time:
We have no intuitions except through the senses; thus no other concepts can in­
habit the understanding except those which pertain to the disposition and order
among these intuitions. These concepts must contain what is universal, and
rules. The faculty of rules in abstracto: the learned understanding; in concreto: the
common understanding. The common understanding has preference in all
cases, where the rules must be abstracted a posteriori from the cases; but where
they have their origin a priori, there it does not obtain at alJ.r'9
This remark presupposes that concepts are used only in application
to intuitions, the thesis that Kant had not yet seen in I 770 but that was
to become the hallmark of the Critique ofPure Reason, with its famous
statement that "Thoughts without content are empty, intuitions with­
out concepts are blind" (A S I /B 75). It further suggests that the particu­
lar function that the a priori concepts of the understanding play is to
serve as rules for establishing "disposition and order" among intuitions
of objects, though Kant does not yet explain why concepts should be
necessary for this purpose or how concepts function as rules for this
purpose. Finally, Kant suggests that even the ordinary use of abstraction
for the production of empirical concepts depends upon the use of the
a priori concepts of the understanding for the establishment of this "dis­
position and order," even though these a priori concepts may seem
"learned" rather than "common." This is an important point, because it
implies that the theory of a priori concepts to be worked out in the
Critique ofPure Reason is not, as it has sometimes been seen, a theory of
50

Introduction
the foundations of natural science considered as separate from everyday
life, but rather a theory of the foundations of science as continuous with
all of our knowledge.
The following series of notes shows that Kant spent much of his time
in the next several years trying to work out his hunch that the categories
can be shown to be a priori yet necessary conditions of all of our knowl­
edge of objects by showing that their use is the necessary condition of
all determinate "disposition and order" of intuitions. These notes are
assigned to the year 1 77 5 because one of them is written on another let­
ter to Kant dated 20 May 1 7 7 5 . Although, as we saw, Kant had been
moving toward the idea of a fundamental contrast between logical and
real relations throughout the I 760s, it is only in these notes that he first
clearly links his fundamental philosophical problem with the distinction
between judgments that are analytic and those that are synthetic yet
a priori. Kant asks under what conditions a predicate b can be predicated
of an object x that is also subsumed under another predicate a. In some
cases, b can be predicated of any x of which a is predicated because the
predicate b is already identical to or contained in a, and we have no need
to consider or experience any particular x in order to see that. In such
cases, a proposition of the form "All x's that are a are also b" would be
true in virtue of "the principle of identity and contradiction, " or a
" merely logical" "principle of form rather than content," that is, it
would be analytic. I 2 0 If, however, the predicates a and b can be related
to each other only through x, then the judgment is synthetic: "If I refer
both predicates to x and only thereby to each other, then it is synthetic,"
and the predicates are in that case "not in a logical but in a real rela­
tion."I2 I Kant also says that "In synthetic propositions the relation be­
tween the concepts is not really immediate (for this happens only in the
case of analytic propositions), rather it is represented in the conditions
of their concrete representation in the subject."I22 Kant does not say so
explicitly, but he is clearly already assuming that propositions asserting
that a priori concepts apply to the objects of sensibility will fall into this
class of synthetic judgments expressing real relations.
Kant's next step is to argue that there are three different ways in
which synthetic judgments may be made. The object x by means of
which we link predicates a and b may be constructed in pure intuition,
it may simply be given in empirical intuition or appearance, or it may
be "the sensible condition of the subject within which a perception is to
be assigned its position."I 2 3 Or, in another passage, he writes:
is therefore the determinable (object) that I think through the concept a, and
b is its determination or the way in which it is determined. In mathematics, x is
the construction of a, in experience it is the concretum, and with regard to an in­
herent representation or thought in general x is the function of thinking in gen­
eral in the subject.124

x

51

Introduction
It is clear enough what Kant means by the first two options. In mathe­
matics, synthetic judgments - such as "The sum of the interior angles
of a plane triangle equals two right angles" - are made or confirmed by
constructing an object satisfying the first predicate ("plane triangle") in
pure intuition, and then seeing that the construction satisfies the second
predicate as well ("equals two right angles"); such a construction yields
a determinate answer (two right angles contain 1 80 degrees, not 1 79 or
1 8 I) because it is the construction of a particular object, but it yields a
result that is a priori, because it takes place in pure intuition, the form
that determines the structure of all possible triangles or other spatial
figures or objects. In ordinary experience, observation establishes syn­
thetic and determinate but only contingent or a posteriori propositions
because of the appeal to particular experience: a proposition like "My
copy of the Critique is worn and dog-eared" adds information ("worn
and dog-eared") that goes beyond the initial description of the object
("my copy of the Critique"), but that additional information can only be
asserted of the particular object that is observed, because it has nothing
to do with any essential form of appearance. But what does Kant mean
by his third case, referred to only by such obscure phrases as "the sen­
sible condition of a subject" or "the function of thinking in general"?
'Vhat Kant has in mind is what he hinted at in 1 7 74, namely that
there are certain rules necessary for the "disposition and order" of rep­
resentations conceived of as belonging to a unified self and occupying
determinate positions in the space and time in which that self places its
representations, and that these rules add general conditions to the con­
cept of any possible object of experience that go beyond the particular
features of such objects we may happen to observe and by means of
which we may happen to refer to them. He brings together the steps of
this argument thus far in this passage:
In analytic judgments the predicate [b] pertains properly to the concept a, in
synthetic judgments to the object of the concept, since the predicate [b} is not
contained in the concept. However, the object that corresponds to a concept
has certain conditions for the application of this concept, i.e., its position in con­
creto . . Now the condition of all concepts is sensible; thus, if the concept is also
sensible, but universal, it must be considered in concreto, e.g., a triangle in its
construction. If the concept does not signify pure intuition, but empirical, then
x contains the condition of the relative position (0) in space and time, i.e., the
condition for universally determining something in them.125
.

This is still somewhat obscure, but what Kant is saying is that judgments
that are synthetic but also genuinely universal, that is, a priori, can be
grounded in one of two ways: in the case of mathematics, such judg­
ments are grounded in the construction of a mathematical object; in the
other case, such judgments are grounded in the condition of determin­
ing the relative position of one object in space and time to others.
52

Introduction
Kant also puts this point by saying that what he is looking for are the

principles of the exposition of appearances, where that means precisely the
assignment of each representation to a determinate position in the uni­
fied space and time that is the framework for all the representations be­
longing to a unified self. Kant introduces this concept when he writes:
The principium of the exposition of appearances is the general ground of the ex­
position of that which is given. The exposition of that which is thought depends
merely on consciousness, but the exposition of that which is given, if one re­
gards the matter as undetermined, depends on the ground of all relation and on
the linkage [Verkettung] of representations (sensations). . . . The exposition of
appearances is therefore the determination of the ground on which the nexus of
sensations depends. I 2 6
But perhaps a clearer statement of Kant's strategy is this:
There is in the soul a principium of disposition as well as of affection. The ap­
pearances can have no other order and do not otherwise belong to the unity of
the power of representation except insofar as they are amenable to the common
principio of disposition. For all appearance with its thoroughgoing determination
must still have unity in the mind, consequently be subjected to those conditions
through which the unity of representations is possible. Only that which is req­
uisite for the unity of representations belongs to the objective conditions. The
unity of apprehension is necessarily connected with the unity of the intuition of
space and time, for without this the latter would give no real representation.
The principles of exposition must be determined on the one side through the
laws of apprehension, on the other side through the unity of the power of un­
derstanding. They are the standard for observation and are not derived from
perceptions, but are the ground of those in their entirety. I 2 7
Kant's argument is that although all particular representations are given
to the mind in temporal form, and all representations of outer objects
are given to the mind as spatial representations, these representations
cannot be linked to each other in the kind of unified order the mind de­
mands, in which each object in space and time has a determinate rela­
tion to any other, except by means of certain principles that are inherent
in the mind and that the mind brings to bear on the appearances it ex­
periences. These principles will be, or be derived from, the pure con­
cepts of the understanding that have a subjective origin yet necessarily
apply to all the objects of our experience, and those concepts will not
have any determinate use except in the exposition of appearances. This
is the theory that will answer the puzzle Kant raised in his letter to Herz
of February 1 7 7 2 , and that will eventually allow him to write the

Critique.
But how exactly will the categories be shown to be the necessary con­

ditions for the exposition of appearances? This has by no means been
made clear in anything cited thus far. Kant throws out a number of tan53

Introduction
talizing but incomplete suggestions. Perhaps it was his difficulty in
choosing between as well as working out the details of these suggestions
that prevented the Critique from taking final shape before I 779. One
thing that Kant suggests is that the task of linking appearances in the
orderly fashion required by a unified mind or self-consciousness im­
poses certain principles on those appearances because there is a certain
way in which it is necessary to conceive of a unified mind - or what
Kant now calls "apperception" - itself. He states that "\Vhatever is to
be thought as an object of perception stands under a rule of appercep­
tion, or self-perception," I 2 8 and then claims that there is a "threefold
dimension of synthesis" because there are "three functions of appercep­
tion" or three "exponents" of the way in which we conceive of our­
selves: we necessarily conceive of our own thoughts as having " 1 .
relation to a subject, 2 . a relation of succession among each other, and
3 . [comprising] a whole," and we therefore impose these same cate­
gories - what Kant will later identifY as the categories of relationl29- on
the objects of our representations. Following this argument, Kant says
that "I am the original of all objects," that is, I conceive of objects in
analogy with the way in which I must conceive of myself. 1 30 Alter­
natively, Kant sometimes suggests that we necessarily conceive of objects
by using the categories of a subject to which both a succession and a
whole of properties belongs, and then conceive of our selves and the
unity of our thought in analogy with the way we necessarily think of ob­
jects. Thus, in another note he argues that "All existence belongs to a
substance; everything that happens is a member of a series; everything
that is simultaneous belongs to a whole whose parts reciprocally deter­
mine each other," and then suggests that the way in which we conceive
of ourselves, as subjective orders of experience, corresponds to these
fundamental ways for conceiving of objects. I F
In some of his most promising remarks, however, Kant suggests that
there may be direct arguments showing the necessity of the use of cer­
tain categories of the understanding for certain time-determinations
without any appeal to analogies between the way in which we conceive
of the self and of objects in either direction. Thus, Kant argues that as­
signing determinate positions to events in time presupposes a frame­
work of principles employing the same categories that in the other
passages he has associated with the concept of a subject or of an object:
Something must always precede an occurrence (condition of perception).
All sorts of things can precede an occurrence, but among these there is one
from which it always follows.
A reality is always attached (to a point in time and that which determines it) to
something accompanying it, through which the point in time is determined
(condition of perception).

54

Introduction
All sorts of things can accompany, but among them there is something that is
always there.
With regard to that which is simultaneous there is always a connection (condi­
tion of perception).
But it can be accompanied with all sorts of things; however, what is to be con­
sidered as objectively connected is a mutual determination of the manifold by
one another.
If there were not something that always was, thus something permanent, stabile,
there would be no firm point or determination of the point in time, thus no per­
ception, i.e., determination of something in time.
If there were not something that always preceded an occurrence, then among
the many things that precede there would be nothing with which that which oc­
curs belongs in a series, it would have no determinate place in the series.
Through the rules of perception the objects of the senses are determinable in
time; in intuition they are merely given as appearances. In accordance with
those rules there is found an entirely different series than that in which the ob­
ject was given.'l2
Here Kant suggests that what he has previously called the "exposition
of appearances" is the determination of a definite order and position for
occurrences in time. He does not say whether the occurrences are rep­
resentations in a subject or states of objects, but in either case to order
them in time is to determine whether at some particular point or period
in time such occurrences succeed one another in a specific order or are
simultaneous with each other. In order to determine this, Kant holds,
we have to posit the existence of objects that endure through
time - substances - and the existence of determinate patterns of causa­
tion and interaction among them. Thus we need to use the fundamen­
tal categories of substance, causation, and interaction for time­
determination or the "exposition of appearances. "
Kant does not explain in any detail why we must use these categories
to accomplish this end - a fuller explanation of that will await the sec­
tion of the published Critique called the "Analogies of Experience"
(A 1 76-2 I 8 / B 2 1 8-65). In the Critique, the "Analogies" follow a separate
argument for the universal and necessary validity of the categories from
certain more abstract conceptions of both objects and apperception,
which he calls the "Transcendental Deduction of the Pure Concepts of
the Understanding" (A 84-1 30 and B 1 1 6-69). Since in Kant's original
sketches of the central argument of his planned Critique there is no sep­
aration between the discussion of apperception, objects, and the expo­
sition of appearances, and the original discussion of the relation
between apperception and objects already has the form of an analogy, it
is an enduring question for the interpretation of the Critique whether or
not these two sections have rendered asunder considerations that
should have remained joined. This is a question for any reader of the

55

Introduction

Critique to consider in trying to analyze the relation between the
"Transcendental Deduction" and the "Analogies."
1 776-77. These thoughts seem to be as far as Kant had gotten by
1 77 5. In several further extensive notes from around 1 776-77, we find for
the first time what looks like an outline for a whole intended book. In the
first of these notes, Kant divides his plan under four headings: "Dialectic
of Sensibility"; "Dialectic of Understanding - Transcendental Theory of
Magnitude"; "Transcendental Theory of Appearance - Reality and
Negation"; and "Transcendental Theory of Experience.'" B This fourfold
division does not, however, imply as elaborate a conception of the in­
tended work as it might seem to, because the first three headings all cover
the same ground, namely, Kant's theory of space and time as already
stated in the inaugural dissertation. The fourth part adds to this a state­
ment of the three principles of experience involving the concepts of sub­
stance, causation, and interaction that were first clearly listed in R 468I.
Further, in spite of the fact that the first three sections all have the word
"dialectic" in their titles, it is only in the fourth section that Kant explic­
itly states both theses and antitheses of the kind that we find in the
"Dialectic" of the Critique, though he also hints at antinomies in the
treatment of space and time.
At this point Kant is still experimenting with the organization of his
planned work. But the content that he here envisages including is fairly
clear: First, about space and time, he maintains that "All space and times
are parts of larger ones," and that "All parts of space and time are them­
selves spaces" and times. '34 This implies that there are no simple parts
in space and time, that space and time are continuous, and that space and
time are infinite yet unitary (no matter how large a region of space or
time is, it is always part of one larger space or time). '35 Kant implies that
in order to understand these claims we also have to assume that space
and time "are nothing real."'36 Under the title of "Dialectic of Under­
standing - Transcendental Theory of Magnitude" he further states that
although the nature of our representation of space and time implies the
infinitude of the possible extension or division of space and time, never­
theless "Infinite space and infinite past time are incomprehensible" [un­
begreiflich] . '37 This suggests a conflict between the nature of the
intuition of space and time and the nature of an intellectual concept or
comprehension of them; but Kant does not explain how this conflict is
to be resolved beyond asserting that "Space and time belong only to the
appearances and therefore to the world and not beyond the world." l 3 8
Then Kant turns to the "Transcendental Theory of Experience."
Here he asserts three theses;
I . Something as substance, that is matter, neither comes into nor goes out of
existence, from nothing comes nothing, i.e., matter is eternal (ex nihilo nihil in
mundofit) although dependent.

56

Introduction
2 . Every condition of the world is a consequence, for in the continuity of alter­
ation everything is starting and stopping, and both have a cause.
3 . All appearances together constitute a world and belong to real objects
(against idealism). God as a cause does not belong to the world. For only
through the agreement of representations with objects do they agree with one
another and acquire the unity which perceptions that would be appearances
must have.

To the first two theses he opposes what he explicitly labels "antitheses":
for (I), the antithesis is that "There is no substance," and for (2), "Then
there would be no first cause." Kant is not clear about the source of the
conflict between theses and antitheses, although the whole note seems
to suggest a conflict between the infinite structure of space and time
and the needs of the understanding.
The next note gives a clear picture of the sources of dialectical con­
flict, while also suggesting that the whole content of the Critique could
be organized around this conflict. Kant begins by explicitly formulating
for the first time a principle that will be crucial in the Critique: "The
principles of the possibility of experience (of distributive unity) are at
the same time the principles of the possibility of the objects of experi­
ence." He then suggests that there are two classes of such principles,
namely, (I) principles of "Unity of intuition," or principles of "appear­
ance" as such, and (2) the principles of "experiences," or those in ac­
cordance with which "the existence of appearances is given." Finally, he
suggests how antinomies arise: we get one set of principles from the
"empirical use of reason," where the concepts of reason are applied to
"space and time as conditions of appearance," and a different set from
the "pure use of reason," where space and time are not taken to be con­
ditions of the use of the concepts of reason. On this basis, Kant de­
scribes two sets of competing principles that clearly lead directly to the
"Antinomy of Pure Reason" expounded in the Critique:
Immanent principles of the empirical use of understanding:
I . There is no bound to the composition and decomposition of appearances.
2. There is no first ground or first beginning.
3 · Everything is mutable and variable, thus empirically contingent, since time
itself is necessary but nothing is necessarily attached to time.
Transcendent principles of the pure use of understanding:
1 . There is a first part, namely the simple as principium of composition, and
there are limits to all appearances together.
2 . There is an absolute spontaneity, transcendental freedom.
3 · There is something which is necessary in itself, namely the unity of the high­
est reality, in which all multiplicity of possibilities can be determined through
limits . . . '39
The first pair of principles from each group stakes out the debate sep­
arated into the first two antinomies in the Critique, the disputes over
57

Introduction
whether or not space and time are infinite in extension and over
whether or not they are infinitely divisible; the second pair corresponds
to the third antinomy in the Critique, which debates whether all events
have an antecedent cause or whether there is a first cause that has no
antecedent cause of its own; and the third pair parallels the later fourth
antinomy, which debates whether the whole series of events in the
world is contingent or has an external ground that makes it necessary. 140
However, the conclusion that Kant draws from this presentation of
the antinomies is not yet what he will later argue. He clearly suggests
that the "transcendent principles" (what will be the theses in the later
antinomies) arise from using concepts of the understanding without
space and time as conditions, while the "immanent principles" result
from applying the concepts of the understanding to space and time and
using them within the conditions imposed by the structure of our rep­
resentations of space and time - using them as "principles of the expo- .
sition of appearances." But he does not reject the "transcendent" use of
the concepts of the understanding. On the contrary, he still seems to
hold, as he did in the inaugural dissertation, that there is a legitimate
transcendent use of the concepts of the understanding unrestricted by
the conditions of space and time. Thus he reiterates the three subrep­
tic axioms of the dissertation as three "Rules of Dialectic":
I . Do not judge what does not belong to appearances in accordance with rules
of appearance, e.g., God with [rules of] space and time.
2 . Do not subject what does not belong to outer appearance, e.g., spirit, to its
conditions.
3 . Do not hold to be impossible what cannot be conceived and represented in
intuition, the totality of the infinite or of infinite division.

Then he lists four "principles of the absolute unity of reason" that can
apparently be maintained as long as we do not violate any of these three
rules:
a. Simplicity of the thinking subject.
b. Freedom as the condition of rational actions.
c. Ens originarium as the substratum of all connection of one's representations in
a whole.
d. Do not confuse the restriction [Einschrankung] of the world in accordance
with its origin and content with its limitation [Begrenzung]!41
At this point, then, it seems as if Kant envisioned for the Critique (I) an
account of the nature and structure of space and time paralleling that in
the dissertation, (2) a new account of the use of a priori concepts of the
understanding, according to which they yield "immanent principles for
the empirical use of the understanding" only when applied to the con­
ditions of spatiotemporal representation to achieve an "exposition of
58

Introduction
appearances," but (3) continued adherence to the view of the disserta­
tion that these concepts can also yield transcendent or metaphysical
knowledge when freed of the restriction of the forms of sensibility.
Perhaps this last point was only a momentary lapse, however, for in
the next preserved note Kant says that "The transcendent principles are
principles of the subjective unity of cognition through reason, i.e. of the
agreement of reason with itself"; "Objective principles are principles of
a possible empirical use."142 This suggests that whatever exactly the use
of the transcendent principles of pure reason is, it is not to obtain any
knowledge of external objects, which can only be achieved through the
empirical use of the concepts of understanding, their application to rep­
resentations in space and time for the exposition of appearances. Kant
continues with this thought in the following note, where he lays out
four conflicts between "principles of the exposition of appearances," or
principles applied to "appearances" for the "unity of experience, " on the
one hand, and "principles of rationality or comprehension" on the
other. These conflicts correspond precisely to the four antinomies of
the Critique. The first set of principles is:
I.

2.

3.

4.

no absolute totality in composition, hence infinite progressus,
no absolute totality of decomposition, hence nothing absolutely
simple,
no absolute totality of the series of generation, no unconditioned spon­
taneity,
no absolute necessity.

The opposing set of principles of rationality is:
I.

2.

3.
4.

Unconditioned totality of the dependent whole,
Unconditioned simple,
Unconditioned spontaneity of action,
Unconditioned necessary being.

Kant says that the latter "propositions are subjectively necessary as
principles of the use of reason in the whole of cognition: unity of the
whole of the manifold of cognition of the understanding. They are
practically necessary with regard to . . . " 143 He does not finish the
thought, or explain the practical necessity of the principles of reason.
But he is clearly drawing back from the thought that reason by itself
furnishes metaphysical cognition of real objects independent of our
own thought.
Summing up our results thus far, then, it looks as if by 1 777 Kant had
come this far in planning the Critique: it would include (I ) the account
of space and time as transcendentally ideal pure forms of intuition al­
ready reached in 1 770; (2) a derivation of three concepts of the under­
standing - substance, causation, and interaction - and their associated
59

Introduction
principles - as necessary for the exposition of appearances given
through the forms of space and time and as objectively valid only in that
context, and (3) a presentation in the form of a four-part antinomy pit­
ting those principles, valid for the exposition of appearances, against
four opposed transcendent principles, using the concepts of under­
standing but without restriction by the forms of sensibility which have
no objective validity but can be used in an unspecified way for the uni­
fication of empirical knowledge and for some equally unspecified prac­
tical purpose. Such a Critique would basically have consisted of a theory
of sensibility, a theory of experience, and an antinomy of pure reason.
Clearly Kant needed more time to understand the positive function
of pure reason, which is only hinted at in these notes. But this is not the
only way that the outline of the Critique that we can construct for the
period around 1 7 77 differs from the work as finally published. There
are several other glaring differences. First, tl1e "transcendental theory
of experience," or theory of the "immanent use" of the concepts of un­
derstanding, is not yet divided into a transcendental deduction of the
categories and a derivation of the principles of judgment used in the ex­
position of appearances, as it will be in the published work. Second, all
of these notes suggest that the content of the "Dialectic" is exhausted
by the four antinomies of pure reason, whereas in the published Critique
the Dialectic is divided into three parts, the "Paralogism," "Antinomy,"
and "Ideal of Pure Reason." Can we learn anything about what led to
these further divisions of the Critique before it finally took on the form
Kant gave it in 1 779 and 1 78o?
1 778-80. Fortunately, some notes assigned to the period 1 776-78
rather than 1 775-77 survive and throw light on the final development
of Kant's conception of the Critique. In one note that has been assigned
to the later part of this period, Kant for the first time suggests that there
may be a deduction of the categories as necessary conditions of apper­
ception or the unity of consciousness that does not depend upon the
temporal character of the data to be unified. Since this may be the ear­
liest surviving sketch of a transcendental deduction conceived of as sep­
arate from and antecedent to the argument to the categories as
conditions of the possibility of the exposition of appearances, or what
Kant would come to call the "Analogies of Experience," it is worth
quoting this passage in full:
In everything passive or what is given, apprehension must not merely be found,
but it must also be necessitated in order to represent it as given, i.e., the indi­
vidual apprehension must be determined by the universal. The universal is the
relation to the others and to the whole of the state. By being distinguished from
the arbitrary is it considered as given, and only by being subsumed under the
categories is it considered as something. It must therefore be represented in ac­
cordance with a rule by which appearance becomes experience and by which the
60

r
1

Introduction
mind comprehends it as one of its actions of self-consciousness, within which,
as in space and time, all data are to be encountered. The unity of the mind is
the condition of thinking, and the subordination of every particular under the
universal is the condition of the possibility of associating a given representation
with others through an action. Even if the rule is not immediately obvious, nev­
ertheless one must represent the object as amenable to a rule in order to con­
ceive it as that which represents something, i.e., something which has a
determinate position and function among the other determinations . . . . '44
This note, which is very similar to a crucial passage in the version of the
"Transcendental Deduction" published in the first edition of the
Critique (A 108), is notable for two reasons.
On the one hand, it clearly suggests that there must be general rules
for the unity of consciousness that can be characterized independently
of specific rules for time-determination, although the way remains open
for a further inference that once the temporal character of the data for
consciousness is considered, then these general rules may have given
rise to further rules which are themselves temporal in content. Such a
separation between the most general form of rules for the unity of con­
sciousness and the specific rules for the unity of a consciousness that is
temporal in character, along with the necessity of explaining the rela­
tion between the two forms of rules, will be central to the organization
of the Critique ofPure Reason, where Kant will offer: (I ) a transcenden­
tal deduction of the pure concepts of the understanding as conditions of
the possibility of any unity of consciousness in general, under the rubric
of an "Analytic of Concepts"; (2 ) a derivation from those general rules
of more specific rules for time-determination, under the rubric of a
"Schematism of the Pure Concepts of the Understanding,"'45 which is
in turn part of (3) the "Analytic of Principles," in which Kant argues for
specific principles involving the temporally interpreted categories, such
as the principles of the conservation of substance and of universal cau­
sation, as necessary conditions of objective time-determination.'46 The
introduction of the concept of schematism, which Kant first records in
a note from 1 7 78-79 with the statement that "We must subject all of
our pure concepts of the understanding to a schema, a way of putting
the manifold together in space and time,"'47 is required precisely by the
explicit separation between the transcendental deduction of the cate­
gories and the analogies of experience (and related arguments) by
means of which Kant had previously derived the categories.
On the other hand, this note also reveals a fundamental ambivalence
about exactly how the categories are to be derived from the general idea
of the "unity of consciousness," an ambiguity continuing one already
found in the materials from I 7 7 5 . In one strategy, rules are necessary to
distinguish an arbitrary series of representations from the orderly or
rule-governed series of representations by means of which a determi61

Introduction
nate object is presented to consciousness; on this account, the "unity of
consciousness" would mean the unity of consciousness characteristic of
the presentation of an object. Alternatively, Kant suggests that rules are
necessary for the unity of consciousness as a form of self-consciousness,
the recognition that various representations, whatever objects they may
or may not represent, all have the unity of belonging to a single mind.
Kant does not clearly separate these two strategies, nor suggest a means
for connecting them. This ambiguity will plague all of Kant's attempts
to find a definitive form for the deduction of the categories. It runs
throughout the first-edition version of the "Deduction," and then leads
Kant to continue to experiment with the proper form for the deduction,
not merely in the second edition of the Critique, in which he completely
rewrites the "Deduction," but in the intervening period, in which he
tries to resolve the ambiguity in the Prolegomena to Any Future
Metaphysics ( 1 783), I48 the Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science
( 1 786), '49 and a number of surviving drafts, I 5° and on into the 1 790S as
well, where he continued to tinker with the deduction in his drafts for
an essay on the Real Progress ofMetaphysics from the Time ofLeibniz and
Woljf.'S' Arriving at a definitive interpretation of the transcendental de­
duction of the categories has been the most difficult task for Kant schol­
arship throughout the twentieth century, and this underlying
ambivalence in Kant's conception of its strategy is a large part of the
reason for this problem. '52
Kant never resolved the issue of the fundamental strategy of the de­
duction of the categories, but much else about the content and struc­
ture of the Critique had clearly been resolved by 1 778-79. Several
extensive drafts from this period show that Kant had not only arrived at
the final organization of the "Transcendental Analytic," but also that he
had now arrived at the final organization of the "Transcendental
Dialectic," which is also more complicated than the schemes he had
been considering in the period 1 775-77. \Vhereas in the notes from
that period Kant presented the material of the "Dialectic" as a single set
of antinomies, now he has divided the material into three main parts,
the diagnosis of "three kinds of transcendental illusion" generated by
"three kinds of rational inference."'53 Thus, at this point Kant envi­
sioned the following argument.
The constructive argument of the book would consist of two main
parts. The first of these would in turn be broken into two further parts:
first would be the account of space and time that had been in place since
I 770; in the Critique Kant would finally entitle this the "Transcendental
Aesthetic." Then in the second, under the title of "Transcendental
Analytic" that he now introduces, I54 Kant would make the argument,
based on the principle that "We can have synthetic cognition a priori
about objects of experience, if [it] consists of principles of the possibil62

Introduction
ity of experience"'55 that he now explicitly formulates, in which a tran­
scendental deduction of the categories would be linked to a demonstra­
tion of their role in empirical time-determination by means of an
intervening schematism of those categories. This argument, showing
that the categories must be applied to representations given in space
and time in order to yield unity of consciousness and objective experi­
ence of objects, would have the consequence that by concepts "we cog­
nize only objects of the senses," thus that the categories "do not reach
to the supersensible."
It would then be the burden of the second main part of the work,
which Kant had already been referring to as a "Dialectic" for some
years, to show that "Even though the concepts [of the pure under­
standing] extend to all objects of thought in general," "they do not yield
any amplification of theoretical cognition," but may nevertheless have
a "practical-dogmatic" role in a "practical regard, where freedom is the
condition of their use."'56 Now Kant divides this critical part of the
work into three divisions. He argues that it is characteristic of pure rea­
son to assume as a "petition" or "postulate" the principle that "All con­
ditioned cognition not only stands under conditions, but finally under
one which is itself unconditioned," or that "If the conditioned is given,
then the entire series of all its conditions is also given."'5 7 He now ar­
gues that because there are three kinds of rational inference, from a
property to its subject, from a property to another property, and from a
property to its ground, there must be three dialectical inferences back
to an unconditioned or absolute substance, an unconditioned or ab­
solute whole, and an unconditioned or absolute ground. Thus reason
postulates "the unconditioned subjective conditions of thinking, the un­
conditioned (objective) condition of appearances, and the uncondi­
tioned objective condition of all things in general . " ' 5 8 These three
inferences, which Kant will discuss in the Critique under the titles of the
"Paralogism," the "Antinomy," and the "Ideal of Pure Reason," will be
diagnosed as theoretically unjustified, because the underlying principle,
that whenever the conditioned is given so is its ultimate condition, is
theoretically unjustified. Nevertheless these three ideas of the uncondi­
tioned will be useful in a practical context.
Even in the Critique Kant will retain the argument that the three
forms of "transcendental illusion" arise from three forms of infer­
ence, '59 but he also suggests both in these notes and in the published
work that they arise directly from an unwarranted reification of the
three concepts of a subject, a series, and a ground,,6o and it is easier to
understand his diagnosis in these terms. Thus, the three fundamental
errors of metaphysics are the assumptions (I ) that because we assign all
of our thoughts to our selves as subjects, we have knowledge of the soul
as an absolute subject; (2 ) that because we place all appearances in se63

1

Introduction
ries of ever increasing spaces and times, of ever decreasing spaces and
times, of causes and effects, and of contingents necessarily dependent
upon something else, we have knowledge of completed extensions in
space and time, of simples in space and time, of a first cause, and of a
necessary ground for all contingents; and (3) that because we must think
of some ground for any possibility, we have knowledge of an absolute
ground of all possibilities. In Kant's words:
The idea of the soul is grounded on [the idea that] the understanding must re­
late all thoughts and inner perceptions to the self and assume this as the only
permanent subject.
The idea of the unconditioned for all conditions in appearance is grounded in
reason as the prescription to seek the completeness of all cognition of the un­
derstanding in [series of] subordination.
The idea of the unconditioned unity of all objects of thought in an ens entium is
necessary in order to seek the relationship among all possible [things]
,6,
.

.

.

Kant suggests that it is natural for us to form these ideas, and that there
is even a subjective necessity to do so, but it is a mistake to interpret
them as offering theoretical knowledge of objects of a kind that could
never be presented by the senses.
What led Kant to divide his diagnosis of metaphysical illusions con­
cerning the self, the world, and God into these three parts (rational psy­
chology, rational cosmology, and rational theology), when previously
the claims about the soul were simply instances of the second and third
antinomies (the simplicity of the soul was just an instance of simplicity
in general, and the freedom of the self just an instance of absolute spon­
taneity), and an absolutely necessary ground of all contingents was the
subject of the fourth antinomy? 1 62 The contents of the third part of the
"Dialectic" in the published Critique, the "Ideal of Pure Reason," sug­
gest that Kant elevated the discussion of rational theology into a sepa­
rate section simply because he had too much material to treat it as a
single antinomy - he recapitulates his critique of the ontological, cos­
mological, and physico-theological arguments from the Only Possible
Ground of I 763 as well as criticizing his own positive argument from
that work, even while retaining the arguments about God that consti­
tute the third and fourth antinomies in the Critique. Kant would also
have been hard put to integrate his positive account of the necessary ra­
tional genesis of an ideal of pure reason ("Transcendental Dialectic,"
Book II, Chapter III, Section 2; A 5 7 I-8 3 / B 599-6 I I) into any discus­
sion that takes the form of an antinomy.
The criticism of rational psychology in the "Paralogism," however,
is something new, which appears in these notes of I 778-79 for the first
time. Here one can conjecture that the new "Paralogism" is Kant's re­
sponse to his own new transcendental deduction of the categories 64

Introduction
because he has claimed that the unity ofconsciousness is an a priori neces­
sity from which we can deduce the validity of the categories, he now
also has to tell us to be careful what not to infer from this unity of con­
sciousness, namely any metaphysical claims about the soul, claims that
the subject or bearer of consciousness is a unitary, simple, and eternal
substance. Such a "paralogism of pure reason" would really be "a tran­
scendental subreption," an illusion in which "the unity of apperception,
which is subjective, would be taken for the unity of the subject as a
thing."I63 We find no such warning in Kant before we find the intro­
duction of a separate transcendental deduction of the categories from
the unity of consciousness; so we can assume that the expansion of
the "Dialectic" to include paralogisms of pure reason separate from the
second and third antinomies was a cautionary response to the new
deduction, Kant's own warning about what not to read into his deduc­
tion. Then once the structure of the "Dialectic" had been so expanded,
it would not have been unnatural for Kant to add a fuller treatment
about theoretically unjustified though morally useful conceptions of
God as well.
One last note, written on a matriculation record from March 1 780,
and thus either a last draft for the about to be written Critique or a
memo written during its composition, recapitulates much of this out­
line and then adds a reference to one final section of the Critique:
To the Canon: the end of the whole of metaphysics is God and the future and
the end of these [in] our conduct, not as though morality must be arranged in
accordance with these, but because without these morality would be without
consequences.164
This is cryptic, and can only be fully understood in light of the argu­
ment that Kant develops, over all three Critiques, that the highest good
or maximization of both virtue and happiness, which we can only con­
ceive of as being made possible by an intelligent and benevolent Author
of the world prepared to give us the time necessary to perfect our virtue
and to make the world suitable for the achievement of our ends, is not
the motivation for virtuous action but is presupposed by its rationality.
This is the practical use to which Kant will put the theoretical illusions
of metaphysics. Conceiving of a "canon" of pure reason as well as its
critique - that is, a doctrine of its positive practical use as well as the
negative criticism of its misguided theoretical use - was thus the final
stage in conceiving of the structure and content of the Critique, where
this "canon" would be expanded into a "Doctrine of Method" that
would accompany the "Doctrine of Elements," into which the "Tran­
scendental Aesthetic," "Transcendental Analytic," and "Transcendental
Dialectic" would be placed.
With all of this in place by 1 7 79 or 1 78o, Kant was finally able to
65

Introduction
write the Critique, and to announce to Herz on 1 May 1 7 8 1 , after a
decade of apologies and postponements, that "In the current Easter
book fair there will appear a book of mine, entitled Critique of Pure
Reason. ", 65 Ten days later, he wrote to Herz these lines:
My work, may it stand or fall, cannot help but bring about a complete change
of thinking in this part of human knowledge [metaphysics], a part of knowledge
that concerns us so earnestly. For my part I have nowhere sought to create mi­
rages or to advance specious arguments in order to patch up my system; I have
rather let years pass by, in order that I might get to a finished insight that would
satisfy me completely and at which I have in fact arrived; so that I now find
nothing I want to change in the main theory (something I could never say of
any of my previous writings), though here and there little additions and clarifi­
cations would be desirable. ,66
V.
T H E C H AN G E S I N T H E S E C O N D E D I T I O N

For Kant himself, the Critique of Pure Reason was never intended to be
more than a propaedeutic to the systematic metaphysics of nature and
of morals that he had long intended to write, and his own intention
upon the completion of the Critique must have been to proceed directly
to these two parts of his philosophical system. He made substantial
progress in this direction, publishing the Metaphysical Foundations of
Natural Science in 1 786, in which he tried to show that the application
of his general principles of judgment to the empirical concept of mo­
tion yields the basic principles of Newtonian physics, and the Ground­
work ofthe Metaphysics ofMorals in 1 785, intended to be the introduction
to the detailed system of duties that would constitute the metaphysics
of morals (and would not in fact appear until 1 797)' But the initial re­
ception of the Critique ofPure Reason sorely disappointed Kant's expec­
tation that the work could not "help but bring about a complete change
of thinking," and a great deal of Kant's effort during the decade of the
I 780s was devoted to the unforeseen task of clarifying the critical foun­
dations of his system of philosophy that he thought he had completed
in May I 78 1 . This work took a number of different forms: the publica­
tion of a brief defense and attempted popularization of the Critique in
1 78 3 , the Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysics; continued work on the
transcendental deduction in his private notes during 1 78 3-84; a pro­
posed revision of the transcendental deduction of the categories in the
introduction to the 1 786 Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science; a
substantial revision of the Critique of Pure Reason for its second edition
in 1 787; and finally the publication of two further critiques, the Critique
of Practical Reason ( 1 7 88) and the Critique ofJudgment ( 1 7 90), which
were clearly not works Kant had planned at the time of the publication
66

Introduction
of the Critique ofPure Reason but which instead grew out of his ongoing
struggle to clarify the foundations of his critical philosophy. We cannot
comment on all this material here; instead, after some brief comments
on the revisions to the Critique of Pure Reason that are implicit in the
Prolegomena and Metaphysical Foundations ofNatural Science, we will con­
clude this introduction by outlining the main changes made in the sec­
ond edition of the first Critique.
After a year of silence, broken only by two friendly but insignificant
reviews published in Frankfurt and Greifswald, the Critique finally re­
ceived its first serious review in the first supplementary volume of the
Gijttingischen Anzeigen von gelehrten Sachen for 1 782. The university at
G6ttingen, which had been founded in 1 7 3 7 by George I of England
in his continuing capacity as Georg August, elector of Hanover, was
home to a group of empiricist philosophers led by J. G. H. Feder
(1 740- 1 82 0). The review, apparently abridged and rewritten by Feder
from a much longer and more sympathetic draft by the Berlin moral
philosopher Christian Garve (1 742-1 798), was dismissive. I67 The ver­
sion of the review published by Feder omitted Garve's careful exposi­
tion of much oLKant's arguments and his quite insightful interpretation
of Kant's justification of the possibility of synthetic a priori cognition in
general, and in mathematics in particular, to focus on three objections.
First, it charged that Kant's "system of the higher or . . . transcendental
idealism" was nothing but a restatement of Berkeley's idealism, reduc­
ing all objects to our own sensations and leaving the real existence of
any objects beyond our own representations entirely unknown. Second,
it argued that on Kant's account there could be no differentiation "be­
tween the actual and the imagined, the merely possible, " between the
actual and "mere visions and fantasies." Third, it charged that Kant's ar­
gument that the unsound theoretical use of pure reason can and must
be replaced by a sound practical use was entirely unnecessary, since
morality already has a sound foundation in common sense.
Kant had apparently already formulated the intention to write a
shorter and more popular presentation of his critical philosophy almost
as soon as the Critique was published, but the hostile review clearly
galvanized him, and he included explicit answers to some of its charges
in the pages of the Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysics that he pub­
lished in August 1 78 3 . Specifically, he differentiated his position from
Berkeleian idealism by arguing that he denied the real existence of space
and time and the spatiotemporal properties of objects, but not the real ex­
istence of objects themselves distinct from our representations, and for
this reason he proposed renaming his transcendental idealism with the
more informative name of "formal" or "critical idealism," making it
clear that his idealism concerned the form but not the existence of ex­
ternal objects.I68 Further, he argued that his theory of the understand67

Introduction
ing and its principles, unlike the usual brands of idealism, offered de­
terminate principles for establishing the coherence of veridical experi­
ence as contrasted to incoherent dreams and fantasies, I69 and that for
this reason it should not be considered a form of "higher" idealism, an
expression in which he detected a pejorative implication of fancifulness,
but rather a philosophy firmly rooted in the "fruitful bathos of experi­
ence. "'70 Finally, Kant rejected any comparison of his view to Berkeley's
on the ground that Berkeley's empiricism leaves all knowledge of space
and time a posteriori and contingent, whereas only Kant's own formal
idealism can explain our a priori knowledge of space and time as the uni­
versal and necessary forms of intuition. I 7 I
Emphasizing that only his transcendental idealism can explain our
a priori knowledge of mathematics and pure physics while at the same
time demonstrating that as formal idealism it is entirely compatible
with the real existence of external objects would both be major objec­
tives in Kant's revisions of the Critique for its second edition. Vindi­
cating his view that the illusory theoretical use of pure reason must be
replaced by its sound practical use, the last point challenged by the
Gottingen review although not replied to in the Prolegomena, would
also be an aim of those revisions. But, as had been the case before with
the critical response to the inaugural dissertation, Kant also revealed in
the Prolegomena a concern that his critic had not raised: namely, a con­
cern about the adequacy of the transcendental deduction of the cate­
gories itself. Kant expressed this worry about the deduction (and the
associated paralogisms) as mildly as he could: he says that he is com­
pletely satisfied with the "content, order, and doctrine" of his work but
that he is "not entirely satisfied with the presentation in some parts of
the Doctrine of Elements, e.g., the deduction of the categories or the
paralogisms of pure reason."I 72 In fact, both of those chapters would be
completely rewritten in the second edition of the Critique, in part to re­
spond to the challenge to Kant's variety of idealism raised by the
Gottingen review but also to respond to Kant's own concerns about
their persuasiveness.
Indeed, Kant had already begun to manifest his concern about the
adequacy of the deduction in the Prolegomena itself. Following what he
claims to be the "analytic" method of the Prolegomena rather than the
"synthetic" method of the Critiquel73 the difference is supposed to be
between a method that analyzes the presuppositions of undisputed
knowledge-claims and one that determines the consequences of funda­
mental claims about the human cognitive faculties,174 but in fact the
major difference between Kant's argument in the two works concerns
which knowledge-claims it is whose conditions are analyzed - Kant
replaces the transcendental deduction of the categories, which purports
to analyze the necessary conditions of the possibility of the transcen-

68

Introduction

dental unity of apperception, with an analysis of the necessary condition
of universally and necessarily valid judgments in ordinary life and sci­
ence that makes no use of the concept of apperception at all. Thus,
Kant argues that while mere "judgments of perception," which make no
claim to necessary objective validity or the agreement of others at all,
but only report how things seem to a single subject, use the logical
forms of judgment, "judgments of experience," which do make claims
to objective validity necessary for all, can only derive their universal and
necessary validity from their use of a priori categories to make the oth­
erwise indeterminate use of the forms of judgment determinate. '75 This
approach is pursued even further in the Preface to the Metaphysical
Foundations ofNatural Science three years later, where Kant suggests that
the categories can be derived as the necessary conditions of making the
use of the logical forms of judgment determinate even without explicit
reference to the alleged distinction between judgments of perception
and of experience. '76 But although this strategy avoids the obscurity of
some of Kant's claims about the transcendental unity of apperception,
it is open to the charge of begging the question against both empiricists
and skeptics, proving that the categories are necessary only by accept­
ing an interpretation of ordinary and scientific knowledge-claims as
universally and necessarily true that neither a skeptic nor an empiricist
would dream of accepting.
In any case, Kant's notes from the period 1 78 3-84 show that he con­
tinued to experiment with both the unity of apperception as well as the
concept of objectively valid judgment as possible bases for the deduc­
tion of the categories. '77 However, when Kant came to rewrite the
chapter on the transcendental deduction for the second edition, he
returned to his original strategy of trying to combine the conditions of
possibility of the unity of apperception with those of the judgment of
objects to create an unshakable foundation for the objective validity
of the categories.
When Kant was first notified by his publisher in April 1 786 that a
new edition of the Critique would be needed, he apparently contem­
plated a drastic revision that would include an extensive discussion of
practical reason as well as a restatement of his work on theoretical rea­
son. At the same time, he also assumed the rectorship of his university.
At some point during the year he must have decided on the more mod­
est though still extensive revisions that we have, enough of which were
completed by January 1 787 for typesetting of the new edition to begin,
and all of which were apparently completed by that April, just a year
after the new edition was first requested. '7 8 (At some point between
1 7 8 1 and 1 78 7 Kant made the annotations in his own copy of the first
edition of the Critique that we reproduce throughout our translation,
but as these notes are not closely matched by the changes in the edition
69

Introduction
of I 787, there is no reason to believe that these notes were made dur­
ing I 786-87 as part of the work on the new edition.)
The main changes in the second edition, growing partly out oLKant's
response to the criticism of the first and partly out of his own concerns,
as we have just described, are as follows. (I) Kant replaced the preface
to the first edition, which speaks in only the most general terms about
the need to place the science of metaphysics on a secure footing, with a
considerably longer one that describes in much more detail both the in­
novations of Kant's critical method - it is here that Kant introduces the
famous comparison between his own anthropocentric procedure in phi­
losophy and Copernicus's heliocentric revolution in astronomy
(B xvi) - and his position that pure reason ultimately has a positive role
only in its practical rather than theoretical use (B xxiv-xxxvii). The lat­
ter emphasis is clearly meant to respond to the dismissive remarks of
the Gottingen review on this subject. r 79 The new preface concludes
with a brief comment on the changes in the new edition, and then with
a long footnote (B xxix-xli) revising yet further the new "Refutation of
Idealism" that is one of the most important of those changes.
(2 ) The introduction is considerably expanded. Its main changes are,
first, a more detailed discussion of the distinction between a priori and
a posteriori cognition than the first edition had included, and then an ex­
tended argument that the synthetic a priori cognitions of pure mathe­
matics and physics can only be explained by his transcendental idealism,
which are in fact lifted virtually without change from the Prolego­
mena. r80 Kant's inclusion of these pages shows that he is still very con­
cerned to emphasize the difference between B erkeley's idealism and his
own, since Berkeley's inability to explain a priori knowledge was one of
Kant's chief charges in the Prolegomena.
(3) The "Transcendental Aesthetic" is also considerably expanded.
Kant's aim in its revision seems to have been primarily to buttress the
(anti-Berkeleian) argument for the necessity of his transcendental ide­
alism to explain synthetic a priori cognition, rather than the argument
that his form of idealism is compatible with knowledge of the real exis­
tence of external objects, which will dominate his revisions in later parts
of the work. Thus, Kant divides his previously undivided discussions of
space and time into what he now calls the "Metaphysical" and "Trans­
cendental Exposition" of each, where the first of these titles subsumes
the arguments that space and time are pure and a priori forms of intu­
ition as well as pure intuitions in their own right, and the second sepa­
rately expounds the argument that our synthetic a priori cognition of
mathematics (especially geometry) can only be explained by transcen­
dental idealism. The revised version of the "Aesthetic" concludes with
a number of additional arguments in behalf of transcendental idealism
that were not present in the first edition.
70

Introduction
(4) The next major change comes in the "Transcendental Deduction"
of the categories, which Kant rewrote almost completely for the second
edition (two introductory sections are left largely unchanged, but the
rest is completely rewritten, thirty-five pages in the first edition being
replaced with forty completely new ones in the second). To character­
ize the nature of the changes that Kant made in any detail would be an
interpretative venture inappropriate for this introduction, but a few
points can be noted. First, in spite of his experiments with an apper­
ception-free deduction in I 78 3 and I 786, Kant in fact tried to ground
the entire deduction more clearly on the starting-point of the unity of
apperception than he had in I 7 8 I . At the same time, trying to salvage
his experiments of the intervening years, he also tried to connect the
unity of apperception more unequivocally with the idea of the objective
validity of judgment than he had in the earlier version. Second, Kant
tried to prepare the way for the coming new "Refutation of Idealism"
by stressing that the cognitive subject must be regarded as determining
the structure and order of its own self-consciousness just as much as it
does to the representation of external objects (§§ 2 3-5)' Finally, con­
tinuing the stress on the necessity of the representation of space that
was part of the Prolegomena's response to the charge of Berkeleian ide­
alism, Kant stresses that the synthetic unity of consciousness, which in
the first edition had been associated exclusively with the synthesis of
time, is responsible for the unity of both space and time, and indeed that
the representation of determinate spatial relations is a necessary condi­
tion for the representation of a determinate temporal order, which is an
undeniable feature of any conceivable self-consciousness (see B I 5 6).
(5) The argument that while time is the form of all sense, the repre­
sentation of space is itself the necessary condition for the representation
of determinate order in time, which continues Kant's rebuttal of the
charge of Berkeleian idealism, is the chief theme of all of the revisions
in the "Analytic of Principles." These revisions take the form of re­
statements of the several principles of judgment, and of additional para­
graphs at the start of each of the proofs; but Kant's most important
addition to this part of the book is the new "Refutation of Idealism"
that is inserted into the discussion of actuality in the "Postulates of
Empirical Thought" (B 2 74-9). This may seem like an inauspicious lo­
cation for such an addition, but Kant's intention in choosing it can only
have been to show that empirically meaningful judgments about the
modalities of possibility and necessity all depend upon connection to
the actual in perception, and then to show what he means by the actual
in perception: that which we judge to exist independently of our repre­
sentation of it, even if we also know that the form in which we represent
the independence of such objects is itself dependent upon the constitu­
tion of our own sensibility. The "Refutation of Idealism," in other
71

Introduction

words, is Kant's ultimate attempt to prove that his idealism is merely for­
mal idealism rather than the subjective realism of Berkeley.
The "Refutation of Idealism" is one of the most important of Kant's
additions to the second edition, but the fact that before the new edition
was even published he was already revising this revision in the new
preface (presumably the last part to be rewritten) shows that Kant was
hardly satisfied with his new argument. In fact, the new "Refutation" is
not so much the culmination of a long-considered process of thought
as the beginning of a new one, and a dozen or more further versions
from the period 1 788-90 survive to show that Kant continued to work
on this argument even after the second edition of the Critique had al­
ready appeared. , 8 ,
(6) Kant also undertook major revisions in the chapter on the dis­
tinction between phenomena and noumena. His primary concern in
these revisions was to clarify the difference between using the concept
of a noumenon in a negative and a positive sense. This can be regarded
as a step toward clarifying his doctrine that whereas pure reason has
only a negative theoretical use it does have a positive practical use, a
doctrine the clarity of which had been challenged both by the
Gottingen review and by Garve's original draft.
(7) Having added a new "Refutation of Idealism," Kant had no choice
but to rewrite at least the fourth paralogism of the first edition, which
above all other passages had given justification to the charge of
Berkeleianism by insisting that we could be as certain of the objects of
outer sense as of those of inner sense because objects in space are noth­
ing but one species of representation alongside representations of inner
sense (see especially A 3 70). Kant replaced this argument with a com­
pletely different, anti-Cartesian argument that there should be no puz­
zle about the possibility of interaction between mind and body because
the differences in their appearances that Descartes and his followers
had assumed to stand in the way of interaction might be no more than
different appearances of a single sort of underlying reality (B 42 7-8).
However, Kant did not confine himself to this change, but took the op­
portunity to rewrite and simplify the whole chapter on the paralogisms.
Except for his substantive change in the fourth paralogism, this is the
only part of his revisions that lives up to his pretense of merely im­
proving his manner of exposition (Bxxxvii).
Beyond the "Paralogisms of Pure Reason," Kant made no further sig­
nificant changes for the second edition. We do not know if this means
that he remained completely content with the remainder of the book,
or only that he ran out of time and patience. His continuing restate­
ment and refinement in the second and third Critiques of many impor­
tant doctrines touched upon in the remainder of the book, such as his
72

Introduction

theory of the postulates of practical reason and the regulative use of the
ideas of reason, suggest the latter rather than the former explanation.
In sum, then, the bulk of Kant's changes in the second edition grew
out of his desire to refine and defend his transcendental idealism by
showing that only it could explain our a priori knowledge while at the
same time arguing that it was completely compatible with the real exis­
tence of external objects. Beyond this, Kant wanted to emphasize the
positive role of reason in the practical rather than theoretical sphere,
and he continued to try to find a clear and adequate deduction of the
categories. These concerns led him to revise substantially his introduc­
tion, the "Transcendental Aesthetic," and the chapter on phenomena
and noumena, as well as to revise completely his preface, the "Trans­
cendental Deduction" of the categories, and the "Paralogisms of Pure
Reason."

Note on translation
This is an entirely new translation of the Critique ofPure Reason. Our
intention in producing this translation has been to try to give the reader
of the translation an experience as close as possible to that of the reader
of the German original. The criterion for success in this intention is
that as much interpretative work be left for the reader of the translation
as is left for the reader of the original. This intention has dictated a
number of our choices.
Obviously it has required as much consistency as possible in the
translation of Kant's terminology; to the extent possible, we have always
used the same English word for any philosophically significant German
word, and where a single English word has had to stand duty for several
German words, we have noted this fact. This situation typically arises
when Kant uses both a germanic and a latinate word that would
be translated into English by the same word, e.g., "Gegenstand" and
"Object, " both of which are translated into English as "object." In some
such cases it may be a matter of interpretation whether Kant means pre­
cisely the same thing or not, so we have preserved the information
about his usage by marking the Latinate member of the pair in the foot­
notes, but have not imposed any interpretation of the distinction in the
text.
Other obvious consequences of our underlying intention include the
preservation of Kant's sentences as wholes, even where considerations
of readability might have suggested breaking them up, and the preser­
vation of ambiguous and obscure constructions in Kant's original text
wherever possible. The latter decision means that we have refrained
from accepting emendations to the German text as long as we believe
73

Introduction

some sense can be made of the unemended original, even if a proposed
emendation makes easier sense out of a given passage. In those cases
where we do accept emendations, we have not cited authorities earlier
than Benno Erdmann's edition of the Critique in the Akademie edition
( 1 9 I I), cited as "Erdmann." This means that we have not reproduced
the ascriptions of emendations going back to nineteenth-century edi­
tors that decorate the pages of the edition by Raymund Schmidt (1 926,
1 9 3 0), which was the basis for Norman Kemp Smith's English transla­
tion (1 929, 1 93 3). Our decision also means that where Kant's location
of the adverbial phrase "a priori," which he always treats as a Latin bor­
rowing rather than a naturalized latinate German term, is ambiguous
between an adverbial modification of a verb and an adjectival modifica­
tion of a noun, we have tried to leave it ambiguous, although we could
not always do so.
The biggest issue that we faced, however, was how to present the
variations between the first ( 1 78 1 or "A") and second (1787 or "B") edi­
tions of the Critique. Here too our underlying intention eventually dic­
tated a different approach from that adopted by either Erdmann or
Schmidt and Kemp Smith. Erdmann treated A and B as two separate
works, publishing in Volume 3 of the Akademie edition B in its entirety,
followed by a separate edition in Volume 4 of A up through the point
after which Kant made no further revisions (the "Paralogisms of Pure
Reason"). This approach makes it difficult for the reader to compare
particular passages in A and B. Schmidt and Kemp Smith also regarded
B as the definitive text, but presented a single text that always follows
the text of B on the main part of the page and relegates modified or
deleted passages from A to their notes, except where Kant rewrote
chapters or sections of the book in their entirety, in which case the ver­
sion from A was presented in the text followed by the version from B.
This often makes it difficult for the reader to follow the text, and makes
it particularly difficult for the reader to get a clear sense of how the first
edition read. In order to avoid this problem, we have presented both
versions of those sections of the book that Kant rewrote extensively as
well as completely: thus, we present two versions of the introduction,
the "Transcendental Aesthetic," and the chapter on the "Distinction be­
tween Phenomena and Noumena" as well as two versions of the pref­
ace, "Transcendental Deduction," and "Paralogisms." But in order to
make comparison between the two editions easier than Erdmann made
it, we have also provided the pagination of both editions for all passages
that Kant preserved intact or largely intact from the first edition, even
in those chapters that he rewrote extensively although not completely
for the second, and have noted the changes that Kant made in our foot­
notes. Where Kant made only minor changes in a section, we have fol­
lowed the practice of Schmidt and Kemp Smith by preferring B in our
74

Introduction

main text and noting divergences in A in our footnotes (new material
inserted in B is enclosed in angled brackets). In this way, we hope to
make it easy for the reader to remain clearly aware of the differences be­
tween the two editions without treating them as if they were two unre­
lated works, as Erdmann's approach does.
Our view that we should avoid imposing our own interpretation of
the Critique as much as possible has not meant that we should avoid
referring our readers to materials that might help them in the inter­
pretation of the text. Instead, we have provided two sorts of references
that may help in the interpretation of the text. The first sort of mate­
rial is Kant's notes in his own copy of the first edition of the Critique,
which were published by Benno Erdmann in I 88 I (Benno Erdmann;
Nachtrage zu Kants Kritik der reinen Vernunft [Kiel: Lipsius & Tischer,
I 88 I J). These notes range from mere cross-outs to changes in words
or phrases to extensive comments or paragraphs. Schmidt and Kemp
Smith noted those places where Kant had changed a couple of words,
but omitted all the rest. We have presented all of the material that
Erdmann recorded in our footnotes, following Erdmann's description
of the location of the notes as closely as possible. In this way, the
reader can have the experience not merely of reading and interpreting
Kant's original text of the first edition but that of reading Kant's own
copy of that edition. (No annotated copy of the second edition has
ever been known to exist.) These notes are cited thus: "E" (for Erd­
mann), followed by Erdmann's roman numeral and the page number
in his edition; then the volume and page number of their appearance
in the Akademie edition. Second, we have provided cross-references to
many of Kant's notes in the Handschriftliche Nachlafl ("hand-written re­
mains") transcribed in volumes I4 through 2 3 of the Akademie edition.
Obviously we could not index all of these notes, but have tried to give
references to those that throw light on specific passages in the
Critique, especially those that seem to be either preliminary drafts or
subsequent reworkings of specific passages. Since this material does
not appear in the original editions of the Critique or Kant's own copy
of the first edition, we have not referred to it, let alone reproduced it,
in our footnotes on Kant's pages, but have put the references to it in
our endnotes.
Our translation has not been produced from any single German edi­
tion. As do most contemporary scholars, we began by working from the
edition of the Critique by Raymund Schmidt in the Philosophische
Bibliothek. As we worked on the translation, however, we realized that
Schmidt's edition is the least conservative twentieth-century edition of
Kant's text, not only modernizing spelling and punctuation more than
others do but also accepting the largest number of editorial emenda­
tions to the text. We thus began to check our translation against the
75

Introduction

three other main twentieth-century editions of the text, namely those of
Erdmann in the Akademie edition, of Wilhelm Weischedel in the Insel
Verlag, subsequently Suhrkamp Verlag Studienausgabe ( 1 9 5 6), and of
Ingeborg Heidemann in the Reclam Studienausgabe (1966). Of these,
the Heidemann edition appears closest to the original editions, though
it does modernize spelling. Finally, we have checked the translation
against facsimiles of the original editions.
Here we can add a word about our choice of typography. The origi­
nal editions were set primarily in Fraktur (gothic type). Latin words, in­
cluding such frequently used words as "a priori" and "a posteriori" as well
as "phenomena" and "noumena," which Kant did not regard as natural­
ized into German, were set in roman type. Emphasis was indicated, not
by the modern English method of italics nor by the modern German
method of Sperrdruck (spaced type), but by the use of larger and thicker
Fraktur type than is used elsewhere (boldface or Fettdruck). To try to
recreate the appearance of Kant's pages, we have therefore used bold
type for emphasis and italics for the foreign words that Kant had
printed in roman type. In the original, a range of Fettdruck sizes was
used, which makes it sometimes quite easy and sometimes very difficult
to tell whether a word is being emphasized - this is a source of dis­
agreement in modern editions about which words should be empha­
sized. We have not tried to reproduce this range of type sizes. We
should also note that Kant sometimes but not always uses Fettdruck to
indicate that a word or sentence is being mentioned rather than used.
Where he does so, we use bold type; where he does not, we have intro­
duced quotation marks.
Now for a word about our use of previous English translations. We
have followed Kemp Smith in many of his choices for translation of
Kant's technical terminology, for the simple reason that Kemp Smith
usually (but not always) adopted the wise procedure of letting Kant's
own Latin equivalents for his German technical terms determine the
English translation. (No doubt many of Kemp Smith's turns of phrase
also reverberated in our minds after years of using his translation.)
Nevertheless, the present work is by no means a revision of Kemp
Smith, and it departs from his translation systematically and consis­
tently throughout on many points. We have always worked directly
from German texts, consulting Kemp Smith from time to time but also
consulting the earlier English translations as well. Of these, we found
that by Friedrich Max Muller (1881) more helpful than that by J. M. D.
Meikeljohn (18 5 5 ). Of surprising help was a full translation of only the
second edition done by Francis Haywood (second edition, 1 848). This
is the earliest English translation of the Critique we have been able to
discover, and often proved helpful because, like us, Haywood clearly
made literalness in translation his primary objective.
76

Introduction

Bibliography
In this bibliography, we list the German editions of the text of the
Critique ofPure Reason that we have consulted, the earlier English trans­
lations we have consulted, and a selection of scholarly works including
discussion of the genesis and text of the Critique. The last selection is
not intended as even a selective guide to philosophically interesting and
useful works on the interpretation of the Critique.
I.

German texts

Critik der rein en Vernunft.

KANT , I M MA N U E L .

Riga: Johann Friedrich Hart­

knoch, 1 7 8 1 . Facsimile edition: London: Routledge/Thoemmes Press,
1 994·
KA N T , I M M A N U E L .

Critik der reinen Vernunft.

Zweyte hin und wieder verbes­

serte Auflage. Riga: Johann Friedrich Hartknoch, 1 78 7 . Facsimile edition:
London: Routledge/Thoemmes Press, 1 994.
KAN T , I M M A N U E L .

Kritik der reinen Vernunft. Zweite Auflage 1 7 8 7. [Edited by
Kant's gesammelte Schriften, herausgegeben von der

Benno Erdmann.]

Koniglich Preuflischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Band III. Berlin:
Georg Reimer, 1 9 1 1 .
KANT,

Kritik der reinen Vernunft (1 . Aufl.).
Kant's gesammelte Schriften, herausgegeben

I M MAN U E L .

Erdmann.]

[Edited by B enno
von der Koniglich

Preuflischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Band IV. Berlin: Georg
Reimer, 1 9 1 1 . Pp. 1 -2 5 2 .
KANT ,

Kritik der reinen Vernunft. Nach der ersten und zweiten

I M MAN U E L .

Original-Ausgabe.

Herausgegeben von Raymund Schmidt. Dritte Auflage,

mit einer Bibliographie von Heiner Klemme. Hamburg: Felix Meiner
Verlag, 1 990. (First and second editions, 1 9 26, 1 93 0.)
KANT , I M MA N UE L .

Kritik der reinen Vernunft.

Herausgegeben von Wilhelm

Weischedel. Werkausgabe, Bande III, IV Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp,
1 974. (Originally Wiesbaden: Insel Verlag, 1 956.)
KA N T ,

1M M A N U E L.

Kritik der reinen Vernunft.

Herausgegeben von Inge borg

Heidemann. Stuttgart: Philipp Reclam Jun., 1 966.

2.
KANT, I M MANU E L .

English translations

Critick of Pure Reason.

Second edition with notes and ex­

planation of terms. Translated by Francis Haywood. London: William
Pickering, 1 848 .

Critique ofPure Reason. Translated by J. M. D. Meikeljohn,
introduction by A. D. Lindsay. London: ]. M. D ent, 1 9 34. (Original edi­
tion: 1 8 5 5 .)

KANT , I M MA NU E L .

Critique of Pure Reason. A revised and expanded translation
based on Meikeljohn. Edited by Vasilis Politis. London: J. M. Dent, 1993 .
K A N T , I M M A N U E L . Critique of Pure Reason. Translated by F. Max Muller.

KANT , I M MA N U E L .

77

Introduction
Garden City: Anchor Books, 1 966. (Original edition: London: Macmillan,
I 88 ! .)

Immanuel Kant's Critique of Pure Reason.

Translated by Norman Kemp Smith.

Second impression with corrections. London: Macmillan, 1 9 3 3 . (First edi­
tion, 1 9 29.)
3.
AL-AZM ,

Selected secondary sources

The Origins of Kant's Arguments in the Antinomies.

SADIK.

Oxford:

Oxford University Press, 1 9 7 2 .
ALLISON,

H E N RY

Defense.

Kant's Transcendental Idealism: An Interpretation and

E.

New Haven: Yale University Press, 1 9 8 3 .

Kant's Theory of Mind: An Analysis of the Paralogisms of Pure

A M E R I K S , KAR L .

Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1 9 8 2 .

Reason.

"Die iiussere Entstehung und die Abfassungszeit der Kritik der
rein en Vernunft. " In Arnoldt, Gesammmelte Schriften, Band IV. Berlin:

ARNOLDT, EMIL.

Bruno Cassirer, 1 908. Pp. 1 1 9-2 2 5 .
BECK, LEWIS

WHITE.

Studies in the Philosophy of Kant.

Indianapolis: Bobbs­

Merrill, 1 96 5 .

Early German Philosophy: Kant and his Predecessors.

Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard

University Press, 1 969.
BEISER,

FREDERICK

Fichte.

c.

The Fate of Reason: German Philosophy from Kant to

Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1 9 8 7 .

B E N N E T T , J O NAT H A N F.

Kant's Analytic.

Cambridge: Cambridge University

Press, 1 966.

Kant's Dialectic.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1 9 74.

Kant's Theory of Knowledge: An Outline of One Central
Argument in the Critique ofPure Reason. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul,

BIRD,

G RA H A M .

1 96 2 .
B RA N D T , R E I N H A R D .

B92-1 0 I .

The Table ofJudgment: Critique of Pure Reason A 67-76;

Translated by Eric Watkins. North American Kant Society

Studies in Philosophy, Volume 4. Atascadero, Cal.: Ridgeview, 1 99 5 .
B ROAD ,

C.

D.

Kant: An Introduction.

E d . C. Lewy. Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press, 1 9 7 8 .

Der schweigende Kant: Die Entwurft zu einer Deduktion der
Kategorien vor 1781. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1 989.
C O H E N , H E R M A N N . Kants Theorie der Eifahrung. 2nd. ed. Berlin: F. Diimmler,
C A R L , W O L F G AN G .

1 88 5 .
DRYER,

D O UGLAS

P.

Kant's Solution for Verification in Metaphysics.

Allen & Unwin, 1 966.

London:

B E N N O . Kant's Kriticismus in der ersten und zweiten Aujlage der
Kritik der reinen Vernunft. Eine historiSfhe Untersuchung. Leipzig: Leopold

ERDMANN,

Voss, 1 8 78.

Nachtriige zu Kants Kritik der reinen Vernunft. Kiel: Lipsius & Tischer, 188 I .
Beitriige zur Geschichte und Revision des Textes von Kants Kritik der reinen
Vernunft. Berlin, 1 900.
F A L K E N S T E I N , L O R N E . Kant's Intuitionism: A Commentary on the Transcenden­
tal Aesthetic. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1 99 5 ·
78

Introduction
F R IEDMAN, M I C HA E L .

Kant and the Exact Sciences.

Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard

University Press, 1 9 9 2 .
GUYER,

PAUL.

Kant and the Claims of Knowledge.

Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press, 1 9 8 7 .
HA R I N G , THE O D O R .

Der Duisburg'sche Nachlafi und Kants Kritizismums um

I77S. Tlibingen, 1 9 1 0.
HENRICH, DIETER.

Der Ontologische Gottesbeweis.

2nd. ed. Tlibingen: ]. C. B.

Mohr (Paul Siebeck), 1 96o.

The Unity of Reason: Essays on Kant's Philosophy.

Edited by Richard Velkley.

Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1 994HI N S K E , N O RB E R T .

Kant.

Kants Weg zur Transzendentalphilosophie: Der dreifligjdhrige

Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1 970.

HE L M U T . Kants Eifahrungsbegriff Quellengeschichtliche und bedeu­
tungsanalytische Untersuchungen. Basel: Schwabe, 1 970.
K I T C H E R , PAT R I C I A . Kant's Transcendental Psychology. New York: Oxford Uni­

H a L Z H E Y,

versity Press, 1 990.

Kants Philosophie des Subjekts: Systematische und entwick­
lungs geschichtliche Untersuchungen zum Verhdltnis von Selbstbewufitsein und
Selbsterkenntnis. Kant-Forschungen, Band 7. Hamburg: Felix Meiner,

K L E M M E , H E I N E R F.

1 996.
K O P P E R , J O A C H I M AND R U D O L F M A L T E R , E D S .

der reinen Vernunft.
KREIMENDAHL,

Materialen zu Kants Kritik

Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp, 1 9 7 5 .

L O TH A R .

Kant - Der Durchbruch von

I 7 69. Koln: Dinter,

1 99°·
L AN D A U , A L B E R T ,

EDITOR.

Rezensionen zur Kantischen Philosophie.

Band 1:

1 78 1 - 1 7 8 7 . Bebra: Albert Landau, 1 990.
B EATRI C E .

LONGUEN E S S E ,

Kant et la pouvoir de juger.

Paris: Presses

Universitaires de France, 1 993 .
M E L N I C K , A RT H U R .

Kant:f Analogies ofExperience.

Chicago: University o f Chi­

cago Press, 1 9 7 3 .

Space, Time and Thought in Kant. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1 989.
Kant's Metaphysic ofExperience. 2 voIs. London: Allen

PAT 0 N, H. J.

1 9 3 6.

& Unwin,

Erscheinztng bei Kant. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1 9 7 1 .
The Completeness of Kant's Table of Judgments. Trans. Jane

PRAUS S , GEROLD.
REICH,

K LA U S .

Kneller and Michael Losonsky. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1 99 2 .
S A L A , G I OVAN N I .

"Bausteine zur Entstehungsgeschichte der Kritik der reinen

Vernunft."
S C HULTZ,

Kant-Studien 78 (1987): 1 5 3-69'
J O HA N N . An Exposition of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason.

Translated

by James C. Morrison. Ottawa: University of Ottawa Press, 1 99 5 .
S MITH, A. H.

Kantian Studies. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1 947.
A Commentary to Kant's "Critique of Pure Reason. "

S M I T H , N O R M A N K E M P.

Second edition. London: Macmillan, 1 9 2 3 .
s T RAW S 0 N , P. F. The Bounds ofSense: An Essay on
London: Methuen, 1 966.
TH O L E ,

B ERNHARD.

Kant's Critique ofPure Reason.

Kant und das Problem der Gesetzmdssigkeit der Natur.

Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1 99 1 .
TONELLI,

GIORGIO.

Kant's Critique of Pure Reason within the Tradition of
79

Introduction

Modern Logic.

Edited by D avid H. Chandler. Hildesheim: Georg Olms,

1 994·

Probleme der "Kritik der reinen Vernunft": KantTag;ung Marburg I98r. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1 984.
VAl H I N G E R, HAN s . Kommentar zur Kritik der rein en Vernunft. 2 vols. Stuttgart:

T U S C H L I N G , B URKHARD, E D .

W Spemann, 1 8 8 1 , and Union D eutsche Verlagsgesellschaft, 1 8 9 2 .

V L E E S C H A U W E R , H E R M A N -J EA N D E .

La deduction transcendentale dans l'oeuvre

3 vols. Antwerp, Paris, The Hague: De Sikkel, Champion, and
Martinus Nijhoff, 1 9 34-3 7.

de Kant.

The Development of Kantian Thought.

Translated by A. R. C. Duncan. Edin­

burgh: Thos. Nelson, 1 96 2 .
V O R L A N D E R , KAR L .

Immanuel Kant: Der Mann und das Werk.

2 vols. Leipzig:

Felix Meiner, 1 924.
WAL S H, W. H .

Kant's Criticism ofMetaphysics.

Edinburgh: University of Edin­

burgh Press, 1 9 7 5 .
WA S H B U R N ,

M I C HA E L .

"The Second Edition of the

Understanding of its Nature and Genesis."

Critique:
Kant-Studien

Toward an
66 ( 1 9 7 5):

2 7 7-90.
WERKMEI STER,

w.

H.

Kant's Silent Decade.

Tallahasee: University Presses of

Florida, 1 9 8 1 .

Kant: The Architectonic and Development of His Philosophy.

LaSalle, Ill.: Open

Court, 1 980.
W O L F F, M I C H A E L .

Die Vollstiindigkeit der kantischen Urteilstafe!.

Frankfurt am

Main: Klostermann, 1995.

Kant's Theory ofMental Activity: A Commentary on the
Transcendental Analytic of the Critique of Pure Reason. Cambridge, Mass .:

W O L F F, R O B E R T P A U L .

Harvard University Press, 1 963 .

80

Criti que
of
Pure Reason

by

Immanuel Kant
Professor in Konigsberg

Riga
Published by Johann Friedrich Hartknoch
1 78 1

Criti que
of
Pure Reason

by

Immanuel Kant
Professor in Konigsberg
Member of the Royal Academy of Sciences in Berlin

Second edition, improved here and there

Riga
Johann Friedrich Hartknoch
1 78 7

TAB L E O F C O N T E N T S

a

page 9 1

Motto (added in the second edition)
Dedication
(as in the first edition of

1 78 1)

95
97

(as in the second edition of 1 787)
Preface (to the first edition)

99

Preface to the second edition

106

Table of Contents (as in the first edition)

125

Introduction (as in the first edition)

1 27
I27

I. The idea of transcendental philosophy

On the difference between analytic and

synthetic

judgments.
II. Division of transcendental philosophy.
Introduction (as in the second edition)
I. On the difference between pure and empirical cognition.
II. We are in possession of certain

a priori cognitions,

and

even the common understanding is not without them.

137

III. Philosophy needs a science that determines the possibility,
the principlesb and the domain of all a priori cognitions.
Iv. On the difference between analytic and synthetic

1 39

judgments.
V Synthetic a priori judgments are contained as principles' in

all theoretical sciences of reason.
VI. The general problemd of pure reason.
a

b

This Table o f Contents i s the editors' expansion o f the less detailed one provided by
Kant in the first edition. The second edition contained no Table of Contents at all. A
translation of Kant's own first-edition Table of Contents follows the two versions of the
preface, corresponding to its original location.

Principien
, Principien
d Aufgabe

85

Contents
VII. The idea and the divisions of a special sciem.:e under the
name of a critique of pure reason.
I.

Transcendental doctrine of elements

First Part. Transcendental

aesthetic (as in the first edition)

[Introduction.]

153
155

First section. On space.

157

Second section. On time.

1 62

First Part. Transcendental aesthetic (as in the second edition)
Introduction. <§ I >
First section. On space. <§§ 2-3>
Second section. On time. <§§ 4-7>
General remarks on the transcendental aesthetic. <§ 8>
Second Part. Transcendental logic

1 72
1 74
1 78
185
193

Introduction. The idea o f a transcendental logic

193
193

I. O n logic i n general.
II. O n transcendental logic.

195

III. O n the division of general logic into analytic and dialectic.

197

IV On the division of transcendental logic into the transcen-

1 99

dental analytic and dialectic.

Division one. Transcendental analytic

201

Book I. Analytic of concepts

202

Chapter I. On the clue to the discovery of all pure concepts
204

of the understanding
First section. On the logical use of the understanding in
general.

204

Second section. On the logical function of the
understanding in judgments.

<§

9>

206

Third section. On the pure concepts of the
understanding or categories.

<§§

1 0- 1 2 >

210

Chapter II. On the deduction o f the pure concepts o f the
understanding

2 19

First section. O n the principlesa o f a transcendental
deduction in general.

<§

1 3>

219

Transition to the transcendental deduction of the
categories.

<§

S econd section. O n the

224

14>
a

priori grounds for the possibility

of experience. (as in the first edition)

a

Principien
86

226

Contents
Third section. On the relationO of the understanding to
objects in general and the possibility of cognizing
these

a priori.

(as in the first edition)

236

Second Section. Transcendental deduction o f the pure
concepts of the understanding. (as in the second
edition)

« §§

1 5-27»

2 45
267

Book II. Analytic of principles
Introduction. On the transcendental power of judgment in

268

general
Chapter I . On the schematism of pure concepts of the
understanding

271

Chapter II. System o f all principles of pure understanding

2 78

Section I. On the supreme principle of all analytic
judgments.

2 79

Section II. On the supreme principle of all synthetic
judgments.

281

Section III. Systematic representation o f all synthetic
principles of pure understanding.

283
286

1 . Axioms of intuition
2 . Anticipations o f perception

290

3 . Analogies of experience

295

A. First analogy: principle o f persistence o f substance.

299

B . Second analogy: principle of temporal succession
according to the law of causality.

304

C. Third analogy: principle of simultaneity according to the law of reciprocity or community.
4. The postulates o f empirical thought i n general
Refutation of idealism (added in the second edition)

3 16
32 1
3 26

General note o n the system o f principles (added in
the second edition)

334

Chapter III. On the ground o f the distinction o f all objects
in general into phenomena and

noumena

(as in the first edition)

338

Chapter III. On the ground of the distinction of all objects
in general into phenomena and

noumena

(as in the second edition)

3 54

Appendix: On the amphiboly of concepts of reflection

3 66

Remark to the amphiboly of concepts of reflection

371

Division two. Transcendental

dialectic

Introduction.

3 84
3 84

I. Transcendental illusion

3 84

a Verhiiltnisse

87

Contents
II. On pure reason as the seat of transcendental illusion
A. O n reason i n general.
B. On the logical use o f reason.
C. On the pure use of reason.
Book I. On the concepts of pure reason
Section I. On the ideas in general.
Section II. On the transcendental ideas.
Section III. The system of transcendental ideas.
Book II. The dialectical inferences of pure reason
Chapter I. The paralogisms of pure reason

3 87
3 87
3 89
390
3 94
3 95
3 99
40 5
409
41 1

(as in the first edition)
First paralogism of substantiality.
Second paralogism of simplicity.
Third paralogism of personality.
Fomth paralogism o f ideality.

Observation on the sum of the pure doctrine of the
Chapter

I. The paralogisms

soul

of pure reason

41 5
417
42 2
42 5
43 2
445

(as in the second edition)
Refutation of Mendelssohn's proof of the persistence of
the soul.

449

General remark concerning the transition from rational
psychology to rational cosmology.
Chapter II. The antinomy of pure reason
Section

I. The system of cosmological ideas.

Section II. The antithetic of pure reason.
First conflict
Second conflict
Third conflict
Fourth conflict
Section III. On the interest of reason in these conflicts.
Section IV On the transcendental problemsa of pure reason,
insofar as they absolutely must be capable of a solution.
Section V Skeptical representation of the cosmological
questions raised by all four transcendental ideas.

45 6
459
460
46 7
47 0
47 6
48 4
490
496
50 3
5 08

Section VI. Transcendental idealism as the key to solving
the cosmological dialectic.

5II

Section VII. Critical decision of the cosmological conflict of

5 14

reason with itself.
Section VIII. The regulative principleb of pure reason in
regard to the cosmological ideas.
a Aufgaben
b

Princip

88

5 20

Contents
Section

IX. The empirical use of the regulative principle of

reason in regard to the cosmological ideas.

I.

524

Resolution of the cosmological idea of totality of
the compositiona of the appearances into a

525

world-whole.

II.

Resolution of the cosmological idea of totality of division of a given whole in intuition.

528

Concluding remark o n the resolution o f the mathemati­
cal-transcendental ideas and preamble to the solution of the dynamical transcendental ideas.

III.

5 30

Resolution of the cosmological idea of the totality in
the derivation of occurrences in the world from
their causes.

The possibility of causality through freedom.
Clarification of the cosmological idea of freedom.
IV Resolution of the cosmological idea of the totality of

532
535
537

the dependence of appearances regarding their existence in general.
Concluding remark to the entire antinomy of pure reason.
Chapter

III. The ideal of pure reason
I. The ideal in general.
Section II. The transcendental ideal (prototypon
transcendentale).b
Section III. The grounds o f proof o f speculative reason
Section

inferring the existence of a highest being.
Section IV On the impossibility of an ontological proof of
God's existence.
Section V On the impossibility of a cosmological proof of
God's existence.

546
549
551
55 1
553
5 59
563
5 69

Discovery and explanation of the dialectical illusion in all
transcendental proofs of the existence of a necessary
being.
Section

VI.

575

On the impossibility of the physicotheological

proof.
Section

VII.

5 78
Critique of all theology from principles' of

reason.
Appendix to the transcendental dialectic
On the regulative use of the ideas of pure reason.
On the final aim of the natural dialectic of human reason.
a Zusammensetzung

b
C

transcendental prototype

Principien

89

583
590
590
605

Contents
II.

Transcendental doctrine of method

Introduction.

627

Chapter I . The discipline o f pure reason
S ection I. The discipline o f pure reason in dogmatic use.

628
630

Section II. The discipline of pure reason with regard to its
polemical use.

643

On the impossibility of a skeptical satisfaction of pure reason
that is divided against itself.

652

Section III. The discipline o f pure reason with regard to
658

hypotheses.
Section Iv. The discipline o f pure reason with regard t o its
proofs .

665

Chapter II. The canon of pure reason

672

Section 1. On the ultimate end of the pure use of our reason.

673

S ection II. On the ideal of the highest good.

676

Section III. On having an opinion, knowing, and believing.

684

Chapter III. The architectonic of pure reason

691

Chapter Iv. The history of pure reason

702

90

Baco de verulam
Instauratio Magna. Praefatio
De nobis ipsis silemus: De re autem, quae agitur, petimus: ut homines
earn non Opinionem, sed Opus esse cogitent; ac pro certo habeant, non
Sectae nos alicuius, aut Placiti, sed utilitatis et amplitudinis humanae
fundamenta moliri. Deinde ut suis commodis aequi . . . in commune
consulant . . . et ipsi in partem veniant. Praeterea ut bene sperent, neque
Instaurationem nostram ut quiddam infinitum et ultra mortale fingant,
et animo concipiant; quum revera sit infiniti erroris finis et terminus
legitimus.o
a This motto was added in the second edition:

Bacon of Verulam
The Great Instauration. Preface
Of our own person we will say nothing. But as to the subject matter with which we
are concerned, we ask that men think of it not as an opinion but as a work; and consid­
er it erected not for any sect of ours, or for our good pleasure, but as the foundation of
human utility and dignity. Each individual equally, then, may reflect on it himself . . .
for his own part . . . in the common interest. Further, each may well hope from our
instauration that it claims nothing infinite, and nothing beyond what is mortal; for in
truth it prescribes only the end of infinite errors, and this is a legitimate end.

91

B 11

To his Excellency,
the Royal Minister of State,
Baron von ZedlitzI

A iii / B iii

A IV

a Gracious Lord,

To further for one's own part the growth of the sciences is to labor in
your Excellency's own interest; for the former is most inwardly bound
up with the latter, not only through the exalted post as a protector of
the sciences, but also through the more intimate relationshipb of a lover
and an enlightened connoisseur. On this account, I avail myself of the
only means within my capacity to show my gratitude for the gracious
trust with which your Excellency honors me, as though that could contribute something to this aim.
For someone who enjoys the life of speculation the approval of an
enlightened and competent judge is, given his modest wishes, a power­
ful encouragement to toils whose utility is great, but distant, and hence
it is wholly misjudged by vulgar eyes.
To such a judge and to his gracious attention, I now dedicate this
piece of writing; to his protection I commend all the remaining business
of my literary vocation; and with deepest reverence I am,
Your Excellency's humble,
most obedient servant

Immanuel Kant
Konigsberg: the 29th of March, 1 7 8 1
a As in the first edition.
b

vertrautere Verhdltnis; this last word was added later, according to Kant's letter to Biester
of 8 June 1 78 1 .

95

AV

A VI

Bv

a<Gracious Lord,
To further for one's own part the growth of the sciences is to labor in
your Excellency's own interest; for the former is most inwardly bound
up with the latter, not only through the exalted post as a protector of
the sciences, but also through the more intimate relationshipb of a lover
and an enlightened connoisseur. On this account, I avail myself of the
only means within my capacity to show my gratitude for the gracious
trust with which your Excellency honors me, as though that could con­
tribute something to this aim.
To the same gracious attention with which Your Excellency has dignified the first edition of this work, I dedicate also this second one, and
at the same time all the remaining business of my literary vocation; and
with deepest reverence I am,
Your Excellency's humble,
most obedient servant,

Immanuel Kant
Konigsberg, the 2 3rd of April, 1 787>
a As in
h

the second edition.
vertrautere Verhiiltuis; this last word wa� added later, according to Kant's letter to Biester
of 8 June 1781.

97

B vi

P R E FA C E

a, I

A Vll

Human reason has the peculiar fate in one species of its cognitions that
it is burdened with questions which it cannot dismiss, since they are
given to it as problemsb by the nature of reason itself, but which it also
cannot answer, since they transcend every capacity" of human reason.
Reason falls into this perplexity through no fault of its own. It begins
from principles whose use is unavoidable in the course of experience
and at the same time sufficiently warranted by it. With these principles
it rises (as its nature also requires) ever higher, to more remote condi­
tions. But since it becomes aware in this way that its business must al­
ways remain incomplete because the questions never cease, reason sees
itself necessitated to take refuge in principles that overstep all possible
use in experience, and yet seem so unsuspicious that even ordinary
common sense agrees with them. But it thereby falls into obscurity and
contradictions, from which it can indeed surmise that it must some­
where be proceeding on the ground of hidden errors; but it cannot dis­
cover them, for the principles on which it is proceeding, since they
surpass the bounds of all experience, no longer recognize any touch­
stone of experience. The battlefield of these endless controversies is
called metaphysics.
There was a time when metaphysics was called the queen of all the
sciences, and if the will be taken for the deed, it deserved this title of
honor, on account of the preeminent importance of its object. Now, in
accordance with the fashion of the age, the queen proves despised on all
sides; and the matron, outcast and forsaken, mourns like Hecuba: Modo
maxima rerum, tot generis natisque potens - nunc trahor exul, inops Ovid,
Metamorphoses. d
In the beginning, under the administration of the dogmatists,2 her
rule was despotic. Yet because her legislation still retained traces of an­
cient barbarism, this rule gradually degenerated through internal wars
into complete anarchy; and the skeptics,3 a kind of nomads who abhor
all permanent cultivation of the soil, shattered civil unity from time to
-

a As in the first edition. Kant wrote a new preface for the second edition, given below.

b

aufgegeben
, Vermiigen
d

"Greatest of all by race and birth, I now am �ast out, powerless" (Ovid, Metamorphoses
1 3 :so8-ro).

99

A Vlll

A ix

Preface

<A>

time. But since there were fortunately only a few of them, they could
not prevent the dogmatists from continually attempting to rebuild,
though never according to a plan unanimously accepted among them­
selves. Once in recent times it even seemed as though an end would be
put to all these controversies, and the lawfulnesso of all the competing
claims would be completely decided, through a certain physiology of
.the human understanding (by the famous Locke);4 but it turned out that
although the birth of the purported queen was traced to the rabble of
common experience and her pretensions would therefore have been
rightly rendered suspicious, nevertheless she still asserted her claims,
because in fact this genealogy was attributed to her falsely; thus metaA X physics fell back into the same old worm-eaten dogmatism, and thus
into the same position of contempt out of which the science was to have
been extricated. Now after all paths (as we persuade ourselves) have
been tried in vain, what rules is tedium and complete indifferentism,s
the mother of chaos and night in the sciences, but at the same time also
the origin, or at least the prelude, of their incipient transformation and
enlightenment, when through ill-applied effort they have become ob­
scure, confused, and useless.
For it is pointless to affect indifference with respect to such in­
quiries, to whose object human nature cannot be indifferent. More­
over, however much they may think to make themselves unrecognizable
by exchanging the language of the schools for a popular style, these so­
called indifferentists, to the extent that they think anything at all, al­
ways unavoidably fall back into metaphysical assertions, which they yet
professed so much to despise. Nevertheless this indifference, occurring
amid the flourishing of all sciences, and directed precisely at those sci­
ences whose resultsb (if such are to be had at all) we could least do withA X! out, is a phenomenon deserving our attention and reflection. This is
evidently the effect not of the thoughtlessness of our age, but of its
ripened power of judgment, * which will no longer be put off with il* Now and again one hears complaints about the superficiality of our age's way
of thinking, and about the decay of well-grounded science. Yet I do not see
that those sciences whose grounds are well laid, such as mathematics, physics,
etc., in the least deserve this charge; rather, they maintain their old reputation
for well-groundedness, and in the case of natural science, even surpass it. This
same spirit would also prove itself effective in other species of cognition if
only care had first been taken to correct their principles. In the absence of
C

this, indifference, doubt, and finally strict criticism are rather proofs of a well­
grounded way of thinking. Our age is the genuine age of criticism, to which
a Rechtmassigkeit
b

Kenntnisse
, Principien

1 00

Preface

<A>

lusory knowledge, and which demands that reason should take on anew
the most difficult of all its tasks, namely, that of self-knowledge,a and to
institute a court of justice, by which reason may secure its rightful
claims while dismissing all its groundless pretensions, and this not by
mere decrees but according to its own eternal and unchangeable laws;
and this court is none other than the critique of pure reason itself.6
Yet by this I do not understand a critique of books and systems, but a
critique of the faculty of r�_ason in general, in respect of all the cogni­
tions after which reasonb might strive independendy of all experi­
ence, and hence the decision about the possibility or impossibility of a
metaphysics in general, and the determination of its sources, as well as
its extent and boundaries, all, however, from principles.c
It is on this path, the only one left, that I have set forth, and I flatter
myself that in following it I have succeeded in removing all those errors
that have so far put reason into dissension with itself in its nonexperi­
ential use. I have not avoided reason's questions by pleading the inca­
pacity of human reason as an excuse; rather I have completely specified
these questions according to principles,d and after discovering the point
where reason has misunderstood itself, I have resolved them to reason's full satisfaction. To be sure, the answer to these questions has not
turned out just as dogmatically enthusiastic lust for knowledge might
have expected; for the latter could not be satisfied except through magical powers in which I am not an expert. Yet this was also not the intent
of our reason's natural vocation; and the duty of philosophy was to abolish the semblance arising from misinterpretation, even if many prized
and beloved delusions have to be destroyed in the process. In this business I have made comprehensiveness my chief aim in view, and I make
bold to say that there cannot be a single metaphysical problem that has
not been solved here, or at least to the solution of which the key has not
been provided. In fact pure reason is such a perfect unity that if its principle' were insufficient for even a single one of the questions that are set
everything must submit.
through its

Religion through its holiness and legislation
majesty commonly seek to exempt themselves from it. But in this

way they excite a just suspicion against themselves, and cannot lay claim to
that unfeigned respect that reason grants only to that which has been able to
withstand its free and public examination.
a Selbsterkenntnis
b

sie. To agree with "faculty of reason" (das Vernunftvermiigen) the pronoun should have
been neuter; perhaps Kant was taking the antecedent to be "reason" (die Vernunft).
, Principien
d Principien
, Princip

101

AXIl

AXIll

Preface

Axiv

AXV

Axvi

<A>

for it by its own nature, then this [principle] might as well be discarded,
because then it also would not be up to answering any of the other ques­
tions with complete reliability.?
While I am saying this I believe I perceive in the face of the reader
an indignation mixed with contempt at claims that are apparently so
pretentious and immodest; and yet they are incomparably more mod­
erate than those of any author of the commonest program who pretends
to prove the simple nature of the soul or the necessity of a first begin­
ning of the world. For such an author pledges himself to extend
human cognition beyond all bounds of possible experience, of which I
humbly admit that this wholly surpasses my capacity; instead I have to
do merely with reason itself and its pure thinking; to gain exhaustive ac­
quaintance with them I need not seek far beyond myself, because it is in
myself that I encounter them, and common logic already also gives me
an example of how the simple acts of reason may be fully and systemat­
ically enumerated; only here the question is raised how much I may
hope to settle with these simple acts if all the material and assistance of
experience are taken away from me.
So much for the completeness in reaching each of the ends, and for
the comprehensiveness in reaching all of them together, which ends
are not proposed arbitrarily, but are set up for us by the nature of cog­
nition itself, as the matter of our critical investigation.
Furthermore certainty and clarity, two things that concern the
form of the investigation, are to be viewed as essential demands, which
may rightly be made on the author who ventures upon so slippery an
undertaking.
As far as certainty is concerned, I have myself pronounced the judg­
ment that in this kind of inquiry it is in no way allowed to hold opin­
ions, and that anything that even looks like an hypothesis is a forbidden
commodity, which should not be put up for sale even at the lowest price
but must be confiscated as soon as it is discovered. For every cognition
that is supposed to be certain a priori proclaims that it wants to be held
for absolutely necessary, and even more is this true of a determination
of all pure cognitions a priori, which is to be the standard and thus even
the example of all apodictic (philosophical) certainty. Whether I have
performed what I have just pledged in that respect remains wholly to
the judgment of the reader, since it is appropriate for an author only to
present the grounds, but not to judge about their effect on his judges.
But in order that he should not inadvertently be the cause of weakening his own arguments, the author may be permitted to note himself
those places that, even though they pertain only to the incidental end of
the work, may be the occasion for some mistrust, in order that he may
in a timely manner counteract the influence that even the reader's

1 02

Preface

<A>

slightest reservation on this point may have on his judgment over the
chief end.
I am acquainted with no investigations more important for getting to
the bottom of that faculty we call the understanding, and at the same
time for the determination of the rules and boundaries of its use, than
those I have undertaken in the second chapter of the Transcendental
Analytic, under the title Deduction of the Pure Concepts of the
Understanding; they are also the investigations that have cost me the
most, but I hope liot unrewarded, effort. This inquiry, which goes
rather deep, has two sides. One side refers to the objects of the pure un­
derstanding, and is supposed to demonstrate and make comprehensible
the objective validity of its concepts a priori; thus it belongs essentially
to my ends. The other side deals with the pure understanding itself,
concerning its possibility and the powers of cognition on which it itself
rests; thus it considers it in a subjective relation, and although this exposition is of great importance in respect of my chief end, it does not
belong essentially to it; because the chief question always remains:
"What and how much can understanding and reason cognize free of all
experience? " and not: "How is the faculty of thinking itself possible?"g
Since the latter question is something like the search for the cause of a
given effect, and is therefore something like a hypothesis (although, as
I will elsewhere take the opportunity to show, this is not in fact how
matters stand), it appears as if I am taking the liberty in this case of ex­
pressing an opinion, and that the reader might therefore be free to hold
another opinion. In view of this I must remind the reader in advance
that even in case my subjective deduction does not produce the com­
plete conviction that I expect, the objective deduction that is my pri­
mary concern would come into its full strength, on which what is said
at pages [AJ 92-3 should even be sufficient by itself.
Finally, as regards clarity,a the reader has a right to demand first discursive (logical) clarity, through concepts, but then also intuitive
(aesthetic) clarity, through intuitions, that is, through examples or
other illustrations in concreto. I have taken sufficient care for the former.
That was essential to my undertaking but was also the contingent cause
of the fact that I could not satisfy the second demand, which is less strict
but still fair. In the progress of my labor I have been almost constantly
undecided how to deal with this matter. Examples and illustrations always appeared necessary to me, and hence actually appeared in their
proper place in my first draft. But then I looked at the size of my task
and the many objects with which I would have to do, and I became
aware that this alone, treated in a dry, merely scholastic manner, would
a Deutlichkeit

;

103

A XV11

AXVlll

Preface <Pi>

A xix

AXX

Axxi

suffice to fill an extensive work; thus I found it inadVisable to swell it
further with examples and illustrations, which are necessary only for a
popular aim, especially since this work could never be made suitable for
popular use, and real experts in this science do not have so much need
for things to be made easy for them; although this would always be
agreeable, here it could also have brought with it something counterproductive. The Abbe Terrasson says that if the size of a book is mea­
sured not by the number of pages but by the time needed to understand
it, then it can be said of many a book that it would be much shorter
if it were not so short.9 But on the other hand, if we direct our view
toward the intelligibility of a whole of speculative cognition that is
wide-ranging and yet is connected in principle,a we could with equal
right say that many a book would have been much clearer if it had
not been made quite so clear. For the aids to clarity helpb in the parts
but often confuse in the whole, since the reader cannot quickly enough
attain a survey of the whole; and all their bright colors paint over and
make unrecognizable the articulation or structure of the system, which
yet matters most when it comes to judging its unity and soundness. 10
It can, as it seems to me, be no small inducement for the reader to
unite his effort with that of the author, when he has the prospect of car­
rying out, according to the outline given above, a great and important
piece of work, and that in a complete and lasting way. Now metaphysics, according to the concepts we will give of it here, is the only one
of all the sciences that may promise that little but unified effort, and
that indeed in a short time, will complete it in such a way that nothing
remains to posterity except to adapt it in a didactic manner to its in­
tentions, yet without being able to add to its content in the least. For it
is nothing but the inventory of all we possess through pure reason, or­
dered systematically. Nothing here can escape us, because what reason
brings forth entirely out of itself cannot be hidden, but is brought to
light by reason itself as soon as reason's common principlec has been dis­
covered. The perfect unity of this kind of cognition, and the fact that it
arises solely out of pure concepts without any influence that would ex­
tend or increase it from experience or even particular intuition, which
would lead to a determinate experience, make this unconditioned com­
pleteness not only feasible but also necessary. Tecum habita, et naris quam
sit tibi curta supellex. - Persius.d
Such a system of pure (speculative) reason I hope myself to deliver
a Princip
b

Kant's text reads ''fohlen'' (are missing). We follow Erdmann, reading helfen.

, Princip

d "Dwell in your own house, and you will know how simple your possessions
(Persius, Satires 4: 5 2 ) .

1 04

are"

Preface <A>

under the title Metaphysics of Nature, which will be not half so ex­
tensive but will be incomparably richer in content than this critique,
which had first to display the sources and conditions of its possibility,
and needed to clear and level a ground that was completely overgrown.
Here I expect from my reader the patience and impartiality of a judge,
but there I will expect the cooperative spirit and assistance of a fellow
worker; for however completely the principlesa of the system may be
expounded in the critique, the comprehensiveness of the system itself
requires also that no derivative concepts should be lacking, which,
however, cannot be estimated a priori in one leap, but must be gradually
sought out; likewise, just as in the former the whole synthesis of con­
cepts has been exhausted, so in the latter it would be additionally de­
manded that the same thing should take place in respect of their
analysis, which would be easy and more entertainment than labor.
I have only a few more things to remark with respect to the book's
printing. Since the beginning of the printing was somewhat delayed, I
was able to see only about half the proof sheets, in which I have come
upon a few printing errors, though none that confuse the sense except
the one occurring at page [A] 3 79, fourth line from the bottom, where
specific should be read in place of skeptical. The Antinomy of Pure
Reason, from page [A] 42 5 to page [A] 46 r , is arranged in the manner
of a table, so that everything belonging to the thesis always continues
on the left side and what belongs to the antithesis on the right side,
which I did in order to make it easier to compare proposition and
counter-proposition with one another.
a Principien

105

AXX11

Preface to the second edition a

Bvii

Bviii

B ix

Whether or not the treatment of the cognitions belonging to the con­
cern of reason travels the secure course of a science is something which
can soon be judged by its success. If after many preliminaries and prepa­
rations are made, a science gets stuck as soon as it approaches its end,
or if in order to reach this end it must often go back and set out on a
new path; or likewise if it proves impossible for the different co-work­
ers to achieve unanimity as to the way in which they should pursueh
their common aim; then we may be sure that such a study is merely
groping about, that it is still far from having entered upon the secure
course of a science; and it is already a service to reason if we can possi­
bly find that path for it, even if we have to give up as futile much of what
was included in the end previously formed without deliberation.
That from the earliest times logic has traveled this secure course can
be seen from the fact that since the time of Aristotle it has not had to
go a single step backwards, unless we count the abolition of a few dis­
pensable subtleties or the more distinct determination of its presenta­
tion, which improvements belong more to the elegance than to the
security of that science. What is further remarkable about logic is that
until now it has also been unable to take a single step forward, and
therefore seems to all appearance to be finished and complete. For if
some moderns have thought to enlarge it by interpolating psychologi­
cal chapters about our different cognitive powers (about imagination,
wit), or metaphysical chapters about the origin of cognition or the dif­
ferent kinds of certainty in accordance with the diversity of objects'
(about idealism, skepticism, etc.), or anthropological chapters about
our prejudice (about their causes and remedies), then this proceeds only
from their ignorance of the peculiar nature of this science. It is not an
improvement but a deformation of the sciences when their boundaries
are allowed to run over into one another; the boundaries oflogic, how­
ever, are determined quite precisely by the fact that logic is the science
that exhaustively presents and strictly proves nothing but the formal
a This new preface, so entitled, replaces the preface from the first edition.
b

Kant's text reads "erfolgt" (result or ensue), which does not make sense here because it
is an intransitive verb; we follow Grillo in reading verfolgt.

, Objecte
1 06

Preface to the second edition <B>

rules of all thinking (whether this thinking be empirical or a priori,
whatever origin or object" it may have, and whatever contingent or nat­
ural obstacles it may meet with in our minds).
For the advantage that has made it so successful logic has solely its
own limitation to thank, since it is thereby justified in abstracting - is
indeed obliged to abstract - from all objectsb of cognition and all the
distinctions between them; and in logic, therefore, the understanding
has to do with nothing further than itself and its own form. How much
more difficult, naturally, must it be for reason to enter upon the secure
path of a science if it does not have to do merely with itself, but has to
deal with objectsC too; hence logic as a propadeutic constitutes only the
outer courtyard, as it were, to the sciences; and when it comes to infor­
mation, a logic may indeed be presupposed in judging about the latter,
but its acquisition must be sought in the sciences properly and objec­
tively so called.
Insofar as there is to be reason in these sciences, something in them
must be cognized a priori, and this cognition can relate to its object in
either of two ways, either merely determining the object and its con­
cept (which must be given from elsewhere), or else also making the ob­
ject actual. The former is theoretical, the latter practical cognition of
reason. In both the pure part, the part in which reason determines its
objecti wholly a priori, must be expounded all by itself, however much
or little it may contain, and that part that comes from other sources
must not be mixed up with it; for it is bad economy to spend blindly
whatever comes in without being able later, when the economy comes
to a standstill, to distinguish the part of the revenue that can cover the
expenses from the part that must be cut.
Mathematics and physics are the two theoretical cognitions of rea­
son that are supposed to determine their objectse a priori, the former
entirely purely, the latter at least in part purely but also following the
standards of sources of cognition other than reason.
Mathematics has, from the earliest times to which the history of
human reason reaches, in that admirable people the Greeks, traveled
the secure path of a science. Yet it must not be thought that it was as
easy for it as for logic - in which reason has to do only with itself - to
find that royal path, or rather itself to open it up; rather, I believe that
mathematics was left groping about for a long time (chiefly among the
Egyptians), and that its transformation is to be ascribed to a revolu­
tion, brought about by the happy inspiration of a single man in an ata Object

b Objecte
, Objecte
d
Object
, Objecte

107

BX

B xi

Preface

tempt from which the road to be taken onward could no longer be
missed, and the secure course of a science was entered on and pre­
scribed for all time and to an infinite extent. The history of this rev­
olution in the way of thinking - which was far more important than
the discovery of the way around the famous CapeII- and of the lucky
one who brought it about, has not been preserved for us. But the leg­
end handed down to us by Diogenes Laertius - who names the
reputed inventor of the smallest elements of geometrical demonstra­
tions, even of those that, according to common judgment, stand in no
need of proof - proves that the memory of the alteration wrought by
the discovery of this new path in its earliest footsteps must have
seemed exceedingly important to mathematicians, and was thereby
rendered unforgettable. A new light broke upon the first person who
demonstrated the isoscelesa triangle (whether he was called "Thales"
or had some other name). 12 For he found that what he had to do was
B xii not to trace what he saw in this figure, or even trace its mere con­
cept, and read off, as it were, from the properties of the figure; but
rather that he had to produce the latter from what he himself thought
into the object and presented (through construction) according to a
priori concepts, and that in order to know something securely a priori
he had to ascribe to the thing nothing except what followed nec­
essarily from what he himself had put into it in accordance with its
concept.
It took natural science much longer to find the highway of science;
for it is only about one and a half centuries since the suggestion of the
ingenious Francis Bacon partly occasioned this discovery and partly fur­
ther stimulated it, since one was already on its tracks - which discovery,
therefore, can just as much be explained by a sudden revolution in the
way of thinking. Here I will consider natural science only insofar as it
is grounded on empirical principles.b
When Galileo'3 rolled balls of a weight chosen by himself down an
inclined plane, or when Torricelli'4 made the air bear a weight that he
had previously thought to be equal to that of a known column of water,
or when in a later time Stahl's changed metals into calxc and then
B xiii changed the latter back into metal by first removing something and
a Kant's text reads "gleichseitig" (equilateral); but on the basis of his correction in a letter to
Schutz of 2 5 June 1 787 (ro:466), he appears to have meant "gleichschenklig" (isosceles).
b Principien

, Kalk. Kemp Smith translates this as "oxides," but that is anachronistic; prior to the

chemical revolution of Priestley and Lavoisier, the calx was conceived to be what was
left of a metal after its phlogiston had been driven off; only later was it discovered that
this process was actually one of oxidation.

1 08

to the second edition <B>
then putting it back again,* a light dawned on all those who study na­
ture. They comprehended that reason has insight only into what it it­
self produces according to its own design; that it must take the lead with
principlesa for its judgments according to constant laws and compel na­
ture to answer its questions, rather than letting nature guide its move­
ments by keeping reason, as it were, in leading-strings; for otherwise
accidental observations, made according to no previously designed
plan, can never connect up into a necessary law, which is yet what rea­
son seeks and requires. Reason, in order to be taught by nature, must
approach nature with its principlesb in one hand, according to which
alone the agreement among appearances can count as laws, and, in the
other hand, the experiments thought out in accordance with these prin­
ciplesc- yet in order to be instructed by nature not like a pupil, who has
recited to him whatever the teacher wants to say, but like an appointed
judge who compels witnesses to answer the questions he puts to them.
Thus even physics owes the advantageous revolution in its way of thinking to the inspiration that what reason would not be able to know of it-

B XlV

self and has to learn from nature, it has to seek in the latter (though not
merely ascribe to it) in accordance with what reason itself puts into nature. This is how natural science was first brought to the secure course
of a science after groping about for so many centuries.
Metaphysics a wholly isolated speculative cognition of reason that
-

elevates itself entirely above all instruction from experience, and that
through mere concepts (not, like mathematics, through the application
of concepts to intuition), where reason thus is supposed to be its own
pupil - has up to now not been so favored by fate as to have been able
to enter upon the secure course of a science, even though it is older than
all other sciences, and would remain even if all the others were swal­
lowed up by an all-consuming barbarism. For in it reason continuously
gets stuck, even when it claims a priori insight (as it pretends) into those

laws confirmed by the commonest experience. In metaphysics we have
to retrace our path countless times, because we find that it does not lead
where we want to go, and it is so far from reaching unanimity in the as-

B XV

sertions o f its adherents that i t i s rather a battlefield, and indeed one
that appears to be especially determined for testing one's powers in
mock combat; on this battlefield no combatant has ever gained the least
* Here I am not following exactly the thread of the history of the experimental

method, whose first beginnings are also not precisely known.
Principien
Principien
, Principien
a

b

109

B xiii

Preface
bit of ground, nor has any been able to base any lasting possession on
his victory. Hence there is no doubt that up to now the procedure of
metaphysics has been a mere groping, and what is the worst, a groping
among mere concepts.
Now why is it that here the secure path of science still could not be
found? Is it perhaps impossible? Why then has nature afflicted our rea­
son with the restless striving for such a path, as if it were one of rea­
son's most important occupations? Still more, how little cause have we
to place trust in our reason if in one of the most important parts of our
desire for knowledge it does not merely forsake us but even entices us
with delusions and in the end betrays us! Or if the path has merely
eluded us so far, what indications may we use that might lead us to hope
that in renewed attempts we will be luckier than those who have gone
before us?

B xvi

I should think that the examples of mathematics and natural science,
which have become what they now are through a revolution brought
about all at once, were remarkable enough that we might reflect on the
essential element in the change in the ways of thinking that has been so
advantageous to them, and, at least as an experiment, imitate it insofar
as their analogy with metaphysics, as rational cognition, might permit.
Up to now it has been assumed that all our cognition must conform to
the objects; but all attempts to find out something about them a priori
through concepts that would extend our cognition have, on this pre­
supposition, come to nothing. Hence let us once try whether we do not
get farther with the problems of metaphysics by assuming that the ob­
jectsa must conform to our cognition, which would agree better with the
requested possibility of an a priori cognition of them, which is to estab­
lish something about objectsb before they are given to us. This would
be just like the first thoughts of Copernicus, ,6 who, when he did not
make good progress in the explanation of the celestial motions if he as­
sumed that the entire celestial host revolves around the observer, tried
to see if he might not have greater success if he made the observer re­

B xvii

volve and left the stars at rest. Now in metaphysics we can try in a similar way regarding the intuition of objects. If intuition has to conform
to the constitution of the objects, then I do not see how we can know
anything of them a priori; but if the object (as an objectC of the senses)
conforms to the constitution of our faculty of intuition, then I can very
well represent this possibility to myself. Yet because I cannot stop with
these intuitions, if they are to become cognitions, but must refer them
as representations to something as their object and determine this oba Objecte

b

Objecte
, Object
1 10

to the second edition <B>
ject through them, I can assume either that the concepts through which
I bring about this determination also conform to the objects, and then

I am once again in the same difficulty about how I could know anything
about them a priori, or else I assume that the objects, or what is the same

thing, the

experience in which

alone they can be cognized (as given ob-

jects) conforms to those concepts, in which case I immediately see an
easier way out of the difficulty, since experience itself is a kind of cognition requiring the understanding, whose rule I have to presuppose in
myself before any object is given to me, hence a priori, which rule is expressed in concepts a priori, to which all objects of experience must
therefore necessarily conform, and with which they must agree. As for

B XV1l1

objects insofar as they are thought merely through reason, and necessarily at that, but that (at least as reason thinks them) cannot be given
in experience at all - the attempt to think them (for they must be capable of being thought) will provide a splendid touchstone of what we assume as the altered method of our way of thinking, namely that we can
cognize of things a priori only what we ourselves have put into them.*
This experiment succeeds as well as we could wish, and it promises to
metaphysics the secure course of a science in its first part, where it concerns itself with concepts a priori to which the corresponding objects ap­

propriate to them can be given in experience. For after this alteration in
our way o f thinking we can very well explain the possibility o f a cogni-

B XlX

tion a priori, and what is still more, we can provide satisfactory proofs of

the laws that are the a priori ground of nature, as the sum total of objects
of experience - which were both impossible according to the earlier way
of proceeding. But from this deduction of our faculty of cognizing

a

pri-

* This method, imitated from the method of those who study nature, thus consists in this: to seek the elements of pure reason in that which admits of
being confirmed or refuted through an experiment. Now the propositions of pure reason, especially when they venture beyond all boundaries of
possible experience, admit of no test by experiment with their objects" (as in
natural science): thus to experiment will be feasible only with concepts and
principles that we assume a priori by arranging the latter so that the same
objects can be considered from two different sides, on the one side as objects of the senses and the understanding for experience, and on the other
side as objects that are merely thought at most for isolated reason striving
beyond the bounds of experience. If we now find that there is agreement with
the principleb of pure reason when things are considered from this twofold
standpoint, but that an unavoidable conflict of reason with itself arises with a
single standpoint, then the experiment decides for the correctness of that
distinction.
a

b

Objecte
Princip
111

Bxviii

Bxix

Preface

ori in

the first part of metaphysics, there emerges a very strange result,

and one that appears very disadvantageous to the whole purpose with
which the second part of metaphysics concerns itself, namely that with
this faculty we can never get beyond the boundaries of possible experi­
ence, which is nevertheless precisely the most essential occupation of

B XX

this science. But herein lies just the experiment providing a checkupu on
the truth of the result of that first assessment of our rational cognition
a priori, namely that such cognition reaches appearances only, leaving
the thini' in itself as something actual for itself but uncognized by us.
For that which necessarily drives us to go beyond the boundaries of ex­
perience and all appearances is the

unconditioned,

which reason nec­

essarily and with every right demands in things in themselves for
everything that is conditioned, thereby demanding the series of condi­
tions as something completed. Now if we find that on the assumption
that our cognition from experience conforms to the objects as things in
themselves, the unconditioned

tradiction,

cannot be thought at all without con­

but that on the contrary, if we assume that our representa­

tion of things as they are given to us does not conform to these things
as they are in themselves but rather that these objects as appearances
conform to our way of representing, then the contradiction disap­
pears; and consequently that the unconditioned must not be presentC in
things insofar as we are acquainted with them (insofar as they are given
to us), but rather in things insofar as we are not acquainted with them,
as thingsd in themselves: then this would show that what we initially as-

B XXl

sumed only as an experiment is well grounded.* Now after speculative
reason has been denied all advance in this field of the supersensible,

what still remains for us is to try whether there are not data in reason's

practical data for determining that transcendent rational concept of the
unconditioned, in such a way as to reach beyond the boundaries of all
possible experience, in accordance with the wishes of metaphysics, cog­
nitions a priori that are possible, but only from a practical standpoint. By

* This experiment of pure reason has much in common with what the
chemists sometimes call the experiment of reduction, or more generally the
synthetic procedure. The analysis of the metaphysician separated pure a
priori knowledge into two very heterogeneous elements, namely those of the
things as appearances and the things in themselves. The dialectic once again
combines them, in unison with the necessary rational idea of the uncondi­
tioned, and finds that the unison will never come about except through that
distinction, which is therefore the true one.
a Gegenprobe

b

Sache
, angetroffin
d Sacherz
1 12

to the second edition <B>
such procedures speculative reason has at least made room for such an
extension, even if it had to leave it empty; and we remain at liberty, indeed we are called upon by reason to fill it if we can through practical

B xxii

data of reason. *
Now the concern of this critique of pure speculative reason consists
in that attempt to transform the accepted procedure of metaphysics, un­
dertaking an entire revolution according to the example of the geome­
ters and natural scientists. It is a treatise on the method, not a system of
the science itself; but it catalogs the entire outline of the science of
metaphysics, both in respect of its boundaries and in respect of its entire internal structure. For pure speculative reason has this peculiarity

B XXlll

about it, that it can and should measure its own capacity a according to
the different ways for choosing the objects b of its thinking, and also
completely enumerate the manifold ways of putting problemsc before itself, so as to catalog the entire preliminary sketch of a whole system of
metaphysics; because, regarding the first point, in a

priori

cognition

nothing can be ascribed to the objectsd except what the thinking subject
takes out of itself, and regarding the second, pure speculative reason is,
in respect of principlese of cognition, a unity entirely separate and subsisting for itself, in which, as in an organized body, every part exists for
the sake of all the others as all the others exist for its sake, and no principle! can be taken with certainty in one relation unless it has at the

* In the same way, the central laws of the motion of the heavenly bodies established with certainty what Copernicus assumed at the beginning only as a hy­
pothesis, and at the same time they proved the invisible force (of Newtonian
attraction) that binds the universel which would have remained forever
undiscovered if Copernicus had not ventured, in a manner contradictory to
the senses yet true, to seek for the observed movements not in the objects of
the heavens but in their observer. In this Preface I propose the transformation in our way of thinking presented in criticismh merely as a hypothesis,
analogous to that other hypothesis, only in order to draw our notice to the
first attempts at such a transformation, which are always hypothetical, even
though in the treatise itself it will be proved not hypothetically but rather
apodictically from the constitution of our representations of space and time
and from the elementary concepts of the understanding.
a Vermogen

b Objecte
, Aufgaben
d Objecte
, Principien
f Princip
g Weltbau
h in der Kritik, which could also be translated "in the Critique, " referring "to the present

book

as a

whole.

113

BXXll

Preface
same time been investigated in its

thoroughgoing relation to the entire

use of pure reason. But then metaphysics also has the rare good fortune,
enjoyed by no other rational science that has to do with objectsO (for
logic deals only with the form of thinking in general), which is that if by

Bxxiv

this critique it has been brought onto the secure course of a science,
then it can fully embrace the entire field of cognitions belonging to it
and thus can complete its work and lay it down for posterity as a princi­

pal frameworkb that can never be enlarged, since it has to do solely with
principlesc and the limitations on their use, which are determined by the

principles themselves. Hence as a fundamental science, metaphysics is
also bound to achieve this completeness, and we must be able to say of
it:

nil actum reputans, si quid superesset agendum. d

But it will be asked: What sort of treasure is it that we intend to leave
to posterity, in the form of a metaphysics that has been purified through
criticism but thereby also brought into a changeless state?e On a cursory
overview of this work, one might believe that one perceives it to be only
of negative utility, teaching us never to venture with speculative reason
beyond the boundaries of experience; and in fact that is its first useful­
ness. But this utility soon becomes positive when we become aware
that the principles with which speculative reason ventures beyond its
boundaries do not in fact result in

extending

our use of reason, but

rather, if one considers them more closely, inevitably result in

ing it
B XXV

narrow­

by threatening to extend the boundaries of sensibility, to which

these principles really belong, beyond everything, and s o even to dis­
lodge the use of pure (practical) reason. Hence a critique that limits the
speculative use of reason is, to be sure, to that extent

negative,

but be­

cause it simultaneously removes an obstacle that limits or even threat­
ens to wipe out the practical use of reason, this critique is also in fact of

positive

and very important utility, as soon as we have convinced our­

selves that there is an absolutely necessary practical use of pure reason
(the moral use), in which reason unavoidably extends itself beyond the
boundaries of sensibility, without needing any assistance from specula­
tive reason, but in which it must also be made secure against any coun­
teraction from the latter, in order not to fall into contradiction with
a Objecte
b

Hauptstuhl; Kant's metaphor seems to be drawn from weaving (cf. Webstuhl, a loom or

C

Principien

d

frame for weaving).
"Thinking nothing done if something more is to be done." The correct quotation is:

"Caesar in omnia praeceps, nil actum credens, cum quid superesset agendum, instat atrox"
(Caesar, headlong in everything, believing nothing done while something more re­
mained to be done, pressed forward fiercely) (Lucan, De bello civili 2:657).

, beharrlichen Zustand

1 14

to the second edition <B>
itself. To deny that this service of criticisma is of any

positive

utility

would be as much as to say that the police are of no positive utility be­
cause their chief business is to put a stop to the violence that citizens
have to fear from other citizens, so that each can carry on his own af­
fairs in peace and safety. '7 In the analytical part of the critique it is

proved that space and time are only forms of sensible intuition, and
therefore only conditions of the existence of the things as appearances,
further that we have no concepts of the understanding and hence no elements for the cognition of things except insofar as an intuition can be

B XXVl

given corresponding to these concepts, consequently that we can have
cognition of no object as a thing in itself, but only insofar as it is an objectb of sensible intuition, i.e. as an appearance; from which follows the
limitation of all even possible speculative cognition of reason to mere
objects of experience. Yet the reservation must also be well noted, that
even if we cannot

cognize

these same objects as things in themselves,

we at least must be able to

think

them as things in themselves.* For

otherwise there would follow the absurd proposition that there is an ap­
pearance without anything that appears. Now if we were to assume that
the distinction between things as objects of experience and the very

B xxvii

same things as things in themselves, which our critique has made necessary, were not made at all, then the principle of causality, and hence
the mechanism of nature in determining causality, would be valid of all
things in general as efficient causes. I would not be able to say of one
and the same thing, e.g., the human soul, that its will is free and yet that
it is simultaneously subject to natural necessity, i.e., that it is not free,
without falling into an obvious contradiction; because in both propositions I would have taken the soul in just the same meaning," namely
as a thing in general (as a thing" in itself), and without prior critique, I

* To cognize an object, it is required that I be able to prove its possibility
(whether by the testimony of experience from its actuality or a priori through
reason). But I can think whatever I like, as long as I do not contradict myself,
i.e., as long as my concept is a possible thought, even if I cannot give any assurance whether or not there is a corresponding object' somewhere within the
sum total of all possibilities. But in order to ascribe objective validity to such a
concept (real possibility, for the first sort of possibility was merely logical)
something more is required. This "more," however, need not be sought in theoretical sources of cognition; it may also lie in practical ones.
der Kritik
Object
, Bedeutung; "meaning" will translate this word for the remainder of this paragraph.
d Sache
Object
n

b

e

115

B XXVl

Preface
could not have taken it otherwise. But if the critique has not erred in
teaching that the objecta should be taken in a twofold meaning,
namely as appearance or as thing in itself; '8 if its deduction of the pure
concepts of the understanding is correct, and hence the principle of
causality applies only to things taken in the first sense, namely insofar
as they are objects of experience, while things in the second meaning
are not subject to it; then just the same will is thought of in the appearB xxviii

ance (in visible actions) as necessarily subject to the law of nature and
to this extent

not free,

while yet on the other hand it is thought of

as belonging to a thing in itself as not subject to that law, and hence

free, without any contradiction hereby occurring. Now although I can­
not cognize my soul, considered from the latter side, through any spec­
ulative reason (still less through empirical observation), and hence I
cannot

cognize

freedom as a property of any being to which I ascribe

effects in the world of sense, because then I would have to cognize such
an existence as determined, and yet not as determined in time (which is
impossible, since I cannot support my concept with any intuition), nev­
ertheless, I can

think freedom to myself, i.e.,

the representation of it at

least contains no contradiction in itself, so long as our critical distinc­
tion prevails between the two ways of representing (sensible and intel­
lectual), along with the limitation of the pure concepts of the under­
standing arising from it, and hence that of the principles flowing from
them. Now suppose that morality necessarily presupposes freedom (in
the strictest sense) as a property of our will, citing a priori as

data

for

this freedom certain original practical principles lying in our reason,
which would be absolutely impossible without the presupposition of
B XXlX

freedom, yet that speculative reason had proved that freedom cannot be
thought at all, then that presupposition, namely the moral one, would
necessarily have to yield to the other one, whose opposite contains an
obvious contradiction; consequently

freedom and with it morality (for

the latter would contain no contradiction if freedom were not already
presupposed) would have to give way to the

mechanism of nature.

But

then, since for morality I need nothing more than that freedom should
not contradict itself, that it should at least be thinkable that it should
place no hindrance in the way of the mechanism of nature in the same
action (taken in another relation), without it being necessary for me to
have any further insight into it: the doctrine of morality asserts its place
and the doctrine of nature its own, which, however, would not have oc­
curred if criticism had not first taught us of our unavoidable ignorance
in respect of the things in themselves and limited everything that we
can cognize theoretically to mere appearances. Just the same sort of ex­
position of the positive utility of critical principles of pure reason can be
a Object
1 16

to the second edition <B>
given in respect to the concepts of God and of the

simple nature

of

our soul, which, however, I forgo for the sake of brevity. Thus I cannot
even

assume God, freedom and immortality for the sake of the necdeprive spec-

B XXX

essary practical use of my reason unless I simultaneously

ulative reason of its pretension to extravagant insights; because in order
to attain to such insights, speculative reason would have to help itself to
principles that in fact reach only to objects of possible experience, and
which, if they were to be applied to what cannot be an object of experience, then they would always actually transform it into an appearance,
and thus declare all

practical extension of pure
knowledge in order to

ble. Thus I had to deny

reason to be impossimake room for

faith;

and the dogmatism of metaphysics, i.e., the prejudice that without criticism reason can make progress in metaphysics, is the true source of all
unbelief conflicting with morality, which unbelief is always very dogmatic. - Thus even if it cannot be all that difficult to leave to posterity
the legacy of a systematic metaphysics, constructed according to the critique of pure reason, this is still a gift deserving of no small respect; to
see this, we need merely to compare the culture of reason that is set on
the course of a secure science with reason's unfounded groping and frivolous wandering about without critique, or to consider how much better young people hungry for knowledge might spend their time than in

B xxxi

the usual dogmatism that gives so early and so much encouragement to
their complacent quibbling about things they do not understand, and
things into which neither they nor anyone else in the world will ever
have any insight, or even encourages them to launch on the invention
of new thoughts and opinions, and thus to neglect to learn the well­
grounded sciences; but we see it above all when we take account of the
way criticism puts an end for all future time to objections against morality and religion in a

Socratic way,

namely by the clearest proof of the

ignorance of the opponent. For there has always been some metaphysics or other to be met with in the world, and there will always continue to be one, and with it a dialectic of pure reason, because dialectic
is natural to reason. Hence it is the first and most important occupation
of philosophy to deprive dialectic once and for all of all disadvantageous
influence, by blocking off the source of the errors.
With this important alteration in the field of the sciences, and with
the

loss

of its hitherto imagined possessions that speculative reason

must suffer, everything yet remains in the same advantageous state as it
was before concerning the universal human concern and the utility that
the world has so far drawn from the doctrines of pure reason, and the
loss touches only the monopoly of the schools and in no way the interest of human beings. I ask the most inflexible dogmatist whether
the proof of the continuation of our soul after death drawn from the
simplicity of substance, or the proof of freedom of the will against uni-

1 17

B xxxii

Preface
versal mechanism drawn from the subtle though powerless distinctions
between subjective and objective practical necessity, or the proof of the
existence of God drawn from the concept of a most real being (or from
the contingency of what is alterable and the necessity of a first mover),
have ever, after originating in the schools, been able to reach the pub­
lic or have the least influence over its convictions? If that has never hap­
pened, and if it can never be expected to happen, owing to the
unsuitability of the common human understanding for such subtle
speculation; if rather the conviction that reaches the public, insofar
as it rests on rational grounds, had to be effected by something
else - namely, as regards the first point, on that remarkable predisposi­
tion of our nature, noticeable to every human being, never to be capa­
ble of being satisfied by what is temporal (since the temporal is always
insufficient for the predispositions of our whole vocation) leading to the

BXXXlll

hope of a future life; in respect of the second point, the mere clear exposition of our duties in opposition to all claims of the inclinations lead­
ing to the consciousness of freedom; and finally, touching on the third
point, the splendid order, beauty, and providence shown forth every­
where in nature leading to the faith in a wise and great author of the
world - then this possession not only remains undisturbed, but it even
gains in respect through the fact that now the schools are instructed to
pretend to no higher or more comprehensive insight on any point
touching the universal human concerns than the insight that is accessi­
ble to the great multitude (who are always most worthy of our respect),
and to limit themselves to the cultivation of those grounds of proof
alone that can be grasped universally and are sufficient from a moral
standpoint. The alteration thus concerns only the arrogant claims of
the schools, which would gladly let themselves be taken for the sole ex­
perts and guardians of such truths (as they can rightly be taken in many
other parts of knowledge), sharing with the public only the use of such
truths, while keeping the key to them for themselves

B xxxiv

salus vult scire videri). a Yet care is taken for a more

(quod mecum nescit,

equitable claim on the
part of the speculative philosopher. He remains the exclusive trustee of
a science that is useful to the public even without their knowledge,
namely the critique of reason; for the latter can never become popular,
but also has no need of being so; for just as little as the people want to
fill their heads with fine-spun arguments for useful truths, so just as lit­
tle do the equally subtle objections against these truths ever enter their
minds; on the contrary, because the school inevitably falls into both, as
does everyone who raises himself to speculation, the critique of reason
a "What he knows no more than I, he alone wants to seem to know." The correct quota­

tion is "Quod mecum ignorat, solus volt scire videl'i" (What is unknown to me, that alone
he wants to seem to know) (Horace, Epistles 2 . 1 .87).
1 18

to the second edition

<B>

is bound once and for all to prevent, by a fundamental investigation of
the rights of speculative reason, the scandal that sooner or later has to
be noticed even among the people in the disputes in which, in the absence of criticism, metaphysicians (and among these in the end even
clerics) inevitably involve themselves, and in which they afterwards
even falsify their own doctrines. Through criticism alone can we sever
the very root of materialism, fatalism, atheism, of freethinking un-

belief,

of

enthusiasm

and

superstition,

injurious, and finally also of idealism and

which can become generally

skepticism, which are

more

dangerous to the schools and can hardly be transmitted to the public. If
governments find it good to concern themselves with the affairs of

B XXXV

scholars, then it would accord better with their wise solicitude both for
the sciences and for humanity if they favored the freedom of such a critique, by which alone the treatments of reason can be put on a firm
footing, instead of supporting the ridiculous despotism of the schools,
which raise a loud cry of public danger whenever someone tears apart
their cobwebs, of which the public has never taken any notice, and
hence the loss of which it can also never feel.
Criticism is not opposed to the dogmatic procedure of reason in its
pure cognition as science (for science must always be dogmatic, i.e., it
must prove its conclusions strictly a priori from secure principles)a;
rather, it is opposed only to dogmatism, i.e., to the presumption of getting on solely with pure cognition from (philosophical) concepts according to principles,b which reason has been using for a long time
without first inquiring in what way and by what right it has obtained
them. Dogmatism is therefore the dogmatic procedure of pure reason,

without an antecedent critique of its own capacity/ This opposition
therefore must not be viewed as putting in a good word for that loquacious shallowness under the presumed name of popularity, or even of
skepticism, which gives short shrift to all metaphysics; rather, criticism
is the preparatory activity necessary for the advancement of metaphysics as a well-grounded science, which must necessarily be dogmatic, carried out systematically in accordance with the strictest re­
quirement, hence according to scholastic rigor (and not in a popular
way); for this requirement is one that it may not neglect, since it undertakes to carry out its business wholly a priori and thus to the full sat-

isfaction of speculative reason. In someday carrying out the plan that
criticism prescribes, i.e., in the future system of metaphysics, we will
have to follow the strict method of the famous Wolff, the greatest
among all dogmatic philosophers, who gave us the first example (an ex-

Principien
Principien
, Vermogen

a

b

1 19

B XXXVI

Preface
ample by which he became the author of a spirit of well-groundedness
in Germany that is still not extinguished) of the way in which the secure
course of a science is to be taken, through the regular ascertainment of
the principles,a the clear determination of concepts, the attempt at
strictness in the proofs, and the prevention of audacious leaps in infer­

ences; for these reasons he had the skills for moving a science such as
metaphysics into this condition, if only it had occurred to him to pre­
B xxxvii

pare the field for it by a critique of the organ, namely pure reason itself:
a lack that is to be charged not so much to him as to the dogmatic way
of thinking prevalent in his age; and for this the philosophers of his as
of all previous times have nothing for which to reproach themselves.
Those who reject his kind of teaching and simultaneously the proce­
dure of the critique of pure reason can have nothing else in mind except
to throw off the fetters of science altogether, and to transform work
into play, certainty into opinion, and philosophy into philodoxy.

Concerning this second edition,

I have wanted, as is only proper,

not to forgo the opportunity to remove as far as possible those difficul­
ties and obscurities from which may have sprung several misunder­
standings into which acute men, perhaps not without some fault on my
part, have fallen in their judgment of this book. I have found nothing to
alter either in the propositions themselves or in their grounds of proof,
or in the form and completeness of the book's plan; this is to be ascribed
partly to the long period of scrutiny to which I subjected them prior to
laying it before the public; and partly to the constitution of the matter
itself, namely to the nature of a pure speculative reason, which contains
a truly articulated structure of members in which each thing is an organ,
that is, in which everything is for the sake of each member, and each
B xxxviii

individual member is for the sake of all, so that even the least frailty,
whether it be a mistake (an error) or a lack, must inevitably betray itself

, J

in its use. I hope this system will henceforth maintain itself in this un­
alterability. It is not self-conceit that justifies my trust in this, but rather
merely the evidence drawn from the experiment showing that the result
effected is the same whether we proceed from the smallest elements to
the whole of pure reason or return from the whole to every part (for this
whole too is given in itself through the final intention of pure reason in
the practical); while the attempt to alter even the smallest part directly
introduces contradictions not merely into the system, but into univer­
sal human reason. Yet in the presentation there is still much to do, and
here is where I have attempted to make improvements in this edition,
which should remove first, the misunderstanding of the Aesthetic,
chiefly the one in the concept of time; second, the obscurity in the
Deduction of the Concepts of the Understanding, next the supposed
a Principien

120

to

second edition <B>

lack of sufficient evidence in the proofs of the Principles of Pure
Understanding, and finally the misinterpretation of the paralogisms ad­
vanced against rational psychology. My revisionsI9 of the mode of pre­
sentation* extend only to this point (namely, only to the end of the first
chapter of the Transcendental Dialectic) and no further, because time

B XXXlX

* The only thing I can really call a supplement, and that only in the way of proof,
is what I have said at [B ] 2 73 in the form of a new refutation of psychological
idealism, and a strict proof (the only possible one, I believe) of the objective
reality of outer intuition. No matter how innocent idealism may be held to be
as regards the essential ends of metaphysics (though in fact it is not so innocent), it always remains a scandal of philosophy and universal human reason
that the existence of things outside us (from which we after all get the whole
matter for our cognitions, even for our inner sense) should have to be assumed
merely on faith, and that if it occurs to anyone to doubt it, we should be unable to answer him with a satisfactory proof. Because there are some obscurities in the expressions of this proof between the third and sixth lines, I ask leave
to alter this passage as follows: "But this persisting element cannot be an
intuition in me. For all the determining grounds of my existence that can
be encountered in me are representations, and as such they themselves
need something persisting distinct from them, in relation to which their
change, and thus my existence in the time in which they change, can be
determined." Against this proof one will perhaps say: I am immediately conscious to myself only of what is in me, i.e., of my representation of external
things; consequently it still remains undecided whether there is something
outside me corresponding to it or not. Yet I am conscious through inner experience o f my existence in time (and consequently also o f its determinability in time), and this is more than merely being conscious of my representation;
yet it is identical with the empirical consciousness of my existence, which
is only determinable through a relation to something that, while being bound
up with my existence, is outside me. This consciousness of my existence in
time is thus bound up identically with the consciousness of a relation to something outside me, and so it is experience and not fiction, sense and not imagination, that inseparably joins the outer with my inner sense; for outer sense is
already in itself a relationa of intuition to something actual outside me; and its
reality; as distinct from imagination, rests only on the fact that it is inseparably
bound up with inner experience itself, as the condition of its possibility, which
happens here. If I could combine a determination of my existence through in­
tellectual intuition simultaneously with the intellectual consciousness of
my existence, in the representation I am, which accompanies all my judgments
and actions of my understanding, then no consciousness of a relation b to something outside me would necessarily belong to this. But now that intellectual
consciousness does to be sure precede, but the inner intuition, in which alone

B XXXIX

a

b

Verhdltnis
Verhdltnis
121

B xl

Preface
B xl
B xli
B xlii

was too short, and also in respect of the rest of the book no misunder­
standing on the part of expert and impartial examiners has come my
way, whom I have not been able to name with the praise due to them;
but the attention I have paid to their reminders will be evident to them
in the appropriate passages. This improvement, however, is bound up
with a small loss for the reader, which could not be guarded against
without making the book too voluminous: namely, various things that
are not essentially required for the completeness of the whole had to
be omitted or treated in an abbreviated fashion, despite the fact that
some readers may not like doing without them, since they could still
be useful in another respect; only in this way could I make room for
what I hope is a more comprehensible presentation, which fundamen­
tally alters absolutely nothing in regard to the propositions or even
their grounds of proof, but which departs so far from the previous edi­
tion in the method of presentation that it could not be managed
through interpolations. This small loss, which in any case can be
compensated for, if anyone likes, by comparing the first and second

a xli

my existence can be determined, is sensible, and is bound to a condition of­
time; however, this determination, and hence inner experience itself, depends
on something permanent, which is not in me, and consequently must be outside me, and I must consider myself in relationa to it; thus for an experience in
general to be possible, the reality of outer sense is necessarily bound up with
that of inner sense, i.e., I am just as certainly conscious that there are things
outside me to which my sensibility relates, as I am conscious that I myself exist
determined in time. Now which given intuitions actually correspond to outer
objects, which therefore belong to outer sense, to which they are to be as­
cribed rather than to the imagination - that must be decided in each particu­
lar case according to the rules through which experience in general (even inner
experience) is to be distinguished from imagination; which procedure is
grounded always on the proposition that there actually is outer experience. To
this the following remark can be added: The representation of something per­
sisting in existence is not the same as a persisting representation; for that
can be quite variable and changeable, as all our representations are, even the
representations of matter, while still being related to something permanent,
which must therefore be a thing distinct from all my representations and ex­
ternal, the existence of which is necessarily included in the determination of
my own existence, which with it constitutes only a single experience, which
could not take place even as inner if it were not simultaneously (in part) outer.
The "How?" of this can be no more explained than we can explain further how
we can think at all of what abides in time, whose simultaneity with what
changes is what produces the concept of alteration.
a Relation

12 2

to the second edition <B>
editions, is, as I hope, more than compensated for by greater compre­
hensibility. In various public writings (partly in the reviews of some
books, partly in special treatises) I have perceived with gratitude and
enjoyment that the spirit of well-groundedness has not died out in
Germany, but has only been drowned out for a short time by the fashionable noise of a freedom of thought that fancies itself ingenious, and

B xliii

I see that the thorny paths of criticism, leading to a science of pure reason that is scholastically rigorous but as such the only lasting and
hence the most necessary science, has not hindered courageous and
clear minds from mastering them. To these deserving men, who combine well-groundedness of insight so fortunately with the talent for a
lucid presentation (something I am conscious of not having myself), I
leave it to complete my treatment, which is perhaps defective here and
there in this latter regard. For in this case the danger is not that I will
be refuted, but that I will not be understood. For my own part, from
now on I cannot let myself become involved in controversies, although
I shall attend carefully to all hints, whether they come from friends or
from opponents, so that I may utilize them, in accordance with this
propaedeutic, in the future execution of the system. Since during these
labors I have come to be rather advanced in age (this month I will attain my sixty-fourth year), I must proceed frugally with my time if ! am
to carry out my plan of providing the metaphysics both of nature and
of morals, as confirmation of the correctness of the critique both of
theoretical and practical reason; and I must await the illumination of
those obscurities that are hardly to be avoided at the beginning of this
work, as well as the defense of the whole, from those deserving men
who have made it their own. Any philosophical treatise may find itself
under pressure in particular passages (for it cannot be as fully armored
as a mathematical treatise), while the whole structure of the system,
considered as a unity, proceeds without the least danger; when a system is new, few have the adroitness of minda to gain an overview of it,
and because all innovation is an inconvenience to them, still fewer have
the desire to do so. Also, in any piece of writing apparent contradictions can be ferreted out if individual passages are torn out of their
context and compared with each other, especially in a piece of informal
discourseb that in the eyes of those who rely on the judgment of others
cast a disadvantageous light On that piece of writing but that can be
very easily resolved by someone who has mastered the idea of the
whole. Meanwhile, if a theory is really durable, then in time the effect

a Geist

b al,. freie Rede Jortgehenden Schrift

123

Bxliv

Preface
of action and reaction, which at first seemed to threaten it with great
danger, will serve only to polish away its rough spots, and if men of im­
partiality, insight, and true popularity make it their business to do this,
then in a short time they will produce even the required elegance.

Konigsberg, in the month ofApril, I787.

124

Con ten tsa

Introduction

A xxiii

page [ 1 2 7]

I. Transcendental Doctrine of Elements
Part I. Transcendental Aesthetic

[ 1 5 1]

Section I. On Space

[ 1 5 3]
[ 1 5 7]

Section II. On Time

[162]

Part II. Transcendental Logic

[193]

Division I. Transcendental Analytic in two
books and their various chapters and sections

[20 1 ]

Division II. Transcendental Dialectic in two
books and their various chapters and sections

II. Transcendental Doctrine of Method
Chapter

I . The

Chapter

2 . The Canon of Pure Reason

Chapter

3.
4.

Chapter
a

Discipline of Pure Reason

[3 84]
[62 5 ]
[62 8]
[672]

The Architectonic of Pure Reason

[691 ]

The History of Pure Reason

[7°2]

Kant includes this table of contents only in the first edition.

125

Axxiv

Introductiona, b

AI

1.
The idea of transcendental philosophy.
Experience is without doubt the first product that our understanding
brings forth as it works on the raw material of sensible sensations. 1 It is
for this very reason the first teaching, and in its progress it is so inex­
haustible in new instruction that the chain of life in all future genera­
tions will never have any lack of new information that can be gathered
on this terrain. Nevertheless it is far from the only field to which our
understanding can be restricted. It tells us, to be sure, what is, but never
that it must necessarily be thus and not otherwise.c For that very reason
it gives us no true universality, and reason, which is so desirous of this
kind of cognitions, is more stimulated than satisfied by it. Now such
universal cognitions, which at the same time have the character of inner
necessity, must be clear and certain for themselves, independently of ex­
perience; hence one calls them

a

priori cognitions:2

whereas that which

is merely borrowed from experience is, as it is put, cognized only a pos­

teriori,

or empirically)

a We first present the introduction as it appeared in the first edition, followed by the re­

vised version that appeared in the second edition. Considerable changes were made in
the latter, including some deletions, major additions, and occasional alterations within
the passages that were repeated. We will use notes and references to the marginal pag­
ination to show what changes were made from the first to the second editions. The fol­
lowing two paragraphs in the first edition were replaced with the first two numbered
sections of the second.
b In his copy of the first edition, Kant made the following two notes:
"
1 . On the possibility of a critique of pure reason.
2. On its necessity (not from other sciences).
3. On its division.
4- On its purpose, the science of all principles [Principien] of pure reason. (Practi­
cal)" (E I, p. 1 2).
"That reason has its boundaries with regard to its a priori principles [Principien] , con­
cerning both degree and scope.
Division of metaphysics into metaphysics of nature and of morals" (E II, p. 1 2 ) .
, The following note is added in Kant's copy of the first edition:
"We cannot infer to any necessity a posteriori if we do not already have a rule a priori.
E.g., 'If many cases are identical, there must be something that makes this agreement
necessary' presupposes the a priori proposition that everything contingent has a cause
that determines its concept a priori." (E IV, p. 1 4)
127

A2

Introduction <A>
Now what is especially remarkable is that even among our experi­
ences cognitions are mixed in that must have their origin a priori and

that perhaps serve only to establish connection among our represen­
tations of the senses. For if one removes from our experiences every­

thing that belongs to the senses, there still remain certain original
concepts and the judgments generated from them, which must have
arisen entirely

a

priori,

independently of experience, because they

make one able to say more about the objects that appear to the senses
than mere experience would teach, or at least make one believe that
one can say this, and make assertions contain true universality and
strict necessity, the likes of which merely empirical cognition can
never afford.

B6
A3

But what says still more is this, that certain cognitions even aban­
don the field of all possible experiences, and seem to expand the do­
main of our judgments beyond all bounds of experience through
concepts to which no corresponding object at all can be given in
expenence.
And precisely in these latter cognitions, which go beyond the world
of the senses, where experience can give neither guidance nor correc­

B7

tion, lie the investigations of our reason that we hold to be far more
preeminent in their importance and sublime in their final aim than
everything that the understanding can learn in the field of appearances,
and on which we would rather venture everything, even at the risk of
erring, than give up such important investigations because of any sort
of reservation or from contempt and indifference. a
Now it may seem natural that as soon as one has abandoned the ter­

rain of experience, one would not immediately erect an edifice with
cognitions that one possesses without knowing whence, and on the
credit of principles whose origin one does not know, without having
first assured oneself of its foundation through careful investigations,
thus that one would have long since raised the question how the un­
derstanding could come to all these cognitions

a

priori

and what do-

A4

main, validity, and value they might have. And in fact nothing is more

B8

natural, if one understands by this word that which properly and
reasonably ought to happen; but if one understands by it that which
usually happens, then conversely nothing is more natural and compre­
hensible than that this investigation should long have been neglected.
For one part of these cognitions, the mathematical, has long been re­
liable, and thereby gives rise to a favorable expectation about others
as well, although these may be of an entirely different nature. Fura Here the second edition adds two sentences characterizing the tasks of pure reason. See

B7 below.

128

Introduction

<A>

thermore, if one is beyond the circle of experience, then one is sure not
to be contradicted through experience. The charm in expanding one's
cognitions is so great that one can be stopped in one's progress only by
bumping into a clear contradiction. This, however, one can avoid if
one makes his inventions carefully, even though they are not thereby
inventions any the less. Mathematics gives us a splendid example of
how far we can go with

a

priori cognition independently of experience.

Now it is occupied, to be sure, with objects and cognitions only so far
as these can be exhibited in intuition. This circumstance, however, is
easily overlooked, since the intuition in question can itself be given

priori,

a

and thus can hardly be distinguished from a mere pure concept.

Encouraged by such a proof of the power of reason, the drive for expansion sees no bounds. The light dove, in free flight cutting through

AS

the air the resistance of which it feels, could get the ideaa that it could
do even better in airless space. Likewise, Plato abandoned the world of
the senses because it posed so many hindrances for the understanding,

B9

and dared to go beyond it on the wings of the ideas, in the empty space
of pure understanding. He did not notice that he made no headway by
his efforts, for he had no resistance, no support, as it were, by which he
could stiffen himself, and to which he could apply his powers in order
to get his understanding off the ground. It is, however, a customary
fate of human reason in speculation to finish its edifice as early as
possible and only then to investigate whether the ground has been
adequately prepared for it. But at that point all sorts of excuses will
be sought to assure us of its sturdiness or to refuse such a late and
dangerous examination. What keeps us free of all worry and suspicion during the construction, however, and flatters us with apparent
thoroughness, is this. A great part, perhaps the greatest part of the
business of our reason consists in analyses of the concepts that we al­
ready have of objects. This affords us a multitude of cognitions that,
though they are nothing more than illuminations or clarifications of
that which is already thought in our concepts (though still in a confused way), are, a t least a s far a s their form i s concerned, treasured as

A6

if they were new insights, though they do not extend the concepts that
we have in either matter or content but only set them apart from each
other. Now since this procedure does yield a real a priori cognition,
which makes secure and useful progress, reason, without itself noticing
it, under these pretenses surreptitiously makes assertions of quite another sort, in which it adds something entirely alien to given concepts
a priori, without one knowing how it was able to do this and without
this question even being allowed to come to mind. I will therefore deal

a Vorstellung

1 29

B IO

Introduction <A>

with the distinction between these two kinds of cognition right at the
outset.a
On the difference between analytic and
synthetic judgments.4

A7
B II

A8

In all judgments in which the relation of a subject to the predicate is
thought (if ! consider only affirmative judgments, since the application
to negative ones is easy), this relation is possible in two different ways.
Either the predicate B belongs to the subject A as something that is
(covertly) contained in this concept A; or B lies entirely outside the
concept A, though to be sure it stands in connection with it. In the first
case I call the judgment analytic, in the second synthetic. Analytic
judgments (affirmative ones) are thus those in which the connection of
the predicate is thought through identity, but those in which this con­
nection is thought without identity are to be called synthetic judgments. One could also call the former judgments of clarification and
the latter judgments of amplification,b since through the predicate the
former do not add anything to the concept of the subject, but only
break it up by means of analysis into its component concepts, which
were already thought in it (though confusedly); while the latter, on the
contrary, add to the concept of the subject a predicate that was not
thought in it at all, and could not have been extracted from it through
any analysis; e.g., if ! say: "All bodies are extended," then this is an an­
alytic judgment. For I do not need to go outside the conceptC that I
combine with the word "body" in order to find that extension is con­
nected with it, but rather I need only to analyze that concept, i.e., be­
come conscious of the manifold that I always think in it, in order to
encounter this predicate therein; it is therefore an analytic judgment.
On the contrary, if I say: "All bodies are heavy," then the predicate is
something entirely different from that which I think in the mere con­
cept of a body in general. The addition of such a predicate thus yields
a synthetic judgment.
"Now from this it is clear: I ) that through analytic judgments our
cognition is not amplified at all, but rather the concept, which I already
a Kant's copy of the first edition has the following note:

"On synthetic hypothetical and disjunctive judgments as well as categorical negative
judgments." (E V, p. 14)
b Erliiuterungs- and Erweiterung.mrteile. These terms are emphasized in the second but not
in the first edition.
, Kant's copy of the first edition here adds: " 'I exist' is an analytic judgment; 'A body ex­
ists' is a synthetic one." (E VI, p. 14)
d The next two paragraphs are replaced with a single one in the second edition, the sec­
ond of which incorporates part of the present one; see B I I-12 below.

130

Introduction

<A>

have, is set out, and made intelligible to me; 2) that in synthetic judg­
ments I must have in addition to the concept of the subject something
else eX) on which the understanding depends in cognizing a predicate
that does not lie in that concept as nevertheless belonging to it.a
In the case of empirical judgments or judgments of experience there
is no difficulty here.b For this X is the complete experience of the object
that I think through some concept A, which constitutes only a part of

this experience. For althoughC I do not at all include the predicate of
weight in the concept o f a body in general, the concept nevertheless

B 12

designates the complete experience through a part of it, to which I can
therefore add still other parts of the very same experience as belonging
to the former. I can first cognize the concept of body analytically
through the marks of extension, of impenetrability, of shape, etc., which
are all thought in this concept. But now I amplify my cognition and, in
looking back to the experience from which I had extracted this concept
of body, I find that weight is also always connected with the previous
marks.d Experience is therefore that X that lies outside the concept

A

and on which the possibility of the synthesis of the predicate of weight

B with the concept A is grounded.
But in synthetic a priori judgments this means of help is entirely lacking.5 I f I am to go outside the concept A in order to cognize another B

as combined with it, what is it on which I depend and through which
the synthesis becomes possible, since I here do not have the advantage
of looking around for it in the field of experience? Take the proposition:
"Everything that happens has its cause." In the concept of something
that happens, I think, to be sure, of an existence which was preceded by
a time, etc., and from that analytic judgments can be drawn. But the
concept of a cause indicates something different from the concept of

something that happens, and is not contained in the latter representa­
tion at all. How then do I come to say something quite different about
that which happens in general, and to cognize the concept of cause as
belonging to it even though not contained in it?" What is the X here on
which the understanding depends when it believes itself to discover be­
yond the concept of A a predicate that is foreign to it and that is yet
a Kant's copy of the first edition adds here: "Analytic judgments could accordingly be

called mere judgments of clarification, synthetic judgments, however, judgments of am­
plification." (E VII, p. 1 5)
b In Kant's copy of the first edition, this was changed to: "In the case of empirical judg­
ments or judgments of experience there is no difficulty about how they are to be proved
synthetically." (E VIII, p. 1 5)
From here the remainder of the paragraph is incorporated into the second edition.
d The remainder of this paragraph is changed in the second edition; see B I 2 .
, Kant ends this and the next sentence with periods, for which w e have substituted ques­
tion marks.

C

13 1

A9

B 13

Introduction <A>
connected with it? It cannot be experience, for the principle that has
been adduced adds the latter representations to the former not only
with greater generality than experience can provide, but also with the

'"1\ 10

expression of necessity, hence entirely a priori and from mere concepts.
Now the entire final aim of our speculative a priori cognition rests on

such synthetic, i.e., ampliative, principles; for the analytic ones are, to

be sure, most important and necessary, but only for attaining that dis­
tinctness of concepts that is requisite for a secure and extended synthe­
sis as a really new construction.a

bA

certain mystery thus lies hidden here,* the elucidation of which

alone can make progress in the boundless field of pure cognition of the
understanding secure and reliable: namely, to uncover the �round of the
possibility of synthetic a priori judgments with appropriate generality, to
gain insight into the conditions that make every kind of them possible,

and not merely to designate this entire cognition (which comprises its
own species) in a cursory outline, but to determine it completely and
adequately for every use in a system in accordance with its primary
sources, divisions, domain, and boundaries. So much provisionally for
the pecularities of synthetic judgments.

B 24

cNow from all of this there results the idea of a special science, which

AII

could serve for the critique of pure reason. Every cognition is called

pure, however, that is not mixed with anything foreign to it. But a cog­

nition is called absolutely pure, in particular, in which no experience or
sensation at all is mixed in, and that is thus fully a priori. Now reason is
the faculty that provides the principlesd of cognition

a

priori.

Hence

pure reason is that which contains the principlese for cognizing some­
thing absolutely

B 25

a

priori. An

organon of pure reason would be a sum

total o f those principles! in accordance with which all pure

a

priori cog-

* If it had occurred to one of the ancients even to raise this question, this alone

would have offered powerful resistance to all the systems of pure reason down
to our own times, and would have spared us so many vain attempts that were
blindly undertaken without knowledge of what was really at issue.
a Anbau, changed to Erwerb (acquisition) in the second edition.
b

The following paragraph, including the footnote, is omitted in the second edition, and
replaced with Sections V and VI, B 14 through B 2 5.
, At this point the common text of the two editions resumes; in the second edition, how­
ever, there is here inserted the section number VII and the ensuing heading. In addi­
tion, the second and third sentences of this paragraph are omitted, and there are minor
changes in the wording of the opening and fourth sentences. See B 24 below.

d

Principien
, Principien
f Principien

132

Introduction <A>

nitions can be acquired and actually brought about. The exhaustive ap­
plication of such an organon would create a system of pure reason. But
since that requires a lot, and it is still an open question whether such an
amplification of our cognition is possible at all and in what cases it
would be possible, we can regard a science of the mere estimation of
pure reason, of its sources and boundaries, as the propaedeutic to the
system of pure reason. Such a thing would not be a doctrine, but must
be called only a critique of pure reason, and its utility would really be
only negative, serving not for the amplification but only for the purifi­
cation of our reason, and for keeping it free of errors, by which a great
deal is already won. I call all cognition

transcendental that is occupied

not so much with objects but rather with our a priori concepts of objects
in general.a,6

A system of such concepts would be

called transcendental

A I2

philosophy. But this is again too much for the beginning. For since such
a science would have to contain completely both analytic as well as synthetic

a

priori cognition,

it is, as far as our aim is concerned, too broad

in scope, since we need to take the analysis only as far as is indispensably necessary in order to provide insight into the principles of a priori

synthesis in their entire scope, which is our only concern. This investigation, which we can properly call not doctrine but only transcenden-

B 26

tal critique, since it does not aim at the amplification of the cognitions
themselves but only at their correction, and is to supply the touchstone
of the worth or worthlessness of all cognitions

a

priori,

is that with

which we are now concerned. Such a critique is accordingly a preparation, if possible, for an organon, and, if this cannot be accomplished,
then at least for a canon, in accordance with which the complete system
of the philosophy of pure reason, whether it is to consist in the ampli­
fication or the mere limitationb of its cognition, can in any case at least
some day be exhibited both analytically and synthetically. For that this
should be possible, indeed that such a system should not be too great in
scope for us to hope to be able entirely to complete it, can be assessed
in advance from the fact that our object is not the nature of things,
which is inexhaustible, but the understanding, which judges about the
nature of things, and this in turn only in regard to its

a

priori cognition,

the supply of which, since we do not need to search for it externally,
cannot remain hidden from us, and in all likelihood is small enough to
be completely recorded, its worth or worthlessness assessed, and subjected to a correct appraisal.c
a In the second edition, "but . . . " replaced with "but with our manner of cognition of ob­
b

jects insofar as this is to be possible a priori." See B 2 5 below.

Begrenzung

, Two sentences are added here in the second edition; see B 2 7 below.

133

AI3

Introduction <A>
B27

II.
D ivision of Transcendental Philosophy"
Transcendental philosophy is here only an idea,b for which the cri­
tique of pure reason is to outline the entire plan

architectonically,

i.e.,

from principles,' with a full guarantee for the completeness and cer­
tainty of all the components that comprise this edifice.d That this cri­
tique is not itself already called transcendental philosophy rests solely
on the fact that in order to be a complete system it would also have to
contain an exhaustive analysis of all of human cognition

a

priori.

Now

our critique must, to be sure, lay before us a complete enumeration of
all of the ancestral conceptse that comprise the pure cogni;:ion in ques­
tion. Only it properly refrains from the exhaustive analysis of these con­
cepts themselves as well as from the complete review of all of those
derived from them, partly because this analysis would not be purpose-

A I4/B Z8

ful l since it does not contain the difficulty that is encountered in the
synthesis on account of which the whole critique is actually undertaken,
partly because it would be contrary to the unity of the plan to take on
responsibility for the completeness of such an analysis and derivation,
from which one could after all be relieved given one's aim. This com­
pleteness of the analysis as well as the derivation from the

a

priori con­

cepts which are to be provided in the future will nevertheless be easy to
complete as long as they are present as exhaustive principle� of synthe­
sis, and if nothing is lacking in them in regard to this essential aim.
To the critique of pure reason there accordingly belongs everything
that constitutes transcendental philosophy, and it is the complete idea
of transcendental philosophy, but is not yet this science itself, since it
goes only so far in the analysis as is requisite for the complete estima­
tion of synthetic

a

priori cognition.

The chief target in the division of such a science is that absolutely no
concepts must enter into it that contain anything empirical, or that the
a

priori cognition

be entirely pure. Hence, although the supreme prin-

n This number and title are omitted in the second edition, having been replaced by the
number and title of Section VII at B 24.

b
C

d

The words "here only an idea" are replaced in the second edition with "the idea of a sci­
ence"; see B 27 below.

Principien

Here the second edition inserts the sentence "It is the system of all principles
[Principien] of pure reason." In his copy of the first edition, Kant had added here: "For
without this the former must also be without any touchstone, and therefore entirely
groundless." (E IX, p. I 5)

, Stammbegriffe

f zweckmiijJig
g

Principien

1 34

Introduction <A>
ciples of morality and the fundamental concepts of it are a priori cognitions, they still do not belong in transcendental philosophy, since the

A15

concepts of pleasure and displeasure, of desires and inclinations, of

B 29

choice, etc., which are all o f empirical origin, must there b e presup­
posed.n Hence transcendental philosophy is a philosophyb of pure,
merely speculative reason. For everything practical, insofar as it contains motives,c is related to feelings, which belong among empirical
sources of cognition.
Now if one wants to set up the division of this science from the gen­
eral viewpoint of a system in general, then the one that we will now pre­
sent must contain first a Doctrine

of Method

of Elements and second a Doctrine

of pure reason. Each of these main parts will have its sub­

division, the grounds for which cannot yet be expounded here. All that
seems necessary for an introduction or a preliminary is that there are
two stems of human cognition, which may perhaps arise from a com­
mon but to us unknown root, namely

sensibility and understanding,

through the first of which objects are given to us, but through the sec­
ond of which they are thought. Now if sensibility were to contain

a

priori representations, which constitute the conditions under which ob-

jects are given t o us, i t would belong t o transcendental philosophy. The
transcendental doctrine of the senses will have to belong to the first part
o f the science o f elements, since the conditions under which alone the
objects of human cognition are given precede those under which those
objects are thought.
n This sentence is revised in the second edition to reflect Kant's intervening argument,

b

beginning with the Groundwork of the Metaphysics ofMorals of 1 785, that the principle of
morality if not its application is indeed entirely a priori. See B 2 8-9 below.

Weltweisheit
, Bewegungsgriinde, replaced in the second edition with Triebfedern (incentives) in order to
leave room for the idea that although incentives based on feelings are not adequate for
morality, there can be other, more purely rational motives for it (see Groundw01·k,
4:427).

135

B 30
A 16

Introductiona

BI

I.h
On the difference between pure and empirical cognition.
There is no doubt whatever that all our cognition begins with experi­
ence; for how else should the cognitive faculty be awakened into exer­
cise if not through objects that stimulate our senses and in part
themselves produce representations, in part bring the activity of our un­
derstanding into motion to compare these, to connect or separate them,
and thus to work up the raw material of sensible impressions into a
cognition of objects that is called experience? 7

cerned,

As far as time is con­

then, no cognition in us precedes experience, and with experi­

ence every cognition begins.
But although all our cognition commences
does not on that account all arise

with experience, yet it
from experience. For it could well be

that even our experiential cognition is a composite of that which we re­
ceive through impressions and that which our own cognitive faculty
(merely prompted by sensible impressions) provides out of itself,

B2

which addition we cannot distinguish from that fundamental material
until long practice has made us attentive to it and skilled in separating
it out.
It is therefore at least a question requiring closer investigation, and
one not to be dismissed at first glance, whether there is any such cog­
nition independent of all experience and even of all impressions of the
senses. One calls such cognitions a priori, C and distinguishes them
from empirical ones, which have their sources
experience.8

a posteriori,

namely in

The former expressiond is nevertheless not yet sufficiently determi­
nate to designate the whole sense of the question before us. For it is cus­
tomary to say of many a cognition derived from experiential sources that
we are capable of it or partake in it a priori, because we do not derive it
a As in the second edition.
b

Sections I and II (B I -6) replace the first two paragraphs of Section I in the first edition
(AI-2).
, Normally set in roman type, here emphasized by Kant by the use of italics.
d That is, "a priori."

1 36

Introduction <B>
immediately from experience, but rather from a general rule that we
have nevertheless itself borrowed from experience. So one says of some­
one who undermined the foundation of his house that he could have
known

a priori that

it would collapse, i.e., he need not have waited for

the experience of it actually collapsing. Yet he could not have known this
entirely a priori. 9 For that bodies are heavy and hence fall if their support

is taken away must first have become known to him through experience.

In the sequel therefore we will understand by a priori cognitions not
those that occur independently of this or that experience, but rather
those that occur

absolutely independently of all

experience. Opposed to

them are empirical cognitions, or those that are possible onl)"" a posteri-

ori,

B3

i.e., through experience. Among a priori cognitions, however, those

are called pure with which nothing empirical is intermixed. Thus, e.g.,
the proposition "Every alteration has its cause" is an

a priori

proposi-

tion, only not pure, since alteration is a concept that can be drawn only
from experience. IO

II.
We are in possession o f certain

a priori cognitions,

and

even the common understanding is never without them.
At issue here is a mark by means of which we can securely distinguish a
pure cognition from an empirical one. I I Experience teaches us, to be

sure, that something is constituted thus and so, but not that it could not
be otherwise.

cessity,

First, then, if a proposition is thought along with its ne­
a priori judgment; if it is, moreover, also not derived

it is an

from any proposition except one that in turn is valid as a necessary
proposition, then it is absolutely

a priori. Second:

Experience never

gives its judgments true or strict but only assumed and comparative

universality (through

induction), so properly it must be said: as far as

we have yet perceived, there is no exception to this or that rule. Thus if
a judgment i s thought in strict universality, i.e., in such a way that no
exception at all is allowed to be possible, then it is not derived from ex­
perience, but is rather valid absolutely a priori. Empirical universality is

therefore only an arbitrary increase in validity from that which holds in

most cases to that which holds in all, as in, e.g., the proposition "All
bodies are heavy," whereas strict universality belongs to a judgment es­
sentially; this points to a special source of cognition for it, namely a faculty of a priori cognition. Necessity and strict universality are therefore
secure indicationsfl of an a priori cognition, and also belong together in-

a Kennzeichen

137

B4

Introduction <B>

B5

B6

separably. But since in their use it is sometimes easier to show the em­
pirical limitation in judgments than the contingency in them, or is often
more plausible to show the unrestricted universality that we ascribe to
a judgment than its necessity, it is advisable to employ separately these
two criteria, each of which is in itself infallible. 12
Now it is easy to show that in human cognition there actually are
such necessary and in the strictest sense universal, thus pure a priori
judgments. If one wants an example from the sciences, one need only
look at all the propositions of mathematics; if one would have one
from the commonest use of the understanding, the proposition that
every alteration must have a cause will do; indeed in the latter the very
concept of a cause so obviously contains the concept of a necessity of
connection with an effect and a strict universality of rule that it would
be entirely lost if one sought, as Hume did, to derive it from a frequent
association of that which happens with that which precedes and a habit
(thus a merely subjective necessity) of connecting representations aris­
ing from that association. 1 3 Even without requiring such examples for
the proof of the reality of pure a priori principles in our cognition, one
could establish their indispensability for the possibility of experience
itself, thus establish it II priori. For where would experience itself get
its certainty if all rules in accordance with which it proceeds were
themselves in turn always empirical, thus contingent?; a hence one
could hardly allow these to count as first principles. Yet here we can
content ourselves with having displayed the pure use of our cognitive
faculty as a fact together with its indication.b Not merely in judgments,
however, but even in concepts is an origin of some of them revealed a
priori. Gradually remove from your experiential concept of a body
everything that is empirical in it - the color, the hardness or softness,
the weight, even the impenetrability - there still remains the space
that was occupied by the body (which has now entirely disappeared),
and you cannot leave that out. Likewise, if you remove from your em­
pirical concept of every object,' whether corporeal or incorporeal, all
those properties of which experience teaches you, you could still not
take from it that by means of which you think of it as a substance or
as dependent on a substance (even though this concept contains more
determination than that of an object! in general). Thus, convinced by
the necessity with which this concept presses itself on you, you must
concede that it has its seat in your faculty of cognition a priori.

" Question mark not in original.
b Kennzeichen, i.e., sign.

, Objects
Objects

d

1 38

Introduction <B>
lILa

Philosophy needs a science that determines the possibility,
the principles,b and the domain of all cognitions a priori.
But what says still more than all the foregoing' is this, that certain
cognitions even abandon the field of all possible experiences, and seem
to expand the domain of our judgments beyond all bounds of experi�nce through concepts to which no corresponding object at all can be
given in experience.
And precisely in these latter cognitions, which go beyond the world
of the senses, where experience can give neither guidance nor correction, lie the investigations of our reason that we hold to be far more
preeminent in their importance and sublime in their final aim than
everything that the understanding can learn in the field of appearances,
in which we would rather venture everything, even at the risk of erring,
than give up such important investigations because of any sort of reser­
vation or from contempt and indifference. dThese unavoidable problems of pure reason itself are God, freedom and immortality. But the
science whose final aim in all its preparations is directed properly only
to the solution of these problems is called metaphysics, whose procedure is in the beginning dogmatic, i.e., it confidently takes on the exe­
cution of this task without an antecedent examination of the capacity or
incapacitye of reason for such a great undertaking.
Now it may seem natural that as soon as one has abandoned the terrain of experience one would not immediately erect an edifice with cog­
nitions that one possesses without knowing whence, and on the credit
of principles whose origin one does not know, without having first as­
sured oneself of its foundation through careful investigations, thus that
one would all the morefhave long since raised the question how the un­
derstanding could come to all these cognitions a priori and what do­
main, validity, and value they might have. And in fact nothing is more
natural, if one understands by the word natural g that which properly
and reasonably ought to happen; but if one understands by it that which
usually happens, then conversely nothing is more natural and comprea This section number and title added in the second edition. The ensuing paragraph com­

b

mences the first part of the introduction common to both editions, extending from here
to B 14, though with one major interpolation in the next paragraph and another change
at B 1 1 - 1 2 .

Principien

, "than all the foregoing" added in the second edition.
d The remainder of this paragraph added in the second edition.

, des Vermogens oder Unvermogens

f "vielmehr" added in the second edition.
g

"dem Wort natiirlich" substituted for "unter diesem Worte" in the second edition.
139

A3

B7

A4

B8

Introduction <B>

A5

B9

A6

hensible than that this investigation should long have been neglected.a
For one part of these cognitions, the mathematical, has long been reli­
able, and thereby gives rise to a favorable expectation about others as
well, although these may be of an entirely different nature. Further­
more, if one is beyond the circle of experience, then one is sure of not
being refutedb through experience. The charm in expanding one's cog­
nitions is so great that one can be stopped in one's progress only by
bumping into a clear contradiction. This, however, one can avoid if one
makes his inventions carefully, even though they are not thereby inven­
tions any the less. Mathematics gives us a splendid example of how far
we can go with a priori cognition independently of experience. Now it
is occupied, to be sure, with objects and cognitions only so far as these
can be exhibited in intuitions. This circumstance, however, is easily
overlooked, since the intuition in question can itself be given a priori,
and thus can hardly be distinguished from a mere pure concept.
CaptivatedC by such a proof o f the power o f reason, the drive for ex­
pansion sees no bounds. The light dove, in free flight cutting through
the air the resistance of which it feels, could get the idead that it could
do even better in airless space. Likewise, Plato abandoned the world of
the senses because it set such narrow limitse for the understanding, and
dared to go beyond it on the wings of the ideas, in the empty space of
pure understanding. He did not notice that he made no headway by his
efforts, for he had no resistance, no support, as it were, by which he
could stiffen himself, and to which he could apply his powers in order
to put his understanding into motion. It is, however, a customary fate
of human reason in speculation to finish its edifice as early as possible
and only then to investigate whether the ground has been adequately
prepared for it. But at that point all sorts of excuses will be sought to as­
sure us of its sturdiness or also, even better! to refuse such a late and
dangerous examination. What keeps us free of all worry and suspicion
during the construction, however, and flatters us with apparent thor­
oughness, is this. A great part, perhaps the greatest part, of the business
of our reason consists in analyses of the concepts that we already have of
objects. This affords us a multitude of cognitions that, although they
are nothing more than illuminations or clarifications of that which is already thought in our concepts (though still in a confused way), are, at
least as far as their form is concerned, treasured as if they were new ina The second edition reads "lange" instead of "lange Zeit. "
b The second edition reads "widerlegt" instead of "widersprochen."
, The second edition reads "eingenommen" instead of "aufgemuntert."
d Vorstellllng
, The second edition reads "so enge Schranken setzt" instead of "so vielfiiltige Hindernisse
legt."
f The second edition inserts the words "allch" and "lieber gar. "
140

Introduction <B>
sights, though they do not extend the concepts that we have in either
matter or content, but only set them apart from each other. Now since
this procedure does yield a real a priori cognition, which makes secure
and useful progress, reason, without itself noticing it, under these pretenses surreptitiously makes assertions of quite another sort, in which
reason adds something entirely alien to given concepts and indeeda does
so a priori, without one knowing how it was able to do this and without
such ab question even being allowed to come to mind. I will therefore
deal with the distinction between these two sorts of cognition right at
the outset.

B 10

Iv.c

On the difference between analytic and

synthetic judgments. 14

In all judgments in which the relation of a subject to the predicate is
thought (if I consider only affirmative judgments, since the application
to negative ones is easy) this relation is possible in two different ways.
Either the predicate B belongs to the subject A as something that is
(covertly) contained in this concept A; or B lies entirely outside the con:
ceptA, though to be sure it stands in connection with it. In the first case
I call the judgment analytic, in the second synthetic. Analytic judgments (affirmative ones) are thus those in which the connection of the
predicate is thought through identity, but those in which this connection is thought without identity are to be called synthetic judgments.
One could also call the former judgments of clarification, and the latter judgments of amplification/ since through the predicate the former do not add anything to the concept of the subject, but only break
it up by means of analysis into its component concepts, which were already thought in it (though confusedly); while the latter, on the contrary, add to the concept of the subject a predicate that was not thought
in it at all, and could not have been extracted from it through any analysis. E.g., if I say: "All bodies are extended," then this is an analytic judgment. For I do not need to go beyonde the concept that I combine with
the body! in order to find that extension is connected with it, but rather
I need only to analyze that concept, i.e., become conscious of the manifold that I always think in it, in order to encounter this predicate
therein; it is therefore an analytic judgment. On the contrary, if I say:
a The second edition adds the words "und zwar. "
b The second edition replaces "diese" with "eine salehe."

, Section number "IV" added in the second edition.
d "Erliiuterungs-" and "Erweiterungsurteile."
, The second edition reads "uber" instead of "aus. "
f The second e�ition reads "dem Kijrper" instead of "dem Wort Kfjrper."
141

A7

BII

Introduction <B>

B 12

A8

A9
B 13

"All bodies are heavy," then the predicate is something entirely differ­
ent from that which I think in the mere concept of a body in general.
The addition of such a predicate thus yields a synthetic judgment.
aJudgments of experience, as such, are all synthetic. For it would
be absurd to ground an analytic judgment on experience, since I do not
need to go beyond my concept at all in order to formulate the judg­
ment, and therefore need no testimony from experience for that. That
a body is extended is a proposition that is established a priori, and is not
a judgment of experience. For before I go to experience, I already have
all the conditions for my judgment in the concept, from which I merely
draw out the predicate in accordance with the principle of contradic­
tion, and can thereby at the same time become conscious of the neces­
sity of the judgment, which experience could never teach me. On the
contrary, although I bdo not at all include the predicate of weight in the
concept of a body in general, the concept nevertheless designates an ob­
ject of experience' through a part of it, to which I can therefore add stilI
other parts of the same experience as belonging with the former. I can
first cognize the concept of body analytically through the marks of ex­
tension, of impenetrability, of shape, etc., which are all thought in this
concept. But now I amplify my cognition and, looking back to the ex­
perience from which I had extracted this concept of body, I find that
weight is also always connected with the previous marks, dand I there­
fore add this synthetically as predicate to that concept. It is thus expe­
rience Con which the possibility of the synthesis of the predicate of
weight with the concept of body is grounded, since both concepts,
though the one is not contained in the other, nevertheless belong to­
gether, though only contingently, as parts of a whole, namely experi­
ence, which is itself a synthetic combination of intuitions.
fBut in synthetic a pri01'i judgments this means of help is entirely
lacking. I5 If I am to go beyondg the concept A in order to cognize an­
other B as combined with it, what is it on which I depend and by means
of which the synthesis becomes possible, since I here do not have the
advantage of looking around for it in the field of experience? Take the
proposition: "Everything that happens has its cause." In the concept of
a The first part of the following paragraph replaces two paragraphs in the first edition;
b
C

d

see A 7-8 above.
The text common to the first edition resumes here.
The second edition has "einen Gegenstand der Erfahrung" instead of the first edition's

"die vollstdndige Erfahrung. "

The remainder of this sentence is added in the second edition.
, The remainder of this sentence is modified and expanded in the second edition.
f The common text resumes here.
g "iiber" substituted in the second edition for "ausser" in the first.

1 42

Introduction

<B>

something that happens, I think, to be sure, of an existence that was
preceded by a time, etc., and from that analytic judgments can be
drawn. But the concept of a cause lies entirely outside that concept,
anda indicates something different than the concept of what happens in
general, and is thereforeb not contained in the latter representation at
all. How then do I come to say something quite different about that
which happens in general, and to cognize the concept of cause as be­
longing to it, indeed necessarily,' even though not contained in it?d
What is the unknown =eX here on which the understanding depends
when it believes itself to discover beyond the concept of A a predicate
that is foreign to it yet which it nevertheless believes to be connected
with it?fIt cannot be experience, for the principle that has been adduced
adds the latter representations to the former not only with greater gen­
erality than experience can provide, but also with the expression of ne­
cessity, hence entirely a priori and from mere concepts. Now the entire
final aim of our speculative a priori cognition rests on such synthetic,
i.e., ampliative principles; for the analytic ones are, to b e sure, most im­
portant and necessary, but only for attaining that distinctness of concepts which is requisite for a secure and extended synthesis as a really
new acquisition.g
hV.

Synthetic

priori judgments are contained as principlesi
in all theoretical sciences of reason.

a

h . Mathematical judgments are all synthetic.'6 This proposition
seems to have escaped the notice of the analysts of human reason until
now, indeed to be diametrically opposed to all of their conjectures, al­
though it is incontrovertibly certain and is very important in the sequel.
For since one found that the inferences of the mathematicians all pro­
ceed in accordance with the principle of contradiction (which is rea "liegt ganz auflerjenem Begriffe, und" added in the second edition.
b "ist also" in the second edition instead of "und ist" in the first.
, "und so gar notwendig" added in the second edition.
d

Kant ends this and the next sentence with periods, for which we have substituted ques­
tion marks.
, "unbekannte =" added in the second edition.
f In the second edition, "welches er gleichwohl damit verkniipft zu sein erachtet?" substituted
for "das gleichwohl damit verkniipft sei. "
g In the second edition, "Erwerb" replaces "Anbau."
h At this point one paragraph from the first edition is omitted and replaced with the fol­
lowing Sections V and VI, B I4 through B 2 S .

; Principien

j Kant adapts the following five paragraphs from the Prolegomena, § 2 (4:268-9).

1 43

A 10

B 14

Introduction <B>

B 15

quired by the nature of any apodictic certainty), one was persuaded that
the principles could also be cognized from the principlea of contradic­
tion, in which, however, theyb erred; for a synthetic proposition can of
course be comprehended in accordance with the principle of contradic­
tion, but only insofar as another synthetic proposition is presupposed
from which it can be deduced, never in itself.
It must first be remarked that properly mathematical propositions are
always a priori judgments and are never empirical, because they carry
necessity with them, which cannot be derived from experience. But if
one does not want to concede this, well then, I will restrict myproposi­
tion to pure mathematics, the concept of which already implies that it
does not contain empirical but merely pure a priori cognition.
To be sure, one might initially think that the proposition " 7 + 5 I 2 "
is a merely analytic proposition that follows from the concept of a sum
of seven and five in accordance with the principle of contradiction. Yet
if one considers it more closely, one finds that the concept of the sum
of 7 and 5 contains nothing more than the unification of both numbers
in a single one, through which it is not at all thought what this single
number is which comprehends the two of them. The concept of twelve
is by no means already thought merely by my thinking of that unifica­
tion of seven and five, and no matter how long I analyze my concept of
such a possible sum I will still not find twelve in it. One must go beyond
these concepts, seeking assistance in the intuition that corresponds to
one of the two, one's five fingers, say, or (as in Segner's arithmetic)!7 five
points, and one after another add the units of the five given in the intu­
ition to the concept of seven. cFor I take first the number 7, and, as I
take the fingers of my hand as an intuition for assistance with the con­
cept of 5, to that image of mine I now add the units that I have previously taken together in order to constitute the number 5 one after
another to the number 7, and thus see the number I 2 arise. That 7
should be added to 5 I have, to be sure, thought in the concept of a sum
7 + 5, but not that this sum is equal to the number I 2 . The arith­
metical proposition is therefore always synthetic; one becomes all the
more distinctly aware of that if one takes somewhat larger numbers, for
it is then clear that, twist and turn our concepts as we will, without get­
ting help from intuition we could never find the sum by means of the
mere analysis of our concepts.
=

B 16

=

a Satz

b Kant switches number from "man" to "sie."
, This and the following sentence are substituted here for the clause "Man erweitet also

wirklich seinen Begriff durch diesen Satz 7 + 5 1 2 und thut zu dem ersteren Begriff einen
neuen hinzu, der in jenem gar nicht gedacht war" (One therefore really amplifies his con­
cept through this proposition "7 + 5 I 2 " and adds a new concept to the former, which
was not thought in it) in the Prolegomena (4:z69).
=

=

1 44

Introduction <B>
Just as little is any principle of pure geometry analytic. That the
straight line between two points is the shortest is a synthetic proposi­
tion. For my concept of the straight contains nothing of quantity, but
only a quality. I 8 The concept of the shortest is therefore entirely addi­
tional to it, and cannot be extracted out of the concept of the straight
line by any analysis. Help must here be gotten from intuition, by means
of which alone the synthesis is possible.
To be sure, a few principles that the geometers presuppose are actually analytic and rest on the principle of contradiction; but they alsoa
only serve, as identical propositions, for the chain of method and not as
principles,b e.g., a = a, the whole is equal to itself, or (a + b) > a, i.e., the
whole is greater than its part. And yet even these, although they are
valid in accordance with mere concepts, are admitted in mathematics
only because they can be exhibited in intuition. 19 What usually makes
us believe here that the predicate of such apodictic judgments already
lies in our concept, and that the judgment is therefore analytic, is
merely the ambiguity of the expression. We should, namely, add a certain predicate to a given concept in thought, and this necessity already
attaches to the concepts. But the question is not what we should think
in addition to the given concept, but what we actually think in it,
though only obscurely, and there it is manifest that the predicate certainly adheres to those concepts necessarily, though not as thought in
the concept itself, C but by means of an intuition that must be added to
the concept.
2 . Natural science (Physica) contains within itself synthetic a pri­
ori judgments as principles.d I will adduce only a couple of proposi­
tions as examples, such as the proposition that in all alterations of the
corporeal world the quantity of matter remains unaltered, or that in all
communication of motion effect and counter-effect must always be
equal. In both of these not only the necessity, thus their a priori origin,
but also that they are synthetic propositions is clear. For in the concept
o f matter I d o not think persistence, but only its presence in space
through the filling of space. Thus I actually go beyond the concept of
matter in order to add something to it a priori that I did not think in it.
The proposition is thus not analytic, but synthetic, and nevertheless
thought a priori, and likewise with the other propositions of the pure
part of natural science.
3 . In metaphysics, even if one regards it as a science that has thus far
a "auch" added to text from Prolegomena (4:269).
b Principien
, "als im Begnffe selbst gedacht" substimted here for the word "unmittelbar" in the
Prolegomena (4:269).
d Principien
145

B 17

B 18

Introduction <B>
merely been sought but is nevertheless indispensable because of the na­
ture of human reason, synthetic a priori cognitions are supposed to
be contained, and it is not concerned merely with analyzing concepts
that we make of things a priori and thereby clarifying them analytically,
but we want to amplify our cognition a priori; to this end we must make
use of such principles that add something to the given concepts that was
not contained in them, and through synthetic a priori judgments go so
far beyond that experience itself cannot follow us that far, e.g., in the
proposition "The world must have a first beginning," and others be­
sides, and thus metaphysics, at least as far as its end is concerned, con­
sists of purely synthetic a priori propositions. 20
VI.

B I9

The general problema of pure reason.21

B 20

One has already gained a great deal if one can bring a multitude of in­
vestigations under the formula of a single problem. For one thereby not
only lightens one's own task, by determining it precisely, but also the
judgment of anyone else who wants to examine whether we have satis­
fied our plan or not. The real problem of pure reason is now contained
in the question: How are synthetic judgments a priori possible?
That metaphysics has until now remained in such a vacillating state
of uncertainty and contradictions is to be ascribed solely to the cause
that no one has previously thought of this problem and perhaps even of
the distinction between analytic and synthetic judgments. On the so­
lution of this problem, or on a satisfactory proof that the possibility that
it demands to have explained does not in fact exist at all, metaphysics
now stands or falls. David Hume, who among all philosophers came
closest to this problem, still did not conceive of it anywhere near deter­
minately enough and in its universality, but rather stopped with the syn­
thetic proposition of the connection of the effect with its cause
(Principium causalitatis), believing himself to have brought out that such
an a priori proposition is entirely impossible, and according to his in­
ferences everything that we call metaphysics would come down to a
mere delusion of an alleged insight of reason into that which has in fact
merely been borrowed from experience and from habit has taken on the
appearance of necessity; an assertion, destructive of all pure philosophy,
on which he would never have fallen if he had had our problem in its
generality before his eyes, since then he would have comprehended that
according to his argument there could also be no pure mathematics,
since this certainly contains synthetic a priori propositions, an assertion
a Aufgabe

1 46

Introduction <B>
from which his sound understanding would surely have protected
him. 22
In the solution of the above problem there is at the same time con­
tained the possibility of the pure use of reason in the grounding and ex­
ecution of all sciences that contain a theoretical a priori cognition of
objects, i.e., the answer to the questions:

How is pure mathematics possible?
How is pure natural science possible?
About these sciences, since they are actually given, it can appropriately be asked how they are possible; for that they must be possible is
proved through their actuality. * As far as metaphysics is concerned,
however, its poor progress up to now, and the fact that of no metaphysics thus far expounded can it even be said that, as far as its essential
end is concerned, it even really exists, leaves everyone with ground to
doubt its possibility.
But now this kind of cognition is in a certain sense also to be re­
garded as given, and metaphysics is actual, if not as a science yet as a
natural predisposition (metaphysica naturalis). For human reason, with­
out being moved by the mere vanity of knowing it all, inexorably pushes
on, driven by its own need to such questions that cannot be answered
by any experiential use of reason and of principlesa borrowed from such
a use; and thus a certain sort of metaphysics has actually been present
in all human beings as soon as reason has extended itself to speculation
in them, and it will also always remain there. And now about this too
the question is: How is metaphysics as a natural predisposition possible? i.e., how d o the questions that pure reason raises, and which it is
driven by its own need to answer as well as it can, arise from the nature
of universal human reason?
But since unavoidable contradictions have always been found in all
previous attempts to answer these natural questions, e.g., whether the
world has a beginning or exists from eternity, etc., one cannot leave it
up to the mere natural predisposition to metaphysics, i.e., to the pure
faculty of reason itself, from which, to be sure, some sort of metaphysics
(whatever it might be) always grows, but it must be possible to bring it
* Some may still doubt this last point in the case of pure natural science. Yet one

need merely consider the various propositions that come forth at the outset of
proper (empirical) physics, such as those of the persistence of the same quantity of matter, of inertia, of the equality of effect and counter-effect, etc., and
one will quickly be convinced that they constitute a physica pura (or rationalis),
which well deserves to be separately established, as a science of its own, in its
whole domain, whether narrow or wide.
a Principien
1 47

B2I

B 22

B2I

Introduction <B>
to certainty regarding either the knowledge or ignorance of objects, i.e.,
to come to a decision either about the objects of its questions or about
the capacity and incapacity" of reason for judging something about
them, thus either reliably to extend our pure reason or else to set de­
terminate and secure limits for it. This last question, which flows from
the general problem above, would rightly be this: How is metaphysics

possible as science?

B 23

B 24

The critique of reason thus finally leads necessarily to science; the
dogmatic use of it without critique, on the contrary, leads to groundless
assertions, to which one can oppose equally plausible ones, thus to

skepticism.
Further, this science cannot be terribly extensive, for it does not deal
with objectsb of reason, whose multiplicity;c is infinite, but merely with
itself, with problems that spring entirely from its own womb, and that
are not set before it by the nature of things that are distinct from it but
through its own nature; so that, once it has become completely familiar
with its own capacity" in regard to the objects that may come before it
in experience, then it must become easy to determine, completely and
securely, the domain and the bounds of its attempted use beyond all
bounds of experience.
Thus one can and must regard as undone all attempts made until now
to bring about a metaphysics dogmatically; for what is analytic in one
or the other of them, namely the mere analysis of the concepts that in­
habit our reason a priori, is not the end at all, but only a preparation for
metaphysics proper, namely extending its a priori cognition syntheti­
cally, and it is useless for this end, because it merely shows what is con­
tained in these concepts, but not how we attain such concepts a priori in
order thereafter to be able to determine their valid use in regard to the
objects of all cognition in general. It also requires only a little self­
denial in order to give up all these claims, since the contradictions of
reason, which cannot be denied and which are also unavoidable in dog­
matic procedure, have long since destroyed the authority of every pre­
vious metaphysics. More resolution will be necessary in order not to he
deterred by internal difficulty and external resistance from using an­
other approach,' entirely opposed to the previous one, in order to pro­
mote the productive and fruitful growth of a science that is indis­
pensable for human reason, and from which one can chop down every
stem that has shot up without ever being able to eradicate its root.
a Vermogen und Unvermogen
b Objecten
, Mannigfaltigkeit
d Vermiigen
, Behandlung
1 48

Introduction <B>
aVII.

The idea and division of a special science
under the name of a critique of pure reason.
Now from all of this there results the idea of a special science, which
can be called the critique of pure reason.b ForC reason is the faculty
that provides the principlesd of cognition a priori. Hence pure reason is
that which contains the principlese for cognizing something absolutely
a priori. An organon of pure reason would be a sum total of all those
principles! in accordance with which all pure a priori cognitions can be
acquired and actually brought about. The exhaustive application of
such an organon would create a system of pure reason. But since that
requires a lot, and it is still an open question whether such an amplification of our knowledge is possible at all and in what cases it would be
possible, we can regard a science of me mere estimation of pure reason,
of its sources and boundaries, as the propaedeutic to the system of
pure reason. Such a thing would not be a doctrine, but must be called
only a critique of pure reason, and its utility in regard to speculationg
would really be only negative, serving not for the amplification but only
for the purification of our reason, and for keeping it free of errors, by
which a great deal is already won. I call all cognition transcendental that
is occupied not so much with objects but rather with our mode of cognition of objects insofar as this is to be possible a priori. h,23 A system of
such concepts would b e called transcendental philosophy. But this is
again too much for the beginning. For since such a science would have
to contain completely both the analytic as well as the synthetic a priori
cognition, it is, so fari as our aim is concerned, too broad in scope, since
we need to take the analysis only as far as is indispensably necessary in
order to provide insight into the principles of a priori synthesis in their
entire scope, which is our only concern. This investigation, which we
a The section number VII and the following title are inserted a t this point in the second

edition, following which the text common to the two editions resumes, with minor al­
terations.
b "die Kritik der reinen Vernunft heiflen kann" substituted in the second edition for "die
zur Kritik der rein en Vernunft dienen kanne. " The next two sentences in the first edition
are omitted; see A I I above.
, "Denn" substituted in the second edition for "Nun."

d

Principien
, Principien
f Principien
g "in Ansehung der Spekulation" added in the second edition.
h "sondern mit unserer Erkenntnisart von Gegenstanden, so fern diese a priori miJglich sem solI"
substituted in the second edition for "sondern mit unsern Begriffen a priori von
Gegenstanden. "
, "so weit" substituted for "insofern" in the second edition.
1 49

AII

B 25

AI2

B 26\

Introduction <B>

A 13

can properly call not doctrine but only transcendental critique, since it
does not aim at the amplification of cognitions themselves but only at
their correction, and is to supply the touchstone of the worth or worth­
lessness of all cognitions a priori, is that with which we are now con­
cerned. Such a critique is accordingly a preparation, if possible, for an
organon, and, if this cannot be accomplished, then at least for a canon,
in accordance with which the complete system of the philosophy of
pure reason, whether it is to consist in the amplification or mere limi­
tationa of its cognition, can in any case at least some day be exhibited
both analytically and synthetically. For that this should be possible, in­
deed that such a system should not be too great in scope for us to hope
to be able entirely to complete it, can be assessed in advance from the
fact that our object is not the nature of things, which is inexhaustible,
but the understanding, which judges about the nature o f things, and this
in turn only in regard to its a priori cognition, the supply of which, since
we do not need to search for it externally, cannot remain hidden from
us, and in all likelihood is small enough to be completely recorded, its

B 27

worth or worthlessness assessed, and subjected to a correct appraisal.
bEven less can one expect here a critique of the books and systems of
pure reason, but rather that of the pure faculty of reason itself. Only if
this is one's ground does one have a secure touchstone for appraising
the philosophical content of old and new works in this specialty; other­
wise the unqualified historian and judge assesses the groundless asser­
tions of others through his own, which are equally groundless.
'Transcendental philosophy is here the idea of a science,d for which
the critique of pure reason is to outline the entire plan architectonically,
i.e., from principles," with a full guarantee for the completeness and cer­
tainty of all the components that comprise this edifice. It is the system
of all principles! of pure reason.g That this critique is not itself already
called transcendental philosophy rests solely on the fact that in order to
be a complete system it would also have to contain an exhaustive analy­
sis of all of human cognition a priori. Now our critique must, to be sure,
lay before us a complete enumeration of all of the ancestral conceptsh
that comprise the pure cognition in question. Only it properly refrains
from the exhaustive analysis of these concepts themselves as well as
a Begrenzung

b
C

d

The next two sentences are added in the second edition.
The title "II. Division of transcendental philosophy" present in the first edition is
omitted in the second.
"Die Idee einer Wissenschaft" substituted in the second edition for "hier nur eine Idee."

, Principien

f Principien
g
h

This sentence inserted in the second edition.

Stammbegriffe
1 50

Introduction <B>
from the complete review of all of those derived from them, partly be­
cause this analysis would not be purposefut,a since it does not contain
the difficulty encountered in the synthesis on account of which the
whole critique is actually undertaken, partly because it would be con­
trary to the unity of the plan to take on responsibility for the com­
pleteness of such an analysis and derivation, from which one could yet
be relieved given its aim. This completeness of the analysis as well as
the derivation from the a priori concepts that are to be provided in the
future will nevertheless be easy to complete as long as they are present
as exhaustive principlesb of synthesis, and if nothing is lacking in them
in regard to this essential aim.
To the critique of pure reason there accordingly belongs everything
that constitutes transcendental philosophy, and it is the complete idea
of transcendental philosophy, but is not yet this science itself, since it
goes only so far in the analysis as is requisite for the complete estima­
tion of synthetic a priori cognition.
The chief target in the division of such a science is that absolutely no
concept must enter into it that contains anything empirical, or that the
a priori cognition be entirely pure. Hence, although the supreme prin­
ciples of morality and the fundamental concepts of it are a priori cogni­
tions, they still do not belong in transcendental philosophy,' for, while
they do not, to be sure, take the concepts of pleasure and displeasure,
of desires and inclinations, etc., which are all of empirical origin, as the
ground of their precepts, they still must necessarily include them in the
composition of the system of pure morality in the concept of duty, as
the hindrance that must be overcome or the attraction that ought not
to be made into a motive. Hence transcendental philosophy is a philos­
ophyt of pure, merely speculative reason. For everything practical, in­
sofar as it contains incentives,' is related to feelings, which belong
among empirical sources of cognition.
Now if one wants to set up the division of this science from the gen­
eral viewpoint of a system in general, then what we will now present
must contain first a Doctrine of Elements and second a Doctrine of
Method of pure reason. Each of these main parts will have its subdivi­
sion, the grounds for which cannot yet be expounded. All that seems
a zweckmiiflig
b

Principien

, The remainder of this sentence in the second edition is substituted for the following in
the first: "since the concepts of pleasure and displeasure, of desires and inclinations, of
choice, etc., which are all of empirical origin, must thereby be presupposed."

d

Wcltweisbeit
, BewegungsgrUnde in the first edition is replaced in the second with Triebfedern to leave
room for the idea that although incentives based on feelings are not adequate for moral­
ity, there can be other, more purely rational motives for it.
151

AIS
B 29

Introduction <B>

B 30
A 16

necessary for an introduction or preliminary is that there are two stems
of human cognition, which may perhaps arise from a common but to us
unknown root, namely sensibility and understanding, through the first
of which objects are given to us, but through the second of which they
are thought. Now if sensibility were to contain a priori representations,
which constitute the conditiona under which objects are given to us, it
will belong to transcendental philosophy. The transcendental doctrine
o f the senses will have t o belong to the first part o f the science o f ele­
ments, since the conditions under which alone the objects of human
cognition are given precede those under which those objects are
thought.
a "Bedingung" in the second edition replaces "Bedingungen" in the first.

1 52

1.

Transcendental Doctrine of Elements

/

The Transcendental Doctrine of Elements
First Part
The Transcendental Aesthetica,I

In whatever way and through whatever means a cognition may relate
to objects, that through which it relates immediately to them, and at
which all thought as a means is directed as an end, is intuition.h,2 This,
however, takes place only insofar as the object is given to us; but this in
turn, is possible only if it affectsC the mind in a certain way. The capac­
ity (receptivity) to acquire representations through the way in which
we are affected by objects is called sensibility. Objects are therefore
given to us by means of sensibility, and it alone affords us intuitions;
but they are thought through the understanding, and from it arise
concepts. But all thought, whether straightaway (directe) or through a
detour (indirecte), must ultimately be related to intuitions, thus, in our
case, to sensibility, since there is no other way in which objects can be
given to us.
The effect of an object on the capacity for representation, insofar as
we are affected by it, is sensation." That intuition which is related to the
object through sensation is called empirical. The undetermined object
of an empirical intuition is called appearance.3
I call that in the appearance which corresponds to sensation its matter,
but that which allows the manifold of appearance to be intuited as ora The "Transcendental Aesthetic" underwent major changes between the two editions of
the Critique, including but not limited to the separation of the "Metaphysical" and
"Transcendental" expositions of space and time and the addition of three sections to the
concluding "General Remarks." We therefore present both versions in their entirety,
using the marginal pagination and notes to show where specific changes were made.
The following version from the first edition also includes the notes Kant made in his
own copy of that edition.
b The following note is inserted in Kant's copy:
" [intuition] is opposed to the concept, which is merely the mark of intuition.
"The universal must be given in the particular. Through that it has significance."
(E X, p. I S ; 2 3 = 2 1 )
, Added i n Kant's copy: "If the representation i s not i n itself the cause of the object
[Objects] ." (E X!, p.
2 J:2 I)
d Added in Kant's copy. 'Intuition is related to the object [Object], sensation merely to the
subject." (E XII, p. I S; 7 3: 2 1)

1ft

155

B 34
A 20

Doctrine of Elements Part I <.A>

B 35
A2I

B 36

A 2 I IB 3 5

B36

dered in certain relationsa I call the fonn of appearance. Since that within
which the sensations can alone be ordered and placed in a certain form
cannot itself be in turn sensation, the matter of all appearance is only
given to us a posteriori, but its form must all lie ready for it in the mind a
priori, and can therefore be considered separately from all sensation.
I call all representations pure (in the transcendental sense) in which
nothing is to be encountered that belongs to sensation. Accordingly the
pure form of sensible intuitions in general is to be encountered in the
mind a priori, wherein all of the manifold of appearances is intuited in
certain relations. This pure form of sensibility itself is also called pure
intuition. So if I separate from the representation of a body that which
the understanding thinks about it, such as substance, force, divisibility,
etc., as well as that which belongs to sensation, such as impenetrability,
hardness, color, etc., something from this empirical intuition is still left
for me, namely extension and form. These belong to the pure intuition,
which occurs a priori, even without an actual object of the senses or sen­
sation, as a mere form of sensibility in the mind.
I call a science of all principlesb of a priori sensibility the transcen­
dental aesthetic.*A There must therefore be such a science, which
constitutes the first part of the transcendental doctrine of elements, in
contrast to that which contains the principlesc of pure thinking, and is
named transcendental logic.
* The Germans are the only ones who now employ the word "aesthetics" to
designate that which others call the critique of taste. The ground for this is a
failed hope, held by the excellent analyst Baumgarten, of bringing the critical
estimation of the beautiful under principles of reason,d and elevating its rules
to a science. But this effort is futile. For the putative rules or criteria are
merely empirical as far as their sources are concerned, and can therefore never
serve as a priori rules according to which our judgment of taste must be di­
rected, rather the latter constitutes the genuine touchstone of the correctness
of the former. For this reason it is advisable again to desist from the use of this
term and to save it for that doctrine which is true science (whereby one would
come closer to the language and the sense of the ancients, among whom the
division of cognition into cHu8'Y]TU KaL vO'Y]Ta was very well known).
a

Verhiiltnissen. Kant uses the term Verhiiltnis throughout the "Transcendental Aesthetic"
to denote the relation among several things occupying different positions in space or
time, reserving the word Beziehung to denote the relation between objects and the cog­
nitive subject (in which sense it is used only four times, to be noted below, in the final
section of the "Transcendental Aesthetic"). Since "relation" or its plural will thus almost
always be translating Verhiiltnis or its plural, further notes of the occurrence of this term
in the "Transcendental Aesthetic" will be omitted.

b Principien
, Principien
d Vernunftprincipien

1 56

Section 1. On Space <A>

\,

In the transcendental aesthetic we will therefore first isolate sensibility by separating o ff everything that the understanding thinks through
its concepts, so that nothing but empirical intuition remains. Second,
we will then detach from the latter everything that belongs to sensation,
so that nothing remains except pure intuition and the mere form of ap­
pearances, which is the only thing that sensibility can make available a
priori. In this investigation it will be found that there are two pure forms
of sensible intuition as principlesa of a priori cognition, namely space
and time, with the assessment of which we will now be concerned.

A22

The Transcendental Aesthetic
First Section
On space.

B37

By means of outer sense (a property of our mind) we represent to our­
selves objects as outside us, and all as in space. In space their form,
magnitude, and relation to one another is determined, or deter­
minable,l Inner sense, by means of which the mind intuits itself, or its
inner sta�� , gives, to be sure, no intuition of the soul itself, as an object;b yet it is still a determinate form, under which the intuition of its
inner state is alone possible, so that everything that belongs to the
inner determinations is represented in relations of time. Time can no
more be intuited externally than space can be intuited as something in
us. Now what are space and time? Are they actual entities?'" Are they
only determinations or relations of things, yet ones that would pertain
to them even if they were not intuited, or are they relations that only
attach to the form of intuition alone, and thus to the subjective constitution o f our mind, without which these predicates could not b e as­
cribed to any thing at all?5 In order to instruct ourselves about this, we
will consider space first.6
I) Space is not an empirical concept that has been drawn from outer
experiences. For in order for certain sensations to be relatedd to some­
thing outside me (i.e., to something in another place in space from that
in which I find myself), thus in order for me to represent them as out­
side one another, thus not merely as different but as in different places,
the representation of space must already be their ground) Thus the
representation of space cannot be obtained from the relations of outer

Principien
Object
, wirkliche Wesen
d bezogen

«

b

1 57

A23

B 38

Doctrine of Elements. Pan

A 24
B 39

1\. 2 5

I.

The Transcendental Aesthetic <A>

appearance through experience, but this outer experience is itself first
possible only through this representation.a
2)b Space is a necessary representation, a priori, which is the ground of
all outer intuitions. 8 One can never represent that there is no space, al­
though one can very well think that there are no objects to be encoun­
tered i n it.9 I t i s therefore t o b e regarded a s the condition o f the possi­
bility of appearances, not as a determination dependent on them, and is
an a priori representation that necessarily grounds outer appearances.c
3) The apodictic certainty of all geometrical principles and the possi­
bility of their a priori construction are grounded in this a priori necessity.
For if this representation of space were a concept acquired a posteriori,
which was drawn out of general outer experience, the first principles of
mathematical determination would be nothing but perceptions. They
would therefore have all the contingency of perception, and it would not
even be necessary that only one straight line lie between two points, but
experience would merely always teach that. What is borrowed from ex­
perience always has only comparative universality, namely through in­
duction. One would therefore only be able to say that as far as has been
observed to date, no space has been found that has more than three
dimensions.d, 10
4) Space is not a discursive or, as is said, general concept of relations
of things in general, but a pure intuition. For, first, one can only repre­
sent a single space, and if one speaks of many spaces, one understands
by that only parts of one and the same unique space. I I And these parts
cannot as it were precede the single all-encompassing space as its com­
ponents (from which its composition would be possible), but rather are
only thought in it. It is essentially single; the manifold in it, thus also
a

The following note is added at the bottom of this page in Kant's copy:

" [ 1 .] Space is not a concept, but an intuition.
2 . - - not an empirical intuition, for everything empirical one can . . .
3 . It is an a priori intuition . . .
4- Space is the subjective form . . . " (E XIII, p. r6; 2 3 :22)
b Added in Kant's copy:
"Space is not a concept of external relations, as Leibniz supposed, but that which
grounds the possibility of external relations.
"The necessity of the relation of our propositions to something external is a proof
of the real connection' in which we stand with external things; against idealism." (E
XIV; p. r 6; 2 3 : 2 2)
, Inserted in Kant's copy:
"Space is not a concept derived from experience, but a ground of possible outer ex­
perience. I must have a concept of space if . . . " (E XV; p. r 6; 2 3 :2 2 )
"Proof o f the ideality o f space from the synthetic a priori proposition. of. and of. [sic]
This is no hypothesis . . . [sic)" (E XVI , p. r6; 2 3 : 2 2 )
d This paragraph i s deleted i n the second edition, and replaced b y §3, "The Transcenden­
tal Exposition of the Concept of Space" (B 40 -r).

, Verbindung

158

Section I. On Space <A>
the general concept of spaces in general, rests merely on limitations.
From this it follows that in respect to it an a priori intuition (which is
not empirical) grounds all concepts of them. Thus also all geometrical
principles, e.g., that in a triangle two sides together are always greater
than the third, are never derived from general concepts of line and tri­
angle, but rather are derived from intuition and indeed derived a priori
with apodictic certainty.
5) Space is represented as a given infinite magnitude. A general con­
cept of space (which is common to a foot as well as an ell) can determine
nothing in respect to magnitude. If there were not boundlessness in the
progress of intuition, no concept of relations could bring with it a prin­
ciplea of their infinity.b, I 2

Conclusions from the above concepts.

a) Space represents no property at all of any things in themselves nor
any relation of them to each other, i.e., no determination of them that
attaches to objects themselves and that would remain even if one were
to abstract from all subjective conditions of intuition. For neither ab­
solute nor relative determinations can be intuited prior to the existence
of the things to which they pertain, thus be intuited a priori. 13
b) Space is nothing other than merely the form o f all appearances of
outer sense, i.e., the subjective condition of sensibility, under which
alone outer intuition is possible for us. Now since the receptivity of the
subject to be affected by objects necessarily precedes all intuitions of
these objects, it can be understood how the form of all appearances can
be given in the mind prior to all actual perceptions, thus a priori, and
how as a pure intuition, in which all objects must be determined, it can
contain principlesc of their relations prior to all experience.d
We can accordingly speak of space, extended beings, and so on, only
from the human standpoint. If we depart from the subjective condition
under which alone we can acquire outer intuition, namely that through
which we may be affected by objects, then the representation of space

a

b
,

d

Principium
This paragraph is changed in the second edition; see paragraph 4, B 39-40 below.

Principien
Inserted in Kant's copy: "Space and time carry with them in their representation the
concept of necessity. Now this is not the necessity of a concept. For we can prove that
their non-existence is not contradictory. Necessity also cannot lie in the empirical intu­
ition. For this can, to be sure, carry with it the concept of existence, but not of neces­
sary existence. Thus this necessity is not in the object [Object) objective - at all;
consequently it is only a necessary condition of the subject for all perceptions of the
senses." (E XVII, p. 1 7 ; 2 3 : 2 2-3)
-

159

Doctrine of Elements. Part 1 . The Transcendental Aesthetic <A>

B 44
Az8

signifies nothing at all.a This predicate is attributed to things only inso­
far as they appear to us, i.e., are objects of sensibility.b,I4 The constant
form of this receptivity, which we call sensibility, is a necessary condi­
tion of all the relations within which objects can be intuited as outside
us, and, if one abstracts from these objects, it is a pure intuition, which
bears the name of space. Since we cannot make the special conditions of
sensibility into conditions of the possibility of things, but only of their
appearances, we can well say that space comprehends all things that
may appear to us externally, but not all things in themselves, whether
they be intuited or not, ord by whatever subject they may be intuited.
For we cannot judge at all whether the intuitions of other thinking be­
ings are bound to the same conditions that limit our intuition and that
are universally valid for us. If we add the limitatione of a judgment to the
concept of the subject, then the judgment is unconditionally valid. The
proposition "All things are next to one another in space"! is valid only
under the limitation that these things be taken as objects of our sensible
intuition. Ifhere I add the condition to the concept and say: "All things,
as outer intuitions, are next to one another in space," then this rule is
valid universally and without limitation. Our expositions accordingly
teach the reality (i.e., objective validity) of space in regard to everything
that can come before us externally as an object, but at the same timeg the
ideality of space in regard to things when they are considered in them­
selves through reason, i.e., without taking account of the constitution of
our sensibility. We therefore assert the empirical reality of space (with
respect to all possible outer experience), though to be sure at the same
time its transcendental ideality, i.e., that it is nothing as soon as we
leave out the condition of the possibility of all experience, and take it as
something that grounds the things in themselves.
a Inserted in Kant's copy: "Perhaps all created beings are bound to it, that we do not
know. This much one can know, that it is a merely sensible form. The most important
thing is that it yields a determinate concept a priori, and through inner intuition we
would not have sensations, thus no empirical representations and no science of objects
[Objectel a priori." (E XVIII, p. 1 7 ; 2 3 '1 3 )
b Here Kant's copy inserts: " a s Mendelssohn could s o apodictically assert, since he still
gave space objective reality." (E XX, p. 1 7; 2 3 '44)
At about this point, this partially decipherable note also appears:

"Field of space and of time.

" 1 . Both cannot extend further than to objects of the senses, thus not to God; 2 .
Even among these they are valid only of things as objects of . . . " (E XIX, p . 1 7; 2 3:23)
Here Kant's copy inserts "ever" (nur immer) (E XXI , p. 1 8; 2 3 :44).
d In his copy Kant crosses out "or not, or" (E XXII, p. 1 8; 2 3 :44).
Kant's copy changes "limitation" to "limiting condition" (E XXIII, p. 1 8; 2 3 '45).
f In his copy Kant changes this proposition to "All things are next to one another in space
or they are somewhere" (E XXIv, p. 18; 2 3 :45).
g In his copy Kant inserts "also" (changing "Db zwar" to "aber auch" (£ xxv, p. 18; 2 3:45)
C

c

1 60

Section I. On Space <A>
Besides space, however, there is no other subjective representation
relateda to something external that could be called a priori objective.
bHence this subjective condition of all outer appearances cannot be
compared with any other. The pleasant taste of a wine does not belong
to the objective determinations of the wine, thus of an object" even con­
sidered as an appearance, but rather to the particular constitution of
sense in the subject that enjoys it. Colors are not objective qualities of
the bodies to the intuition of which they are attached, but are also only
modifications of the sense of sight, which is affected by light in a cer­
tain way. Space, on the contrary, as a condition of outer objects/ neces­
sarily belongs to their appearance or intuition. Taste and colors are by
no means necessary conditions under which alone the objects can be
objectse of the senses for us. They are only combined with the appearance as contingently added effects of the particular organization. Hence
they are not a priori representations, but are grounded on sensation, and
pleasant taste is even grounded on feeling (of pleasure and displeasure)
as an effect of the sensation. And no one can have a priori the representation either of a color or of any taste: but space concerns only the pure
form of intuition, thus it includes no sensation (nothing empirical) in itself, and all kinds and determinations of space can and even must be
able to be represented a priori if concepts of shapes as well as relations
are to arise. Through space alone is it possible for things to be outer obj ects for us!
The aim of this remark is only to prevent one from thinking of illustrating the asserted ideality of space with completely inadequate examples, since things like colors, taste, etc., are correctly considered not as
qualities of things but as mere alterations of our subject, which can even
be different in different people. For in this case that which is originally
itself only appearance, e.g., a rose, counts in an empirical sense as a
thing in itself, which yet can appear different to every eye in regard to
color. The transcendental concept of appearances in space, on the contrary, is a critical reminder that absolutely nothing that is intuited in
space is a thing in itself, and that space is not a form that is proper to
a bezogene

b The remainder of this paragraph is altered in the second edition: see B 44-5 below.

Objects
Objecte
, Objecte

,

d

f Inserted in the margin of Kant's copy:

"Pure idealism concerns the existence of things outside us. Critical idealism leaves
that undecided, and asserts only that the form of their intuition is merely in us." (E
XXVI, p. 18; 2 3 :23)
A further note adds: " An idealism, from which the possibility of an a priori cognition
and of mathematics can be cognized." (E XXVII, p. 1 9; 2 3 :2 3 )

161

A29

B 45

A 30

Doctrine of Elements. Part 1. The Transcendental Aesthetic <A>
anything in itself, but rather that objects in themselves are not known
to us at all, and that what we call outer objects are nothing other than
mere representations of our sensibility, whose form is space, but whose
true correlate, i.e., the thing in itself, is not and cannot be cognized
through them, but is also never asked after in experience.

The Transcendental Aesthetic
Second S ection

On time. IS

A3 I

B 47

A32

I Y Time is not an empirical concept that is somehow drawn from an ex­
perience. For simultaneity or succession would not themselves come
into perception if the representation of time did not ground them a pri­
ori. Only under its presupposition can one represent that several things
exist at one and the same time (simultaneously) or in different times
(successively).
2) Time is a necessary representation that grounds all intuitions. In
regard to appearances in general one cannot remove time, though one
can very well take the appearances away from time. Time is therefore
given a priori. In it alone is all actuality of appearances possible. The lat­
ter could all disappear, but time itself, as the universal condition of their
possibility, cannot be removed.
3) This a priori necessity also grounds the possibility of apodictic
principles of the relations of time, or axioms of time in general. It has
only one dimension: different times are not simultaneous, but succes­
sive (just as different spaces are not successive, but simultaneous).
These principles could not be drawn from experience, for this would
yield neither strict universality nor apodictic certainty. We would only
be able to say: This is what common perception teaches, but not: This
is how matters must stand. These principles are valid as rules under
which experiences are possible at all, and instruct us prior to them, not
through it.b
4) Time is no discursive or, as one calls it, general concept, but a pure
form of sensible intuition. Different times are only parts of one and the
same time.I6 That representation, however, which can only be given
through a single object, is an intuition. Further, the proposition that
different times cannot be simultaneous cannot be derived from a gena

b

The " I " is actually printed at above the center of the first line of this paragraph rather
than at its beginning.
The text reads "belehren uns vor derselben, und llicht durch dieselbe." Earlier editors sug­
gested emending the last word to "dieselben" but if the sentence is interpreted to mean
"instructs us prior to experiences, not through common perception," it can be read
without emendation.
162

Section II. On Time <fu.

eral concept. The proposition is synthetic, and cannot arise from con­
cepts alone. It is therefore immediately contained in the intuition and
representation of time.
5 ) The infinitude of time signifies nothing more than that every de­
terminate magnitude of time is only possible through limitations of a
single time grounding it. The original representation, time, must therefore be given as unlimited. But where the parts themselves and every
magnitude of an object can be determinately represented only through
limitation, there the entire representation cannot be given through
concepts (for then the partial representations precede) but their immediate intuition must be the ground. '7
Conclusions from these concepts.

a) Time is not something that would subsist for itself or attach to things
as an objective determination, and thus remain if one abstracted from
all subjective conditions of the intuition of them; for in the first case it
would be something that was actual yet without an actual object. As far
as the second case is concerned, however, time could not precede the
objects as a determination or order attaching to the things themselves
as their condition and be cognized and intuited a priori through synthetic propositions. But the latter, on the contrary, can very well occur
if time is nothing other than the subjective condition under which all
intuitions can take place in us. For then this form of inner intuition can
be represented prior to the objects, thus a priori. I S
b) Time is nothing other than the form of inner sense, i.e., of the in­
tuition of our self and our inner state.'9 For time cannot be a determi­
nation of outer appearances; it belongs neither to a shape or a position,
etc., but on the contrary determines the relation of representations in
our inner state. And just because this inner intuition yields no shape we
also attempt to remedy this lack through analogies, and represent the
temporal sequence through a line progressing to infinity, in which the
manifold constitutes a series that is of only one dimension, and infer
from the properties of this line to all the properties of time, with the
sole difference that the parts of the former are simultaneous but those
of the latter always exist successively. From this it is also apparent that
the representation of time is itself an intuition, since all its relations can
be expressed in an outer intuition.
c) Time is the a priori formal condition of all appearances in general.
Space, as the pure form of all outer intuitions, is limited as an a priori
condition merely to outer intuitions. But since, on the contrary, all rep­
resentations, whether or not they have outer things as their object, nev­
ertheless as determinations of the mind themselves belong to the inner
state, while this inner state belongs under the formal condition of inner
163

B 48

B 49

A33

B 50

A 34

Doctrine of Elements. Part 1. The Transcendental Aesthetic <A>

B5I

A35

B 52

A36

B 53

intuition, and thus of time, so time is an a priori condition of all ap­
pearance in general, and indeed the immediate condition of the inner
intuition (of our souls), and thereby also the mediate condition of outer
appearances. If I can say a priori: all outer appearances are in space and
determined a priori according to the relations of space, so from the
principlea of inner sense I can say entirely generally: all appearances in
general, i.e., all objects of the senses, are in time, and necessarily stand
in relations of time.
If we abstract from our way of internally intuiting ourselves and by
means of this intuition also dealing with all outer intuitions in the
power of representation, and thus take objects as they may be in them­
selves, then time is nothing. It is only of objective validity in regard to
appearances, because these are already things that we take as objects of
our senses; but it is no longer objective if one abstracts from the sen­
sibility of our intuition, thus from that kind of representation that is pe­
culiar to us, and speaks of things in general. Time is therefore merely
a subjective condition of our (human) intuition (which is always sensi­
ble, i.e., insofar as we are affected by objects), and in itself, outside the
subject, is nothing. Nonetheless it is necessarily objective in regard to
all appearances, thus also in regard to all things that can come before us
in experience. We cannot say all things are in time, because with the
concept of things in general abstraction is made from every kind of in­
tuition of them, but this is the real condition under which time belongs
to the representation of objects. Now if the condition is added to the
concept, and the principle says that all things as appearances (objects of
sensible intuition) are in time, then the principle has its sound objective
correctness and a priori universality.
Our assertions accordingly teach the empirical reality of time, i.e.,
objective validity in regard to all objects that may ever be given to our
senses. And since our intuition is always sensible, no object can ever be
given to us in experience that would not belong under the condition of
time. But, on the contrary, we dispute all claim of time to absolute re­
ality, namely where it would attach to things absolutely as a condition
o r property even without regard to the form o f our sensible intuition.
Such properties, which pertain to things in themselves, can never be
given to us through the senses. In this therefore consists the transcen­
dental ideality of time, according to which it is nothing at all if one ab­
stracts from the subjective conditions of sensible intuition, and cannot
be counted as either subsisting or inhering in the objects in themselves
(without their relation to our intuition). Yet this ideality is to be compared with the subreptions of sensation just as little as that of space is,
because in that case one presupposes that the appearance itself, in which
«

Princip
1 64

Section II. On Time <A>

these predicates inhere, has objective reality, which is here entirely ab­
sent except insofar as it is merely empirical, i.e., the object itself is re­
garded merely as appearance: concerning which the above remark in
the previous section is to be consulted.a,b
Elucidation.
Against this theory, which concedes empirical reality to time but disputes its absolute and transcendental reality, insightful men have so
unanimously proposed one objection that I conclude that it must naturally occur to every reader who is not accustomed to these considera­
tions.20 It goes thus: Alterations are real (this is proved by the change of
our own representations, even if one would deny all outer appearances
together with their alterations). Now alterations are possible only in
time, therefore time is something real. There is no difficulty in answering. I admit the entire argument. Time is certainly something real/
namely the real form of inner intuition. It therefore has subjective reality in regard to inner experience, i.e., I really have the representation of
time and of my determinations in it. It is therefore to be regarded really not as object! but as the way of representing myself as object! But
if I or another being could intuit myself without this condition of sen­
sibility, then these very determinations, which we now represent to ourselves as alterations, would yield us a cognition in which the representation of time and thus also of alteration would not occur at all. Its
empirical reality therefore remains as a condition of all our experiences.
Only absolute reality cannot be granted to it according to what has been
adduced above. It is nothing except the form of our inner intuition. * If
* I can, to be sure, say: my representations succeed one another; but that only
means that we are conscious of them as in a temporal sequence, i.e., accord­
ing to the form of inner sense. Time is not on that account something in it­
self, nor any determination objectively adhering to things.
a

b

C

d

This refers to A28-30/B 44-5 in § 3 .
Inserted in Kant's copy, before the next section: "Space and time are not merely logical
forms of our sensibility, i.e., they do not consist in the fact that we represent actual re­
lations to ourselves confusedly; for then how could we derive from them a priori syn­
thetic and true propositions? We do not intuit space, but in a confused manner; rather
it is the form of our intuition. Sensibility is not confusion of representations, but the
subjective condition of consciousness." (E XXVIII, p. 20; 2 3 :2 3 )
Kant's copy adds: " S o i s space. This proves that here a reality (consequently also indi­
vidual intuition) is given, which yet always grounds the reality as a thing. Space and time
do not belong to the reality of things, but only to our representations." (E XXIX, p. 20;
2 3 :24)

Object
, Objects

165

A 37

B 54

Doctrine of Elements. Part I. The Transcendental Aesthetic <A>

A38
B 55

A 39

B 56

one removes the special condition of our sensibility from it, then the
concept of time also disappears, and it does not adhere to the objects
themselves, rather merely to the subject that intuits them.2I
The cause, however, on account of which this objection is so unani­
mously made, and indeed by those who nevertheless know of nothing
convincing to object against the doctrine of the ideality of space,"2 is
this. They did not expect to be able to demonstrate the absolute reality
of space apodictically, since they were confronted by idealism, accord­
ing to which the reality of outer objects is not capable of any strict proof;
on the contrary, the reality of the object of our inner sense (of myself
and my state) is immediately clear through consciousness. The former
could have been a mere illusion, but the latter, according to their opin­
ion, is undeniably something real. But they did not consider that both,
without their reality as representations being disputed, nevertheless be­
long only to appearance, which always has two sides, one where the ob­
ject" is considered in itself (without regard to the way in which it is to be
intuited, the constitution of which however must for that very reason al­
ways remain problematic), the other where the form of the intuition of
this object is considered, which must not be sought in the object in it­
self but in the subject to which it appears, but which nevertheless really
and necessarily pertains to the representation of this object.
Time and space are accordingly two sources of cognition, from which
different synthetic cognitions can be drawn a priori, of which especially
pure mathematics in regard to the cognitions of space and its relations
provides a splendid example.2 3 Both taken together are, namely, the
pure forms of all sensible intuition, and thereby make possible synthetic
a priori propositions. But these a priori sources of cognition determine
their own boundaries by that very fact (that they are merely conditions
of sensibility), namely that they apply to objects only so far as they are
considered as appearances, but do not present things in themselves.
Those alone are the field of their validity, beyond which no further ob­
j ective use of them takes place. This reality of space and time, further,
leaves the certainty of experiential cognition untouched: for we are just
as certain of that whether these forms necessarily adhere to the things/
in themselves or only to our intuition of these things. Those, however,
who assert the absolute reality of space and time, whether they assume
it to be subsisting or only inhering, must themselves come into conflict
with the principlesb of experience. For if they decide in favor of the first
(which is generally the position of the mathematical investigators of na­
ture),z4 then they must assume two eternal and infinite self-subsisting
non-entities (space and time), which exist (yet without there being anya Object
b Principim
1 66

Section II. On Time <A>

thing real) only in order to comprehend everything real within themselves. If they adopt the second position (as do some metaphysicians of
nature), and hold space and time to be relations of appearances (next to
or successive to one another) that are abstracted from experience
though confusedly represented in this abstraction, then they must dispute the validity or at least the apodictic certainty of a priori mathematical doctrines in regard to real things (e.g., in space), since this certainty
does not occur a posteriori, and on this view the a priori concepts of space
and time are only creatures of the imagination, the origin of which must
really be sought in experience, out of whose abstracted relations imag­
ination has made something that, to be sure, contains what is general in
them, but that cannot occur without the restrictions that nature has attached to them.2; The first succeed in opening the field of appearances
for mathematical assertions; however, they themselves become very
confused through precisely these conditions if the understanding would
go beyond this field. The second succeed, to be sure, with respect to the
latter, in that the representations of space and time do not stand in their
way if they would judge of objects not as appearances but merely in relation to the understanding; but they can neither offer any ground for
the possibility of a priori mathematical cognitions (since they lack a true
and objectively valid a priori intuition), nor can they bring the propositions of experience into necessary accord with those assertions. On our
theory of the true constitution of these two original forms of sensibility
both difficulties are remedied.a
Finally, that the transcendental aesthetic cannot contain more than
these two elements, namely space and time, is clear from the fact that
all other concepts belonging to sensibility, even that of motion, which
unites both elements, presuppose something empiricatz6 For this pre­
supposes the perception of something movable. In space considered in
itself there is nothing movable; hence the movable must be something
that is found in space only through experience, thus an empirical
datum. In the same way the transcendental aesthetic cannot count the
concept of alteration among its a priori data; for time itself does not
alter, but only something that is within time. For this there is required
the perception of some existence and the succession of its determina­
tions, thus experience.b

a

b

Inserted in Kant's copy: "Leibniz's system of space and time was to transform both into
intellectual but confused concepts. But from this the possibility of a priori cognition
cannot be understood, for in that case both must precede." (E XXX , p. 20; 2 3 :24)
Inserted in Kant's copy: "Conclusion: That space and time of course have objective re­
ality, but not for what pertains to things outside of their relation [RelationI to our fac­
ulty of cognition, but rather only in relation to it, and thus to the form of sensibility,
hence solely as appearances." (E XXXI , p. 2 I; 2 3 :24)

1 67

A 40

B 57

A4I
B 58

Doctrine of Elements. Part I. The Transcendental Aesthetic <A>

General remarks
on the transcendental aesthetic.

B 59

A42

B 60

A 43

B6I

It will first be necessary to explain as distinctly as possible our opin­
ion in regard to the fundamental constitution of sensible cognition in
general, in order to preclude all misinterpretation of it.
We have therefore wanted to say that all our intuition is nothing but
the representation of appearance; that the things that we intuit are not
in themselves what we intuit them to be, nor are their relations so con­
stituted in themselves as they appear to us; and that if we remove our
own subject or even only the subjective constitution of the senses in
general, then all the constitution, all relations of objectsa in space and
time, indeed space and time themselves would disappear, and as ap­
pearances they cannot exist in themselves, but only in us. What may be
the case with objects in themselves and abstracted from all this recep­
tivity of our sensibility remains entirely unknown to us. We are ac­
quainted with nothing except our way of perceiving them, which is
peculiar to us, and which therefore does not necessarily pertain to every
being, though to be sure it pertains to every human being. We are concerned solely with this. Space and time are its pure forms, sensation in
general its matter. We can cognize only the former a priori, i.e., prior to
all actual perception, and they are therefore called pure intuition; the
latter, however, is that in our cognition that is responsible for it being
called a posteriori cognition, i.e., empirical intuition. The former ad­
heres to our sensibility absolutely necessarily, whatever sort of sensations we may have; the latter can be very different. Even if we could
bring this intuition of ours to the highest degree of distinctness we
would not thereby come any closer to the constitution of objects in
themselves. For in any case we would still completely cognize only our
own way of intuiting, i.e., our sensibility, and this always only under the
conditions originally depending on the subject, space and time; what
the objects may be in themselves would still never be known through
the most enlightened cognition of their appearance, which is alone
given to us.
That our entire sensibility is nothing but the confused representation
of things, which contains solely that which pertains to them in them­
selves but only under a heap of marks and partial representations that
we can never consciously separate from one another, is therefore a fal­
sification of the concept of sensibility and of appearance that renders
the entire theory of them useless and empty. The difference between an
indistinct and a distinct representation is merely logical, and does not
concern the content. Without doubt the concept of right that is used
a Objecte

1 68

Section II. On Time <A>

by the healthy understanding contains the very same things that the
most subtle speculation can evolve out of it, only in common and practical use one is not conscious of these manifold representations in these
thoughts. Thus one cannot say that the common concept is sensible and
contains a mere appearance, for right cannot appear at all; rather its
concept lies in the understanding and represents a constitution (the
moral constitution) of actions that pertains to them in themselves. The
representation of a body in intuition, on the contrary, contains nothing
at all that could pertain to an object in itself, but merely the appearance
of something and the way in which we are affected by it; and this re­
ceptivity of our cognitive capacity is called sensibility and remains
worlds apart from the cognition of the object in itself even if one might
see through to the very bottom of it (the appearance).
The Leibnizian-Wolffian philosophy has therefore directed all inves­
tigations of the nature and origin of our cognitions to an entirely unjust
point of view in considering the distinction between sensibility and the
intellectual as merely logical, since it is obviously transcendental, and
does not concern merely the form of distinctness or indistinctness, but its
origin and content, so that through sensibility we do not cognize the
constitution of things in themselves merely indistinctly, but rather not at
all, and, as soon as we take away our subjective constitution, the repre­
sented object" with the properties that sensible intuition attributes to it
is nowhere to be encountered, nor can it be encountered, for it is just this
subjective constitution that determines its form as appearance.27
We ordinarily distinguish quite well between that which is essentially
attached to the intuition of appearances, and is valid for every human
sense in general, and that which pertains to them only contingently because it is not valid for the relationb to sensibility in general but only for
a particular situation or organization of this or that sense. And thus one
calls the first cognition one that represents the object in itself, but the
second one only its appearance. This distinction, however, is only em­
pirical. If one stands by it (as commonly happens) and does not regard
that empirical intuition as in turn mere appearance (as ought to happen), so that there is nothing to be encountered in it that pertains to any
thing in itself, then our transcendental distinction is lost, and we believe
ourselves to cognize things in themselves, although we have nothing to
do with anything except appearances anywhere (in the world of sense),
even in the deepest research into its objects. Thus, we would certainly
a

b

Object
Here is where Kant switches from Verhiiltnis to Beziehung as his topic switches from the
relation of objects in space or time to each other to the relation of space and time to us.
With one exception to be noted, therefore, for the remainder of the section "relation"
translates Beziehung.

169

A44

B62

A 45

B 63

Doctrine of Elements. Part 1. The Transcendental Aesthetic <A>

A46

B 64

A 47

B 6S

call a rainbow a mere appearance in a sun-shower, but would call this
rain the thing in itself, and this is correct, as long as we understand the
latter concept in a merely physical sense, as that which in universal ex­
perience and all different positions relative to the senses is always de­
termined thus and not otherwise in intuition. But if we consider this
empirical object in general and, without turning to its agreement with
every human sense, ask whether it (not the raindrops, since these, as ap­
pearances, are already empirical objects)" represents an object in itself,
then the question of the relation of the representation to the object is
transcendental, and not only these drops are mere appearances, but
even their round form, indeed even the space through which they fall
are nothing in themselves, but only mere modifications or foundationsb
of our sensible intuition; the transcendental object,c however, remains
unknown to us.
The second important concern of our transcendental aesthetic is that
it not merely earn some favor as a plausible hypothesis, but that it be as
certain and indubitable as can ever be demanded of a theory that is to
serve as an organon. In order to make this certainty fully convincing we
will choose a case in which its validity can become obvious.
Thus, if it were to be supposed that space and time are in themselves
objective and conditions of the possibility of things in themselves, then
it would be shown, first, that there is a large number of a priori apodic­
tic and synthetic propositions about both, but especially about space,
which we will therefore here investigate as our primary example. Since
the propositions of geometry are cognized synthetically a priori and
with apodictic certainty, I ask: Whence do you take such propositions,
and on what does our understanding rely in attaining to such absolutely
necessary and universally valid truths?d There is no other way than
through concepts or through intuitions, both of which, however, are
given, as such, either a priori or a posteriori. The latter, namely empiri­
cal concepts, together with that on which they are grounded, empirical
intuition, cannot yield any synthetic proposition except one that is also
merely empirical, i.e., a proposition of experience; thus it can never
contain necessity and absolute universality of the sort that is neverthe­
less characteristic of all propositions of geometry. Concerning the first
and only means for attaining to such cognitions, however, namely
through mere concepts or a priori intuitions, it is clear that from mere
concepts no synthetic cognition but only merely analytic cognition can
be attained. Take the proposition that with two straight lines no space
n Objecte
b GrundJagen
,

d

Object

The question mark replaces a period in the text.

170

Section II. On Time <A>

at all can be enclosed, thus no figure is possible, and try to derive it from
the concept of straight lines and the number two; or take the proposition that a figure is possible with three straight lines, and in the same
way try to derive it from these concepts. All of your effort is in vain, and
you see yourself forced to take refuge in intuition, as indeed geometry
always does. You thus give yourself an object in intuition; but what kind
is this, is it a pure a priori intuition or an empirical one? If it were the
latter, then no universally valid, let alone apodictic proposition could
ever come from it: for experience can never provide anything of this
sort. You must therefore give your object a priori in intuition, and
ground your synthetic proposition on this. If there did not lie in you a
faculty for intuiting a priori; if this subjective condition regarding form
were not at the same time the universal a priori condition under which
alone the object" of this (outer) intuition is itself possible; if the object
(the triangle) were something in itself without relation to your subject:
then how could you say that what necessarily lies in your subjective con­
ditions for constructing a triangle must also necessarily pertain to the
triangle in itself?b for you could not add to your concept (of three lines)
something new (the figure) that must thereby necessarily be encountered in the object, since this is given prior to your cognition and not
through it. If, therefore, space (and time as well) were not a mere form
of your intuition that contains a priori conditions under which alone
things could be outer objects for you, which are nothing in themselves
without these subjective conditions, then you could make out absolutely
nothing synthetic and a priori about outer objects.c,28 It is therefore in­
dubitably certain, and not merely possible or even probable, that space
and time, as the necessary conditions of all (outer and inner) experience,
are merely subjective conditions of all our intuition, in relationd to
which therefore all objects are mere appearances and not things given
for themselves in this way; about these appearances, further, much may
be said a priori that concerns their form, but nothing whatsoever about
the things in themselves that may ground them.'
" Object
b
,

d

Question mark added.

Objecte
Verhdltnis

, Kant adds three paragraphs and a conclusion following this point in the second edition
(B 66-73). In his copy of the first edition, he here inserted the following note, which to
some extent outlines the additions to be made in the second:
"On the necessity of space and time as a priori conditions belonging to the existence
of things - On the effort nevertheless to remove both from a being that is no object of
the senses, God - Mendelssohn.
"On the theory of nature: how it is to be seen from that that bodies are mere phe­
nomena." (E XXXII, p. 2 1; 2 3 : 2 4)

171

A48

B 66

A 49

The Transcendental Doctrine ofElements
First Part
The Transcendental Aesthetic a

<§ I >b

B 34
A20

In whatever way and through whatever means a cognition may relate to
objects, that through which it relates immediately to them, and at which
all thought as a means is directed as an end, is intuition. This, however,
takes place only insofar as the object is given to us; but this in turn, <at
least for us humans,> is possible only if it affects the mind in a certain
way. The capacity (receptivity) to acquire representations through the
way in which we are affected by objects is called sensibility. Objects are
therefore given to us by means of sensibility, and it alone affords us in­
tuitions; but they are thought through the understanding, and from it
arise concepts. But all thought, whether straightaway (directe) or
through a detour (indirecte), must, <by means of certain marks,> ulti­
mately be related to intuitions, thus, in our case, to sensibility, since
there is no other way in which objects can be given to us.
The effect of an object on the capacity for representation, insofar as
we are affected by it, is sensation. That intuition which is related to the
object through sensation is called empirical. The undetermined object
of an empirical intuition is called appearance.
I call that in the appearance which corresponds to sensation its mat­
ter, but that which allows the manifold of appearance to be orderedc in
We here present the revised version of the "Transcendental Aesthetic" that Kant pre­
pared for the second edition of the Critique. Since in addition to the major changes that
he made, all of which will be noted, Kant also made numerous minor changes that it
would be cumbersome to note individually, we will enclose all the changes Kant made
in B within angled brackets « . . » , whether or not they are otherwise noted. Editorial
notes on passages unchanged from A will not be repeated.
b In the second edition, Kant divided the "Transcendental Doctrine of Elements" from
the beginning of the "Transcendental Aesthetic" through the end of the "Transcen­
dental Deduction of the Pure Concepts of the Understanding" into twenty-seven num­
bered sections. In the case of some sections, new titles were also added for material
otherwise taken over without other change from the first edition.
, In the first edition this reads "intuited as ordered in certain relations . . .

a

.

"

1 72

The Transcendental Aesthetic <B>

certain relationsa I call the form of appearance. Since that within which
the sensations can alone be ordered and placed in a certain form cannot
itself be in turn sensation, the matter of all appearance is only given to
us a posteriori, but its form must all lie ready for it in the mind a priori,
and can therefore be considered separately from all sensation.
I call all representations pure (in the transcendental sense) in which
nothing is to be encountered that belongs to sensation. Accordingly the
pure form of sensible intuitions in general is to be encountered in the
mind a priori, wherein all of the manifold of appearances is intuited in
certain relations. This pure form of sensibility itself is also called pure
intuition. So if I separate from the representation of a body that which
the understanding thinks about it, such as substance, force, divisibility,
etc., as well as that which belongs to sensation, such as impenetrability,
hardness, color, etc., something from this empirical intuition is still left
for me, namely extension and form. These belong to the pure intuition,
which occurs a priori, even without an actual object of the senses or sen­
sation, as a mere form of sensibility in the mind.
I call a science of all principlesb of a priori sensibility the transcen­
dental aesthetic. * There must therefore be such a science, which con­
stitutes the first part of the transcendental doctrine of elements, in
opposition to that which contains the principlesc o f pure thinking, and
which is named transcendental logic.
* The Germans are the only ones who now employ the word "aesthetics" to designate that which others call the critique o f taste. The ground for this i s a failed
hope, held by the excellent analyst Baumgarten, of bringing the critical estimation of the beautiful under principles of reason,d and elevating its rules to a science. But this effort is futile. For the putative rules or criteria are merely empirical as far as their <most prominent> sources are concerned, and can therefore
never serve as <determinate> a priori rules according to which our judgment of
taste must be directed; rather the latter constitutes the genuine touchstone of the
correctness of the former. For this reason it is advisable <either> again to desist
from the use of this term and preserve it for that docu'ine which is true science
(whereby one would come closer to the language and the sense of the ancients,
among whom the division of cognition into CHe1JTG¥ Kat V01JTG¥ was very well
known), <or else to share the term with speculative philosophy and take aesthetics partly in a transcendental meaning, partly in a psychological meaning>.
a As already noted at p. 1 56, note

b
C

d

a, with the exception of four cases in its final section,
throughout the "Transcendental Aesthetic" Kant characteristically uses the term
Verbaltnis, connoting a relation among objects, rather than Beziebung, connoting a rela­
tion between subject and object; thus, unless otherwise noted, "relation" or its plural
translates Verbaltnis or its derivatives.

Principien
Principien
Vernunftprincipien
173

B 35
A21

B 36

A2 I /B 35

B 36

Doctrine of Elements. Part L The Transcendental Aesthetic <B>

A22

In the transcendental aesthetic we will therefore first isolate sensibility by separating off everything that the understanding thinks
through its concepts, so that nothing but empirical intuition remains.
Second, we will then detach from the latter everything that belongs to
sensation, so that nothing remains except pure intuition and the mere
form of appearances, which is the only thing that sensibility can make
available a priori. In this investigation it will be found that there are two
pure forms of sensible intuition as principles a of a priori cognition,
namely space and time, with the assessment of which we will now be
concerned.

B 37

The Transcendental Aesthetic
First Section
On space.
<§ 2

Metaphysical exposition of this concept.>

A23

B 38

By means of outer sense (a property of our mind) we represent to
ourselves objects as outside us, and all as in space. In space their shape,
magnitude, and relation to one another is determined, or determinable.
Inner sense, by means of which the mind intuits itself, or its inner state,
gives, to be sure, no intuition of the soul itself, as an object;h yet it is
still a determinate form, under which the intuition of its inner state is
alone possible, so that everything that belongs to the inner determina­
tions is represented in relations of time. Time can no more be intuited
externally than space can be intuited as something in us. Now what are
space and time? Are they actual entities?C Are they only determinations
or relations of things, yet ones that would pertain to them even if they
were not intuited, or are they relations that only attach to the form of
intuition alone, and thus to the subjective constitution o f our mind,
without which these predicates could not be ascribed to any thing at all?
In order to instruct ourselves about this, we will <expound the concept
of space> first.d <l understand by exposition (expositio) the distinct
(even if not complete) representation of that which belongs to a con­
cept; but the exposition is metaphysical when it contains that which
exhibits the concept as given a priori. >
I) Space is not an empirical concept that has been drawn from outer

" Principien
b Object
, wirkliche Wesen
d

In the first edition: "first consider space."

1 74

Section 1. On Space <B>

experiences. For in order for certain sensations to be relateda to some­
thing outside me (i.e., to something in another place in space from that
in which I find myself), thus in order for me to represent them as out­
side <and next to> one another, thus not merely as different but as in
different places, the representation of space must already be their
ground. Thus the representation of space cannot be obtained from the
relations of outer appearance through experience, but this outer expe­
rience is itself first possible only through this representation.
2) Space is a necessary representation, a priori, that is the ground of
all outer intuitions. One can never represent that there is no space,
though one can very well think that there are no objects to be encountered in it. It is therefore to be regarded as the condition of the possibility of appearances, not as a determination dependent on them, and is
an a priori representation that necessarily grounds outer appearances.b
<3» Space is not a discursive or, as is said, general concept of relations of things in general, but a pure intuition. For, first, one can only
represent a single space, and if one speaks o f many spaces, one under­
stands by that only parts of one and the same unique space. And these
parts cannot as it were precede the single all-encompassing space as its
components (from which its composition would be possible), but rather
are only thought in it. It is essentially single; the manifold in it, thus
also the general concept of spaces in general, rests merely on limitations. From this it follows that in respect to it an a priori intuition
(which is not empirical) grounds all concepts of it.C Thus also all geo­
metrical principles, e.g., that in a triangle two sides together are always
greater than the third, are never derived from general concepts of line
and triangle, but rather are derived from intuition and indeed derived a
priori with apodictic certainty.
< d4) Space is represented as an infinite given magnitude. Now one
must, to be sure, think of every concept as a representation that is contained in an infinite set of different possible representations (as their
common mark), which thus contains these under itself; but no concept, as such, can be thought as if it contained an infinite set of repre­
sentations within itself. Nevertheless space is so thought (for all the
parts of space, even to infinity, are simultaneous). Therefore the original representation of space is an a priori intuition, not a concept.>
a bezogen
b

In the first edition there follows a paragraph (3) (at A24 above) that is replaced by the
"Transcendental Exposition of the Concept of Space" in the second (see B 40- I below);
the following paragraphs, (3) and (4), were thus originally numbered (4) and (5); the
content of the original paragraph (5), now renumbered (4), is also changed.
, In the first edition: "of them," i.e., the limitations of space.
d As previously mentioned, the content of this paragraph is changed from the first edition.

175

A 24
B 39

A25

B 40

Doctrine of Elements. Part 1. The Transcendental Aesthetic <B>

<§

3
Transcendental exposition of the concept of space.

841

I understand by a transcendental exposition the explanation of a
concept as a principlea from which insight into the possibility of other
synthetic a priori cognitions can be gained. For this aim it is required r)
that such cognitions actually flow from the given concept, and 2 ) that
these cognitions are only possible under the presupposition of a given
way of explaining this concept.
Geometry is a science that determines the properties of space syn­
thetically and yet a priori. vv'hat then must the representation of space
be for such a cognition of it to be possible? It must originally be intuition; for from a mere concept no propositions can be drawn that go be­
yond the concept, which, however, happens in geometry (Introduction
V). But this intuition must be encountered in us a priori, i.e., prior to all
perception of an object, thus it must be pure, not empirical intuition.
For geometrical propositions are all apodictic, i.e., combined with con­
sciousness of their necessity, e.g., space has only three dimensions; but
such propositions cannot be empirical or judgments of experience, nor
inferred from them (Introduction II).
Now how can an outer intuition inhabit the mind that precedes the
objects b themselves, and in which the concept of the latter can be de­
termined a priori? Obviously not otherwise than insofar as it has its seat
merely in the subject, as its formal constitution for being affected by ob­
jectsC and thereby acquiring immediate representation, i.e., intuition,
of them, thus only as the form of outer sense in general.
Thus our explanation alone makes the possibility of geometry as a
synthetic a priori cognition comprehensible. Any kind of explanation
that does not accomplish this, even if it appears to have some similar­
ity with it, can most surely be distinguished from it by means of this
characteristic.>29

Az6/B42

Conclusions from the above concepts.

a) Space represents no property at all of any things in themselves nor
any relation of them to each other, i.e., no determination of them that
attaches to objects themselves and that would remain even if one were
to abstract from all subjective conditions of intuition. For neither ab­
solute nor relative determinations can be intuited prior to the existence
of the things to which they pertain, thus be intuited a priori.
Princips
Objecten
, Objecten
a

b

1 76

Section

1.

On Space <B>

b) Space is nothing other than merely the form of all appearances of
outer sense, i.e., the subjective condition of sensibility, under which
alone outer intuition is possible for us. Now since the receptivity of the
subject to be affected by objects necessarily precedes all intuitions of
these objects, it can be understood how the form of all appearances can
be given in the mind prior to all actual perceptions, thus a priori, and
how as a pure intuition, in which all objects must be determined, it can
contain principlesa of their relations prior to all experience.
We can accordingly speak of space, extended beings, and so on, only
from the human standpoint. If we depart from the subjective condition
under which alone we can acquire outer intuition, namely that through
which we may be affected by objects, then the representation of space
signifies nothing at all. This predicate is attributed to things only inso­
far as they appear to us, i.e., are objects of sensibility. The constant form
of this receptivity, which we call sensibility, is a necessary condition of
all the relations within which objects can be intuited as outside us, and,
if one abstracts from these objects, it is a pure intuition, which bears the
name of space. Since we cannot make the special conditions of sensibil­
ity into conditions of the possibility of things, but only of their appear­
ances, we can well say that space comprehends all things that may
appear to us externally, but not all things in themselves, whether they
be intuited or not, or by whatever subject they may be intuited. For we
cannot judge at all whether the intuitions of other thinking beings are
bound to the same conditions that limit our intuition and that are uni­
versally valid for us. If we add the limitation of a judgment to the con­
cept of the subject, then the judgment is unconditionally valid. The
proposition: "All things are next to one another in space," is valid under
the limitation that these things be taken as objects of our sensible intu­
ition. If here I add the condition to the concept and say "All things, as
outer intuitions, are next to one another in space," then this rule is valid
universally and without limitation. Our expositions accordingly teach
the reality (i.e., objective validity) of space in regard to everything that
can come before us externally as an object, but at the same time the ide­
ality of space in regard to things when they are considered in them­
selves through reason, i.e., without taking account of the constitution of
our sensibility. We therefore assert the empirical reality of space (with
respect to all possible outer experience), though to be sure its tran­
scendental ideality, i.e., that it is nothing as soon as we leave aside the
condition of the possibility of all experience, and take it as something
that grounds the things in themselves.
Besides space, however, there is no other subjective representation

a

Principien
1 77

Doctrine of Elements. Part I. The Transcendental Aesthetic <B>

B 45

A 30

relateda to something external that could be called a priori objective.
b<For one cannot derive synthetic a priori propositions from any such
representation, as one can from intuition in space (§ 3 ). Strictly speak­
ing, therefore, ideality does not pertain to them, although they coincide
with the representation of space in belonging only to the subjective
constitution of the kind of sense, e.g., of sight, hearing, and feeling,
through the sensations of colors, sounds, and warmth, which, however,
since they are merely sensations and not intuitions, do not in them­
selves allow any objectC to be cognized, least of all a priori. >
The aim of this remark is only to prevent one from thinking of illustrating the asserted ideality of space with completely inadequate exam­
ples, since things like colors, taste, etc., are correctly considered not as
qualities of things but as mere alterations of our subject, which can even
be different in different people. For in this case that which is originally
itself only appearance, e.g., a rose, counts in an empirical sense as a
thing in itself, which yet can appear different to every eye in regard to
color. The transcendental concept of appearances in space, on the con­
trary, is a critical reminder that absolutely nothing that is intuited in
space is a thing in itself, and that space is not a form that is proper to
anything in itself, but rather that objects in themselves are not known
to us at all, and that what we call outer objects are nothing other than
mere representations of our sensibility, whose form is space, but whose
true correlate, i.e., the thing in itself, is not and cannot be cognized
through them, but is also never asked after in experience.
The Transcendental Aesthetic
Second Section
On time.

B 46

<§ 4
Metaphysical exposition of the concept of time.>

A3 I

Time is <I» not an empirical concept that is somehow drawn from an
experience. For simultaneity or succession would not themselves come
into perception if the representation of time did not ground them a pri­
ori. Only under its presupposition can one represent that several things
exist at one and the same time (simultaneously) or in different times
(successively) .
2 ) Time is a necessary representation that grounds all intuitions. In
regard to appearances in general one cannot remove time, though one
a

b

bezogene
In the first edition, the remainder of this paragraph reads differently; see A 2 8 - 9 above.

, Object

1 78

I

Section II. On Time <B>

can very well take the appearances away from time. Time is therefore
given a priori. In it alone is all actuality of appearances possible. The lat­
ter could all disappear, but time itself (as the universal condition of their
possibility)a cannot be removed.
3) This a priori necessity also grounds the possibility of apodictic
principles of relations of time, or axioms of time in general. It has only
one dimension: different times are not simultaneous, but successive
(just as different spaces are not successive, but simultaneous). These
principles could not be drawn from experience, for this would yield neither strict universality nor apodictic certainty. We would only be able to
say: This is what common perception teaches, but not: This is how matters must stand. These principles are valid as rules under which alone
experiences are possible at all, and instruct us prior to them, not
through it.b
4) Time is no discursive or, as one calls it, general concept, but a pure
form of sensible intuition. Different times are only parts of one and the
same time. That representation, however, which can only be given
through a single object, is an intuition. Further, the proposition that
different times cannot be simultaneous cannot be derived from a general concept. The proposition is synthetic, and cannot arise from concepts alone. It is therefore immediately contained in the intuition and
representation of time.
5 ) The infinitude of time signifies nothing more than that every de­
terminate magnitude of time is only possible through limitations of a
single time grounding it. The original representation time must therefore be given as unlimited. But where the parts themselves and every
magnitude of an object can be determinately represented only through
limitation, there the entire representation cannot be given through
concepts, « for they contain only partial representations» ,' but immediate intuition must ground them.d

<§

5
Transcendental exposition of the concept of time.
I can appeal to NO. 3 where, in order to be brief, I have placed that
which is properly transcendental under the heading of the metaphysical
exposition. Here I add further that the concept of alteration and, with
a These parentheses added in B.
b The text reads "belehren uns vor derselben, und nicht durch dieselbe." Earlier editors sug­

gested emending the last word to "dieselben"; but if the sentence is interpreted to mean
"instructs us prior to experiences, not through common perception," it can be read
without emendation.
, In the first edition: "for there the partial representations precede."
d B has ihnen instead of ihre here.

1 79

B 47

A32

B 48

Doctrine of Elements. Part 1. The Transcendental Aesthetic <B>

B 49

it, the concept of motion (as alteration of place), is only possible
through and in the representation of time - that if this representation
were not a priori (inner) intuition, then no concept, whatever it might
be, could make comprehensible the possibility of an alteration, i.e., of a
combination of contradictorily opposed predicates (e.g., a thing's being
in a place and the not-being of the very same thing in the same place)
in one and the same object.a Only in time can both contradictorily opposed determinations in one thing be encountered, namely succes­
sively. Our concept of time therefore explains the possibility of as much
synthetic a priori cognition as is presented by the general theory of mo­
tion, which is no less fruitful.>30
<§ 6>
Conclusions from these concepts.

A32

A33

B 50

A 34

a) Time is not something that would subsist for itself or attach to things
as an objective determination, and thus remain if one abstracted from
all subjective conditions of the intuition of them; for in the first case it
would be something that was actual yet without an actual object. As far
as the second case is concerned, however, time could not precede the
objects as a determination or order attaching to the things themselves
as their condition and be cognized and intuited a priori through syn­
thetic propositions. But the latter, on the contrary, can very well occur
if time is nothing other than the subjective condition under which all
intuitions can take place in us. For then this form of inner intuition can
be represented prior to the objects, thus a priori.
b) Time is nothing other than the form of inner sense, i.e., of the in­
tuition of our self and our inner state. For time cannot be a determination of outer appearances; it belongs neither to a shape or a position,
etc., but on the contrary determines the relation of representations in
our inner state. And just because this inner intuition yields no shape we
also attempt to remedy this lack through analogies, and represent the
temporal sequence through a line progressing to infinity, in which the
manifold constitutes a series that is of only one dimension, and infer
from the properties of this line to all the properties of time, with the
sole difference that the parts of the former are simultaneous but those
of the latter always exist successively. From this it is also apparent that
the representation of time is itself an intuition, since all its relations can
be expressed in an outer intuition.
c) Time is the a priori formal condition of all appearances in general.
Space, as the pure form of all outer intuitions, is limited as an a priori
a

Objecte

1 80

Section II. On Time <B>

condition merely to outer intuitions. But since, on the contrary, all rep­
resentations, whether or not they have outer things as their object, nev­
ertheless as determinations of the mind themselves belong to the inner
state, while this inner state belongs under the formal condition of inner
intuition, and thus of time, so time is an a priori condition of all ap­
pearance in general, and indeed the immediate condition of the inner
intuition (of our souls), and thereby also the mediate condition of outer
appearances. If I can say a priori: all outer appearances are in space and
determined a priori according to the relations of space, so from the
principlea of inner sense I can say entirely generally: all appearances in
general, i.e., all objects of the senses, are in time, and necessarily stand
in relations of time.
If we abstract from our way of internally intuiting ourselves and by
means of this intuition also dealing with all outer intuitions in the
power of representation, and thus take objects as they may be in them­
selves, then time is nothing. It is only of objective validity in regard to
appearances, because these are already things that we take as objects of
our senses; but it is no longer objective if one abstracts from the sensibility of our intuition, thus from that kind of representation that is peculiar to us, and speaks of things in general. Time is therefore merely
a subjective condition of our (human) intuition (which is always sensible, i.e., insofar as we are affected by objects), and in itself, outside the
subject, is nothing. Nonetheless it is necessarily objective in regard to
all appearances, thus also in regard to all things that can come before us
in experience. We cannot say all things are in time, because with the
concept of things in general abstraction is made from every kind of intuition of them, but this is the real condition under which time belongs
to the representation of objects. Now if the condition is added to the
concept, and the principle says that all things as appearances (objects of
sensible intuition) are in time, then the principle has its sound objective
correctness and a priori universality.
Our assertions accordingly teach the empirical reality of time, i.e.,
objective validity in regard to all objects that may ever be given to our
senses. And since our intuition is always sensible, no object can ever be
given to us in experience that would not belong under the condition of
time. But, on the contrary, we dispute all claim of time to absolute re­
ality, namely where it would attach to things absolutely as a condition
or property even without regard to the form of our sensible intuition.
Such properties, which pertain to things in themselves, can never be
given to us through the senses. In this therefore consists the transcen­
dental ideality of time, according to which it is nothing at all if one aba Princip

181

B 5I

A35

B 52

A 36

Doctrine of Elements. Part I. The Transcendental Aesthetic <B>

B 53

stracts from the subjective conditions of sensible intuition, and cannot
be counted as either subsisting or inhering in the objects in themselves
(without their relation to our intuition). Yet this ideality is to be compared with the subreptions o f sensation just as little as that o f space is,
because in that case one presupposes that the appearance itself, in which
these predicates inhere, has objective reality, which is here entirely ab­
sent except insofar as it is merely empirical, i.e., the object itself is re­
garded merely as appearance: concerning which the above remark in
the previous sections is to be consulted.a
<§ 7>
Elucidation.

A37

B 54

Against this theory, which concedes empirical reality to time but dis­
putes its absolute and transcendental reality, insightful men have so
unanimously proposed one objection that I conclude that it must natu­
rally occur to every reader who is not accustomed to these considera­
tionsY It goes thus: Alterations are real (this is proved by the change of
our own representations, even i f one would deny all outer appearances
together with their alterations). Now alterations are possible only in
time, therefore time is something real. There is no difficulty in answer­
ing. I admit the entire argument. Time is certainly something real,
namely the real form of inner intuition. It therefore has subjective real­
ity in regard to inner experience, i.e., I really have the representation of
time and <my>b determinations in it. It is therefore to be regarded re­
ally not as object" but as the way of representing myself as object.d But
if I or another being could intuit myself without this condition of sen­
sibility, then these very determinations, which we now represent to our­
selves as alterations, would yield us a cognition in which the repre­
sentation of time and thus also of alteration would not occur at all. Its
empirical reality therefore remains as a condition of all our experiences.
Only absolute reality cannot be granted to it according to what has been
adduced above. It is nothing except the form of our inner intuition.* If
* I can, to be sure, say: my representations succeed one another; but that only
means that we are conscious of them as in a temporal sequence, i.e., accord­
ing to the form of inner sense. Time is not on that account something in it­
self, nor any determination objectively adhering to things.
A 28-30/B44-5 in § 3 .
I n the first edition: "of my."

a This refers to
b

, Object
Object

d

1 82

Section II. On Time <B>

one removes the special condition of our sensibility from it, then the
concept of time also disappears, and it does not adhere to the objects
themselves, rather merely to the subject that intuits them.
The cause, however, on account of which this objection is so unani­
mously made, and indeed by those who nevertheless know of nothing
convincing to object against the doctrine of the ideality of space,32 is
this. They did not expect to b e able to demonstrate the absolute reality
of space apodictically, since they were confronted by idealism, according to which the reality of outer objects is not capable of any strict
proof: on the contrary, the reality of the object of our inner sense (of
myself and my state) is immediately clear through consciousness. The
former could have been a mere illusion, but the latter, according to
their opinion, is undeniably something real. But they did not consider
that both, without their reality as representations being disputed, nev­
ertheless belong only to appearance, which always has two sides, one
where the object a is considered in itself (without regard to the way in
which it is to be intuited, the constitution of which however must for
that very reason always remain problematic), the other where the form
of the intuition of this object is considered, which must not be sought
in the object in itself but in the subject to which it appears, but which
nevertheless really and necessarily pertains to the representation of this
object.
Time and space are accordingly two sources of cognition, from
which different synthetic cognitions can be drawn a priori, of which especially pure mathematics in regard to the cognitions of space and its
relations provides a splendid example. Both taken together are,
namely, the pure forms of all sensible intuition, and thereby make possible synthetic a priori propositions. But these a priori sources of cognition determine their own boundaries by that very fact (that they are
merely conditions of sensibility), namely that they apply to objects
only so far as they are considered as appearances, but do not present
things in themselves. Those alone are the field of their validity, beyond
which no further objective use of them takes place. This reality of
space and time, further, leaves the certainty of experiential cognition
untouched: for we are just as certain of that whether these forms nec­
essarily adhere to the things in themselves or only to our intuition of
these things. Those, however, who assert the absolute reality of space
and time, whether they assume it to be subsisting or only inhering,
must themselves come into conflict with the principlesb of experience.

a Object
b Principien

183

A38

B55

A39

B 56

Doctrine of Elements. Part 1. The Transcendental Aesthetic <B>

A40
B57

A41
B 58

For if they decide in favor of the first (which is generally the position
of the mathematical investigators of nature), 33 then they must assume
two eternal and infinite self-subsisting non-entities (space and time),
which exist (yet without there being anything real) only in order to
comprehend everything real within themselves. If they adopt the second position (as do some metaphysicians of nature), and hold space
and time to be relations of appearances (next to or successive to one
another) that are abstracted from experience though confusedly repre­
sented in this abstraction, then they must dispute the validity or at least
the apodictic certainty of a priori mathematical doctrines in regard to
real things (e.g., in space), since this certainty does not occur a posteri­
ori, and on this view the a priori concepts of space and time are only
creatures of the imagination, the origin of which must really be sought
in experience, out of whose abstracted relations imagination has made
something that, to be sure, contains what is general in them but that
cannot occur without the restrictions that nature has attached to
them.34 The first succeed in opening the field of appearances for math­
ematical assertions.a However, they themselves become very confused
through precisely these conditions if the understanding would go be­
yond this field. The second succeed, to be sure, with respect to the lat­
ter, in that the representations of space and time do not stand in their
way if they would judge of objects not as appearances but merely in re­
lation to the understanding; but they can neither offer any ground for
the possibility of a priori mathematical cognitions (since they lack a
true and objectively valid a priori intuition), nor can they bring the
propositions of experience into necessary accord with those assertions.
On our theory of the true constitution of these two original forms of
sensibility both difficulties are remedied.
Finally, that the transcendental aesthetic cannot contain more than
these two elements, namely space and time, is clear from the fact that
all other concepts belonging to sensibility, even that of motion, which
unites both elements, presuppose something empirical. For this pre­
supposes the perception of something movable. In space considered in
itself there is nothing movable; hence the movable must be something
that is found in space only through experience, thus an empirical
datum. In the same way the transcendental aesthetic cannot count the
concept of alteration among its a priori data; for time itself does not
alter, but only something that is within time. For this there is required
the perception of some existence and the succession of its determina­
tions, thus experience.

a

A colon in the first edition is replaced with a period in the second.

1 84

Section II. On Time

<B>

< § 8>

(;eneral remarks
on the transcendental aesthetic

d.>a It will first be necessary to explain as distinctly as possible our
opinion in regard to the fundamental constitution of sensible cognition
in general, in order to preclude all misinterpretation of it.
We have therefore wanted to say that all our intuition is nothing but
the representation of appearance; that the things that we intuit are not
in themselves what we intuit them to be, nor are their relations so con­
stituted in themselves as they appear to us; and that if we remove our
own subject or even only the subjective constitution of the senses in
general, then all constitution, all relations of objectsb in space and time,
indeed space and time themselves would disappear, and as appearances
they cannot exist in themselves, but only in us. What may be the case
with objects in themselves and abstracted from all this receptivity of our
sensibility remains entirely unknown to us. We are acquainted with
nothing except our way of perceiving them, which is peculiar to us, and
which therefore does not necessarily pertain to every being, though to
be sure it pertains to every human being. We are concerned solely with
this. Space and time are its pure forms, sensation in general its matter.
We can cognize only the former a priori, i.e., prior to all actual perception, and they are therefore called pure intuition; the latter, however, is
that in our cognition that is responsible for it being called a posteriori
cognition, i.e., empirical intuition. The former adheres to our sensibility absolutely necessarily, whatever sort of sensations we may have; the
latter can be very different. Even if we could bring this intuition of ours
to the highest degree of distinctness we would not thereby come any
closer to the constitution of objects in themselves. For in any case we
would still completely cognize only our own way of intuiting, i.e., our
sensibility, and this always only under the conditions originally depending on the subject, space and time; what the objects may be in themselves would still never be known through the most enlightened
cognition of their appearance, which alone is given to us.
That our entire sensibility is nothing but the confused representation
of things, which contains solely that which pertains to them in them­
selves but only under a heap of marks and partial representations that
we can never consciously separate from one another, is therefore a fal­
sification of the concept of sensibility and of appearance that renders
a "1." is added in the second edition because of the addition of the further numbered para­
b

graphs (II through N) added at B 66-7 3 .

Objecte

185

B 59

A 42

B 60

A 43

Doctrine of Elements. Part I. The Transcendental Aesthetic <B>

:a 6 1

A44

:a 62

A 45

the entire theory of them useless and empty. The difference between an
indistinct and a distinct representation is merely logical, and does not
concern the content. Without doubt the concept of right that is used
by the healthy understanding contains the very same things that the
most subtle speculation can evolve out of it, only in common and prac­
tical use one is not conscious of these manifold representations in these
thoughts. Thus one cannot say that the common concept is sensible and
contains a mere appearance, for right cannot appear at all; rather its
concept lies in the understanding and represents a constitution (the
moral constitution) of actions that pertains to them in themselves. The
representation of a body in intuition, on the contrary, contains nothing
at all that could pertain to an object in itself, but merely the appearance
of something and the way in which we are affected by i t; and this re­
ceptivity of our cognitive capacity is called sensibility and remains
worlds apart from the cognition of the object in itself even if one might
see through to the very bottom of it (the appearance).
The Leibnizian-Wolffian philosophy has therefore directed all inves­
tigations of the nature and origin of our cognitions to an entirely unjust
point of view in considering the distinction between sensibility and the
intellectual as merely logical, since it is obviously transcendental, and
does not concern merely the form of distinctness or indistinctness, but
its origin and content, so that through sensibility we do not cognize the
constitution of things in themselves merely indistinctly, but rather not
at all, and, as soon as we take away our subjective constitution, the rep­
resented object" with the properties that sensible intuition attributes to
it is nowhere to be encountered, nor can it be encountered, for it is just
this subjective constitution that determines its form as appearance.35
We ordinarily distinguish quite well between that which is essentially
attached to the intuition of appearances, and is valid for every human
sense in general, and that which pertains to them only contingently be­
cause it is not valid for the relationb of sensibility in general but only for
a particular situation or organization of this or that sense. And thus one
calls the first cognition one that represents the object in itself, but the
second one only its appearance. This distinction, however, is only em­
pirical. If one stands by it (as commonly happens) and does not regard
that empirical intuition as in turn mere appearance (as ought to hap­
pen), so that there is nothing to be encountered in it that pertains to
anything in itself, then our transcendental distinction is lost, and we bea

Object

b As noted in the first-edition version above, here Kant switches from Verhaltnis to

Beziehung as his topic switches from the relation of objects in space or time to each other
to the relation of space and time to us. With one exception to be noted, therefore, for
the remainder of this section (I) "relation" translates Verhalmis. In the new paragraphs
11 through IV added below, however, Kant again reverts to Verha/mis.
1 86

Section II. On Time <B>

lieve ourselves to cognize things in themselves, though we have nothing to do with anything except appearances anywhere (in the world of
sense), even in the deepest research into its objects. Thus, we would
certainly call a rainbow a mere appearance in a sun-shower, but would
call this rain the thing in itself, and this is correct, as long as we understand the latter concept in a merely physical sense, as that which in universal experience and all different positions relative to the senses is
always determined thus and not otherwise in intuition. But if we consider this empirical object in general and, without turning to its agreement with every human sense, ask whether it (not the raindrops, since
these, as appearances, are already empirical objects)a represents an object in itself, then the question of the relation of the representation to
the object is transcendental, and not only these drops are mere appearances, but even their round form, indeed even the space through which
they fall are nothing in themselves, but only mere modifications or
foundationsb of our sensible intuition; the transcendental object,' however, remains unknown to us.
The second important concern of our transcendental aesthetic is that
it not merely earn some favor as a plausible hypothesis, but that it be as
certain and indubitable as can ever be demanded of a theory that is to
serve as an organon. In order to make this certainty fully convincing we
will choose a case in which its validity can become obvious <and that
can serve to make that which has been adduced in § 3 even more clear>.
Thus, if it were to be supposed that space and time are in themselves
objective and conditions of the possibility of things in themselves, then
it would be shown, first, that there is a large number of a priori apodic­
tic and synthetic propositions about both, but especially about space,
which we will therefore here investigate as our primary example. Since
the propositions of geometry are cognized synthetically a priori and
with apodictic certainty, I ask: Whence do you take such propositions,
and on what does our understanding rely in attaining to such absolutely
necessary and universally valid truths? There is no other way than
through concepts or through intuitions, both of which, however, are
given, as such, either a priori or a posteriori. The latter, namely empirical concepts, together with that on which they are grounded, empirical
intuition, cannot yield any synthetic proposition except one that is also
merely empirical, i.e., a proposition of experience; thus it can never
contain necessity and absolute universality of the sort that is nevertheless characteristic of all propositions of geometry. Concerning the first
and only means for attaining to such cognitions, however, namely
a

h
,

Objecte
Grundlagen
Object
1 87

B 63

A46

B 64

A 47

Doctrine of Elements. Part I. The Transcendental Aesthetic <B>

B 65

A48

l! 66

A49

through mere concepts or a priori intuitions, it is clear that from mere
concepts no synthetic cognition but only merely analytic cognition can
be attained. Take the proposition that with two straight lines no space
at all can be enclosed, thus no figure is possible, and try to derive it from
the concept of straight lines and the number two; or take the proposi­
tion that a figure is possible with three straight lines, and in the same
way try to derive it from these concepts. All of your effort is in vain, and
you see yourself forced to take refuge in intuition, as indeed geometry
always does. You thus give yourself an object in intuition; but what kind
is this, is it a pure a priori intuition or an empirical one? If it were the
latter, then no universally valid, let alone apodictic proposition could
ever come from it: for experience can never provide anything of this
sort. You must therefore give your object a priori in intuition, and
ground your synthetic proposition on this. If there did not lie in you a
faculty for intuiting a priori; if this subjective condition regarding form
were not at the same time the universal a priori condition under which
alone the object a of this (outer) intuition is itself possible; if the object
(the triangle) were something in itself without relation to your subject:
then how could you say that what necessarily lies in your subjective con­
ditions for constructing a triangle must also necessarily pertain to the
triangle in itself? for you could not add to your concept (of three lines)
something new (the figure) that must thereby necessarily be encoun­
tered in the object, since this is given prior to your cognition and not
through it. If, therefore, space (and time as well) were not a mere form
of your intuition that contains a priori conditions under which alone
things could be outer objects for you, which are nothing in themselves
without these subjective conditions, then you could make out absolutely
nothing synthetic and a priori about outer objects.b It is therefore indu­
bitably certain and not merely possible or even probable that space and
time, as the necessary conditions of all (outer and inner) experience, are
merely subjective conditions of all our intuition, in relation to which
therefore all objects are mere appearances and not things given for
themselves in this way; about these appearances, further, much may be
said a priori that concerns their form but nothing whatsoever about the
things in themselves that may ground them.
'dI. For confirmation of this theory of the ideality of outer as well as
inner sense, thus of all objectsd of the senses, as mere appearances, this
comment is especially useful: that everything in our cognition that be­
longs to intuition (with the exception, therefore, of the feeling of pleaa Object
b Objecte
, From here to the end of the "Transcendental Aesthetic" added in the second edition.
d Objecte
1 88

Section II. On Time <B>

sure and displeasure and the will, which are not cognitions at all) contains nothing but mere relations,a of places in one intuition (extension),
alteration of places (motion), and laws in accordance with which this alteration is determined (moving forces). But what is present in the place,
or what it produces in the things themselves besides the alteration of
place, is not given through these relations. Now through mere relations
no thing in itself is cognized; it is therefore right to judge that since
nothing is given to us through outer sense except mere representations
of relation, outer sense can also contain in its representation only the
relation of an object to the subject, and not that which is internal to the
objectb in itself.36 It is exactly the same in the case of inner sense. It is
not merely that the representations of outer sense make up the proper
material with which we occupy our mind, but also the time in which we
place these representations, which itself precedes the consciousness of
them in experience and grounds the way in which we place them in
mind as a formal condition, already contains relations of succession, of
simultaneity, and of that which is simultaneous with succession (of that
which persists). Now that which, as representation, can precede any act
of thinking something is intuition and, if it contains nothing but relations, it is the form of intuition, which, since it does not represent anything except insofar as something is posited in the mind, can be nothing
other than the way in which the mind is affected by its own activity,
namely this positing of its representation, thus the way it is affected
through itself, i.e., it is an inner sense as far as regards its form.
Everything that is represented through a sense is to that extent always
appearance, and an inner sense must therefore either not be admitted at
all or else the subject, which is the object of this sense, can only be rep­
resented by its means as appearance, not as it would judge of itself if its
intuition were mere self-activity, i.e., intellectual. Any difficulty in this
depends merely on the question how a subject can internally intuit itself; yet this difficulty is common to every theory. Consciousness of itself (apperception) is the simple representation of the I, and if all of the
manifold in the subject were given self-actively through that alone,
then the inner intuition would be intellectual. In human beings this
consciousness requires inner perception of the manifold that is an­
tecedently given in the subject, and the manner in which this is given in
the mind without spontaneity must be called sensibility on account of
this difference. If the faculty for becoming conscious of oneself is to
seek out (apprehend) that which lies in the mind, it must affect the lata Here Kant reverts to the use of Verhiiltnis for the remainder of the "Transcendental
b

Aesthetic," and it is thus this word that is translated by "relation" here and for the re­
mainder of the section unless otherwise noted.

Objecte
1 89

B 67

B 68

Doctrine of Elements. Pan I. The Transcendental Aesthetic <B>

B 69

B 70
B 69
B 70

ter, and it can only produce an intuition of itself in such a way, whose
form, however, which antecedently grounds it in the mind, determines
the way in which the manifold is together in the mind in the representation of time; there it then intuits itself not as it would immediately
self-actively represent itself, but in accordance with the way in which it
is affected from within, consequently as it appears to itself, not as it is.
III. In say: in space and time intuition represents both outer objectsa
as well as the self-intuition of the mind as each affects our senses, i.e.,
as it appears, that is not to say that these objects would be a mere illu­
sion.b,37 For in the appearance the objects/ indeed even propertiesd that
we attribute to them, are always regarded as something really given,
only insofar as this property depends only on the kind of intuition of the
subject in the relation e of the given object to it then this object as ap­
pearance is to be distinguished from itself as object! in itself. Thus I
do not say that bodies merely seemg to exist outside me or that my soul
only seemsh to be given ifI assert that the quality of space and time - in
accordance with which, as condition of their existence, I posit both of
these - lies in my kind of intuition and not in these objectsi in them­
selves. It would be my own fault if I made that which I should count as
appearance into mere illusion. * But this does not happen according to
*The predicates of appearance can be attributed to the object} in itself, in rela­
tion to our sense, e.g., the red color or fragrance to the rose; but the illusion
can never be attributed to the object as predicate, precisely because that would
be to attribute to the objectk for itself what pertains to it only in relation to
the senses or in general to the subject, e.g., the two handles that were origi­
nally attributed to Saturn. VVhat is not to be encountered in the object' in it­
self at all, but is always to be encountered in its relation to the subject and is
inseparable from the representation of the object, is appearance, and thus the
predicates of space and of time are rightly attributed to the objects of the
senses as such, and there is no illusion in this. On the contrary, if I attribute
the redness to the rose in itself, the handles to Saturn or extension to all outer
objects in themselves, without looking to a determinate relation of these ob­
jects to the subject and limiting my judgment to this, then illusion first arises.
a Objate
b Schein
, Objecte
d Beschaffenheitm, here and in the remainder of this paragraph.
Relation
f Object
g scheinen
h scheint
i Objecten
J Objecte
k Object
I Objecte
,

1 90

Section II. On Time <B>

our principle of the ideality of all of our sensible intuitions; rather, if
one ascribes objective reality to those forms of representation then
one cannot avoid thereby transforming everything into mere illusion.
For if one regards space and time as properties that, as far as their pos­
sibility is concerned, must be encountered in things in themselves, and
reflects on the absurdities in which one then becomes entangled, be­
cause two infinite things that are neither substances nor anything really
inhering in substances must nevertheless be something existing, indeed
the necessary condition of the existence of all things, which also remain B 7 1
even if all existing things are removed; then one cannot well blame the
good Berkeley if he demotes bodies to mere illusion;38 indeed even our
own existence, which would be made dependent in such a way on the
self-subsisting reality of a non-entity such as time, would be trans­
formed along with this into mere illusion; an absurdity of which no one
has yet allowed himself to be guilty.
Iv. In natural theology, where one conceives of an object that is not
only not an object of intuition for us but cannot even be an object of
sensible intuition for itself, one is careful to remove the conditions of
time and space from all of its intuition (for all of its cognition must be
intuition and not thinking, which is always proof of limitations). But
with what right can one do this if one has antecedently made both of
these into forms of things in themselves, and indeed ones that, as a pri­
ori conditions of the existence of things, would remain even if one re­
moved the things themselves? - for as conditions of all existence in
general they would also have to be conditions of the existence of God.
If one will not make them into objective forms of all things, then no al- B 72
ternative remains but to make them into subjective forms of our kind of
outer as well as inner intuition, which is called sensible because it is not
original, i.e., one through which the existence of the objectb of intuition is itself given (and that, so far as we can have insight, can only pertain to the original being); rather it is dependent on the existence of the
object,c thus it is possible only insofar as the representational capacity of
the subject is affected through that.39
·
It is also not necessary for us to limit the kind of intuition in space" )
and time to the sensibility of human beings; it may well be that all finite
thinking beings must necessarily agree with human beings in this re­
gard (though we cannot decide this), yet even given such universal va­
lidity this kind of intuition would not cease to be sensibility, for the very
reason that it is derived (intuitus derivativus),d not original (intuitius or

,

a Princip
b Objects
, Objects
d

derivative intuition

191

Doctrine of Elements. Part 1. The Transcendental Aesthetic <B>

inarius),a thus not intellectual intuition, which for the ground already
adduced seems to ·pertain only to the original being, never to one that
is dependent as regards both its existence and its intuition (which de­
termines its existence in relationb to given objects);C although the last re­
mark must be counted only as an illustration of our aesthetic theory and
not as a ground of its proof.
B 73

Conclusion of the Transcendental Aesthetic.
Here we now have one of the required pieces for the solution of the
general problem of transcendental philosophy how are synthetic a
priori propositions possible? namely pure a priori intuitions, space
and time, in which, if we want to go beyond the given concept in an a
priori judgment, we encounter that which is to be discovered a priori and
synthetically connected with it, not in the concept but in the intuition
that corresponds to it; but on this ground such a judgment never ex­
tends beyond the objects of the senses and can hold only for objectsd of
possible experience.>
-

-

a

b

original intuition

Beziehung
, Objecte
d Objecte

1 92

The Transcendental Doctrine of Elements
Second Part
The Transcendental Logic

Introduction
The Idea of a Transcendental Logk
1.

On logic in general.
Our cognition arises from two fundamental sources in the mind, the
first of which is the reception of representations (the receptivity of im­
pressions), the second the faculty for cognizing an object by means of
these representations (spontaneity of concepts); through the former an
object is given to us, through the latter it is thought in relation to that
representation (as a mere determination of the mind). Intuition and
concepts therefore constitute the elements of all our cognition, so that
neither concepts without intuition corresponding to them in some way
nor intuition without concepts cana yield a cognition. Both are either
pure or empirical. Empirical, if sensation (which presupposes the ac­
tual presence of the object) is contained therein; but pure if no sensa­
tion is mixed into the representation. One can call the latter the matter
of sensible cognition. Thus pure intuition contains merely the form
under which something is intuited, and pure concept only the form of
thinking of an object in general. Only pure intuitions or concepts alone
are possible a priori, empirical ones only a posteriori.
If we will call the receptivity of our mind to receive representations
insofar as it is affected in some way sensibility, then on the contrary the
faculty for bringing forth representations itself, or the spontaneity of
cognition, is the understanding. It comes along with our nature that
intuition can never be other than sensible, i.e., that it contains only
the way in which we are affected by objects. The faculty for thinking
of objects of sensible intuition, on the contrary, is the understanding.
Neither of these properties is to be preferred to the other. Without sen­
sibility no object would be given to us, and without understanding none
would be thought. Thoughts without content are empty, intuitions
a The second edition has the plural verb konnen; the first had the singular kann.
193

B 75
A5I

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Transcendental Logic

B 76
A52

B 77
A 53

without concepts are blind. I It is thus just as necessary to make the
mind's concepts sensible (i.e., to add an object to them in intuition) as
it is to make its intuitions understandable (i.e., to bring them under
concepts). Further, these two faculties or capacities cannot exchange
their functions. The understanding is not capable of intuiting anything,
and the senses are not capable of thinking anything. Only from their
unification can cognition arise. But on this account one must not mix
u p their roles, rather one has great cause to separate them carefully
from each other and distinguish them. Hence we distinguish the science
of the rules of sensibility in general, i.e., aesthetic, from the science of
the rules of understanding in general, i.e., logic.
Now logic in turn can be undertaken with two different aims, either as
the logic of the general or of the particular use of the understanding. The
former contains the absolutely necessary rules of thinking, without which
no use of the understanding takes place, and it therefore concerns these
rules without regard to the difference of the objects to which it may be
directed.2 The logic of the particular use of the understanding contains
the rules for correctly thinking about a certain kind of objects. The for­
mer can be called elementary logic, the latter, however, the organon of
this or that science. In the schools the latter is often stuck before the sci­
ences as their propaedeutic, though in the course of human reason they
are certainly the latest to be reached, once the science is already long
complete, and requires only the final touch for its improvement and per­
fection. For one must already know the objects rather well if one will
offer the rules for how a science of them is to be brought about.
Now general logic is either pure or applied logic. In the former we
abstract from all empirical conditions under which our understanding
is exercised, e.g., from the influence of the senses, from the play of
imagination," the laws of memory, the power of habit, inclination, etc.,
hence also from the sources of prejudice, indeed in general from all
causes from which certain cognitions arise or may be supposed to arise,
because these merely concern the understanding under certain circum­
stances of its application, and experience is required in order to know
these. A general but pure logic therefore has to do with strictly a pri­
ori principles/ and is a canon of the understanding and reason, but
only in regard to what is formal in their use, be the content what it may
(empirical or transcendental). A general logic, however, is then called
applied if it is directed to the rules of the use of the understanding
under the subjective empirical conditions that psychology teaches us. It
therefore has empirical principles/ although it is to be sure general ina Einbildung
b Principien
Principien
C

1 94

Introduction

sofar as it concerns the use of the understanding without regard to the
difference of objects. On this account it is also neither a canon of the
understanding in general nor an organon of particular sciences, but
merely a cathartic of the common understanding.
In general logic the part that is to constitute the pure doctrine of reason must therefore be entirely separated from that which constitutes
applied (though still general) logic. The former alone is properly science, although brief and dry, as the scholastically correct presentation
of a doctrine of the elements of the understanding requires. In this
therefore logicians must always have two rules in view.
I ) As general logic it abstracts from all contents of the cognition of
the understanding and of the difference of its objects, and has to do with
nothing but the mere form of thinking.
2) As pure logic it has no empirical principles,a thus it draws nothing
from psychology (as one has occasionally been persuaded), which there­
fore has no influence at all on the canon of the understanding. It is a
proven doctrine, and everything in it must be completely a priori.
What I call applied logic (in opposition to the common signification
of this word, according to which it ought to contain certain exercises to
which pure logic gives the rule) is thus a representation of the under­
standing and the rules of its necessary use in concreto, namely under the
contingent conditions of the subject, which can hinder or promote this
use, and which can all be given only empirically. It deals with attention,
its hindrance and consequences, the cause of error, the condition of
doubt, of reservation, of conviction, etc., and general and pure logic is
related to it as pure morality, which contains merely the necessary moral
laws of a free will in general, is related to the doctrine of virtue proper,
which assesses these laws under the hindrances of the feelings, inclinations, and passions to which human beings are more or less subject, and
which can never yield a true and proven science, since it requires empirical and psychological principlesb just as much as that applied logic does.
II.

On transcendental logic.
General logic abstracts, as we have shown, from all content of cogni­
tion, i.e. from any relation C of it to the object,d and considers only the
a Principien
b Principien
, Beziehung. The contrast between this term and the following use of Verhdltnis (p. 1 96,

d

note a) shows that Kant continues to use the former to connote a relation between sub­
ject and object and the latter among objects, thuugh in this case objects of thought
rather than sensibility. Further, unnoted instances of "relation" translate Beziehung.

Object
195

B 78

A 54

B 79

A55

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Transcendental Logic

B 80

A56

B 81

A 57

logical form in the relationa of cognitions to one another, i.e., the form
of thinking in general. But now since there are pure as well as empiri­
cal intuitions (as the transcendental aesthetic proved), a distinction between pure and empirical thinking of objects could also well be found.
In this case there would be a logic in which one did not abstract from
all content of cognition; for that logic that contained merely the rules
of the pure thinking of an object would exclude all those cognitions that
were of empirical content. It would therefore concern the origin of our
cognitions of objects insofar as that cannot be ascribed to the objects;
while general logic, on the contrary, has nothing to do with this origin
of cognition, but rather considers representations, whether they are
originally given a priori in ourselves or only empirically, merely in re­
spect of the laws according to which the understanding brings them
into relationb to one another when it thinks, and therefore it deals only
with the form of the understanding, which can be given to the repre­
sentations wherever they may have originated.
And here I make a remark the import of which extends to all of the
following considerations, and that we must keep well in view, namely
that not every a priori cognition must be called transcendental, but only
that by means ofwhich we cognize that and how certain representations
(intuitions or concepts) are applied entirely a priori, or are possible (i.e.,
the possibility o f cognition or its use a priori). Hence neither space nor
any geometrical determination of it a priori is a transcendental repre­
sentation, but only the cognition that these representations are not of
empirical origin at all and the possibility that they can' nevertheless be
related a priori to objects of experience can be called transcendental.
Likewise the use of space about all objects in general would also be
transcendental; but if it is restricted solely to objects of the senses, then
it is called empirical. The difference between the transcendental and
the empirical therefore belongs only to the critique of cognitions and
does not concern their relation to their object.
In the expectation, therefore, that there can perhaps be concepts that
may be related to objects a priori, not as pure or sensible intuitions but
rather merely as acts of pure thinking, that are thus concepts but of nei­
ther empirical nor aesthetic origin, we provisionally formulate the idea
of a science of pure understanding and of the pure cognition of reason,
by means of which we think objects completely a priori. Such a science,
which would determine the origin, the domain, and the objective valid­
ity of such cognitions, would have to be called transcendental logic,
since it has to do merely with the laws of the understanding and reason,
a

Verbaltnisse

b Verbaltnis

, Following Erdmann, reading kiinnen instead of kiinne.

1 96

Introduction

but solely insofar as they are related to objects a priori and not, as in the
case of general logic, to empirical as well as pure cognitions of reason
without distinction.

B 82

III.
On the division of general logic
into analytic and dialectic.
The old and famous question with which the logicians were to be dri­
ven into a corner and brought to such a pass that they must either fall
into a miserable circlea or else confess their ignorance, hence the vanity of their entire art, is this: What is truth? The nominal definition of
truth, namely that it is the agreement of cognition with its object, is
here granted and presupposed; but one demands to know what is the
general and certain criterion of the truth of any cognition.
It is already a great and necessary proof of cleverness or insight to
know what one should reasonably ask. For if the question is absurd in
itself and demands unnecessary answers, then, besides the embarrassment of the one who proposes it, it also has the disadvantage of mis­
leading the incautious listener into absurd answers, and presenting the
ridiculous sight (as the ancients said) of one person milking a billy-goat
while the other holds a sieve underneath.3
If truth consists in the agreement of a cognition with its object, then
this object must thereby be distinguished from others; for a cognition
is false if it does not agree with the object to which it is related even if
it contains something that could well be valid of other objects. Now a
general criterion of truth would be that which was valid of all cognitions
without any distinction among their objects. But it is clear that since
with such a criterion one abstracts from all content of cognition (relation to its object), b yet truth concerns precisely this content, it would be
completely impossible and absurd to ask for a mark of the truth of this
content of cognition, and thus it is clear that a sufficient and yet at the
same time general sign of truth cannot possibly be provided. Since
above we have called the content of a cognition its matter, one must
therefore say that no general sign of the truth of the matter of cognition can be demanded, because it is self-contradictory.
But concerning the mere form of cognition (setting aside all content),
it is equally clear that a logic, so far as it expounds the general and necessary rules of understanding, must present criteria of truth in these
very rules. For that which contradicts these is false, since the under­
standing thereby contradicts its general rules of thinking and thus conn In the second edition, Dialexis; in the first, Dialele, i.e. reasoning in a circle.
b

Object

1 97

A5 8

B 83

A 59

B 84

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Transcendental Logic

A60

B 8S

A6r

B 86

tradicts itself. But these criteria concern only the form of truth, i.e., of
thinking in general, and are to that extent entirely correct but not suf­
ficient. For although a cognition may be in complete accord with logi­
cal form, i.e., not contradict itself, yet it can still always contradict the
object. The merely logical criterion of truth, namely the agreement of
a cognition with the general and formal laws of understanding and rea­
son, is therefore certainly the conditio sine qua non and thus the negative
condition of all truth; further, however, logic cannot go, and the error
that concerns not form but content cannot be discovered by any touch­
stone of logic.4
General logic analyzes the entire formal business of the understand­
ing and reason into its elements, and presents these as principlesa of all
logical assessmentb of our cognition. This part of logic can therefore be
called an analytic, and is on that very account at least the negative
touchstone of truth, since one must before all else examine and evalu­
ate by means of these rules the form of all cognition before investigating its content in order to find out whether with regard to the object it
contains positive truth. But since the mere form of cognition, however
well it may agree with logical laws, is far from sufficing to constitute the
material (objective) truth of the cognition, nobody can dare to judge of
objects and to assert anything about them merely with logic without
having drawn on antecedently well-founded information about them
from outside oflogic, in order subsequently merely to investigate its use
and connection in a coherent whole according to logical laws, or, bet­
ter, solely to examine them according to such laws. Nevertheless there
is something so seductive in the possession of an apparent art for giving
all of our cognitions the form of understanding, even though with regard to their content one may yet be very empty and poor, that this gen­
eral logic, which is merely a canon for judging,c has been used as if it
were an organon for the actual production of at least the semblance of
objective assertions, and thus in fact it has thereby been misused. Now
general logic, as a putative organon, is called dialectic.
As different as the significance of the employment of this designation
of a science or art among the ancients may have been, one can still infer
from their actual use of it that among them it was nothing other than
the logic of illusion a sophistical art for giving to its ignorance, in­
deed even to its intentional tricks, the air of truth, by imitating the
method of thoroughness, which logic prescribes in general, and using
its topics for the embellishment of every empty pretension. Now one
can take it as a certain and useful warning that general logic, consid-

N

Principien

b Beurtheilung

, Beurtheilung
1 98

Introduction

ered as an organon, is always a logic of illusion, i.e., is dialectical. For
since it teaches us nothing at all about the content of cognition, but
only the formal conditions of agreement with the understanding, which
are entirely indifferent with regard to the objects, the effrontery of
using it as a tool (organon) for an expansion and extension of its infor­
mation,a or at least the pretension of so doing, comes down to nothing
but idle chatter, asserting or impeaching whatever one wants with some
plausibility.
Such instruction by no means befits the dignity of philosophy. For
this reason it would be better to take this designation of "dialectic" as a
critique of dialectical illusion, which is counted as part of logic, and
in such a way we would here have it be understood.
Tv.

On the division of transcendental logic into
the transcendental analytic and dialectic.
In a transcendental logic we isolate the understanding (as we did above
with sensibility in the transcendental aesthetic), and elevate from our
cognition merely the part of our thought that has its origin solely in the
understanding. The use of this pure cognition, however, depends on
this as its condition: that objects are given to us in intuition, to which it
can be applied. For without intuition all of our cognition would lack ob­
jects,b and therefore remain completely empty. The part of transcen­
dental logic, therefore, that expounds the elements of the pure
cognition of the understanding and the principlesc without which no
object can be thought at all, is the transcendental analytic, and at the
same time a logic of truth. For no cognition can contradict it without at
the same time losing all content, i.e., all relation to any object,d hence
all truth. But because it is very enticing and seductive to make use of
these pure cognitions of the understanding and principles by them­
selves, and even beyond all bounds of experience, which however itself
alone can give us the matter (objects)' to which those pure concepts of
the understanding can be applied, the understanding falls into the danger of making a material use of the merely formal principles! of pure
understanding through empty sophistries, and of judging without dis­
tinction about objects that are not given to us, which perhaps indeed
a Kenntnisse
b Objecten
, Principien
d Object
, Objecte
f Principien

199

A62

B 87

A63

B 88

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Transcendental Logic

A 64

could not be given to us in any way. Since it should properly be only a
canon for the assessment of empirical use, it is misused if one lets it
count as the organon of a general and unrestricted use, and dares to
synthetically judge, assert, and decide about objects in general with the
pure understanding alone. The use of the pure understanding would in
this case therefore be dialectical. The second part of the transcendental
logic must therefore be a critique of this dialectical illusion, and is called
transcendental dialectic, not as an art of dogmatically arousing such il­
lusion (an unfortunately highly prevalent art among the manifold works
of metaphysical jugglery), but rather as a critique of the understanding
and reason in regard to their hyperphysical use, in order to uncover the
false illusion of their groundless pretensions and to reduce their claims
to invention and amplification, putatively to be attained through tran­
scendental principles, to the mere assessment and evaluation of the pure
understanding, guarding it against sophistical tricks.

200

Transcendental Logic
First Division

The Transcendental Analytic
This Analytic is the analysisa of the entirety of our a priori cognition
into the elements of the pure cognition of the understanding. It is con­
cerned with the following points: I .b That the concepts be pure and not
empirical concepts. 2 . That they belong not to intuition and to sensibility, but rather to thinking and understanding. 3 . That they be ele­
mentary concepts, and clearly distinguished from those which are
derived or composed from them. 4. That the table of them be complete,
and that they entirely exhaust the entire field of pure understanding.
Now this completeness of a science cannot reliably be assumed from a
rough calculation of an aggregate put together by mere estimates;
hence it is possible only by means of an idea of the whole of the a priori cognition of the understanding, and throughC the division of concepts that such an idea determines and that constitutes it, thus only
through their connection in a system. The pure understanding separates itself completely not only from everything empirical, but even
from all sensibility. It is therefore a unity that subsists on its own, which
is sufficient by itself, and which is not to be supplemented by any external additions. Hence the sum total of its cognition will constitute a
system that is to be grasped and determined under one idea, the com­
pleteness and articulation of which system can at the same time yield a
touchstone of the correctness and genuineness of all the pieces of cognition fitting into it. This whole part of the transcendental logic, however, consists of two books, the first of which contains the concepts of
pure understanding, the second its principles.
a Zergliederung
b The numeral " 1 . " is missing in the second edition.
, Added in the second edition.

201

A6S

B 90

Transcendental Analytic
First Book
The Analytic of Concepts. °

A66

B 91

I understand by an analytic of concepts not their analysis, or the usual
procedure of philosophical investigations, that of analyzingh the content
of concepts that present themselves and bringing them to distinctness,
but rather the much less frequently attempted analysisC of the faculty
of understanding itself, in order to research the possibility of a priori
concepts by seeking them only in the understanding as their birthplace
and analyzing its pure use in general; for this is the proper business of
a transcendental philosophy; the rest i s the logical treatment o f con-

a

The following notes appear at this point in Kant's copy of the first edition:
"We remarked above that experience consists of synthetic propositions, and how
synthetic a posteriori propositions are possible is not to be regarded as a question re­
quiring a solution, since it is a fact.
"Now it is to be asked how this fact is possible.
"Experience consists of judgments, but it is to be asked whether these empirical
judgments do not in the end presuppose a priori (pure) judgments. The analysis
[Analysis] of experience contains, first, its analysis [Zergleiderung] insofar as judgments
are in it; second, beyond the a posteriori concepts also a priori concepts.
"The problem is: How is experience possible? 1. vVhat does the understanding do
in judgments in general? 2. What do the senses do in empirical judgments? 3. In em­
pirical cognition, what does the understanding, applied to the representations of the
senses, do in order to bring forth a cognition of objects [Objecte] ?
"One sees at first that experience is only possible through synthetic a pri01'i propo­
sitions. Hence a priori principles [Principien] are 1 . immanent: in accordance with use;
2. it is to be asked, whether they are also transcendent.
"The test for whether something is also experience, i.e., a fact, is as it were experi­
mentation with the universal propositions under which the particular empirical judg­
ment belongs. If the latter cannot stand under a universal rule for judging, if no concept
can be made out of that, then it is a vitium subreptionis [vicious fallacy] . Why in supersti­
tion and credulity." (E XXXIII, pp. 2 1-2; 2 3 :24-5)

b zergliedern
, Zergliederung

2 02

Div. I. Transcendental Analytic

cepts in philosophy in general. We will therefore pursue the pure con­
cepts into their first seeds and predispositions in the human under­
standing, where they lie ready, until with the opportunity of experience
they are finally developed and exhibited in their clarity by the very same
understanding, liberated from the empirical conditions attaching to
them.

203

The Analytic of Concepts
First Chapter
On the Clue to the Discovery of all
Pure Concepts of the Understanding

A67
B 92

If one sets a faculty of cognition into play, then on various occasions dif­
ferent concepts will become prominent that will make this faculty
known and that can be collected in a more or less exhaustive treatise de­
pending on whether they have been observed for a longer time or with
greater acuteness. Where this investigation will be completed can never
be determined with certainty by means of this as it were mechanical
procedure. Further, the concepts that are discovered only as the opportunity arises will not reveal any order and systematic unity, but will
rather be ordered in pairs only according to similarities and placed in
series only in accord with the magnitude of their content, from the sim­
ple to the more composite, which series are by no means systematic
even if to some extent methodically produced.
Transcendental philosophy has the advantage but also the obligation
to seek its concepts in accordance with a principle,a since they spring
pure and unmixed from the understanding, as absolute unity, and must
therefore be connected among themselves in accordance with a concept
or idea. Such a connection, however, provides a rule by means of which
the place of each pure concept of the understanding and the complete­
ness of all of them together can be determined a priori, which would
otherwise depend upon whim or chance.
On the Transcendental Clue for the Discovery of all Pure
Concepts of the Understanding
First Section
On the logical use of the understanding
in general.

A68

The understanding has been explained above only negatively, as a non­
sensible faculty of cognition. Now we cannot partake of intuition indea Princip

204

Section 1. On the logical use of the understanding in general

pendently of sensibility. The understanding is therefore not a faculty of
intuition. But besides intuition there is no other kind of cognition than
through concepts. Thus the cognition of every, at least human, under­
standing is a cognition through concepts, not intuitive but discursive.
All intuitions, as sensible, rest on affections, concepts therefore on
functions. By a function, however, I understand the unity of the action
of ordering different representations under a common one. Concepts
are therefore grounded on the spontaneity of thinking, as sensible intuitions are grounded on the receptivity of impressions. Now the under­
standing can make no other use of these concepts than that of judging
by means of them. Since noa representation pertains to the object im­
mediately except intuition alone, a concept is thus never immediately
related to an object, but is always related to some other representation
of it (whether that be an intuition or itself already a concept).b Judgment
is therefore the mediate cognition of an object, hence the representation of a representation of it. In every judgment there is a concept that
holds of many, and that among this many also comprehends a given
representation, which is then related immediately to the object.5 So in
the judgment, e.g., "All bodies are divisible,"c the concept of the di­
visible is related to various other concepts; among these, however, it is
here particularly related to the concept of body, and this in turn is related to certain appearances d that come before us. These objects are
therefore mediately represented by the concept of divisibility. All judgments are accordingly functions of unity among our representations,
since instead of an immediate representation a higher one, which com­
prehends this and other representations under itself, is used for the cognition of the object, and many possible cognitions are thereby drawn
together into one. We can, however, trace all actions of the under­
standing back to judgments, so that the understanding in general can
be represented as a faculty for judging. For according to what has been
said above it is a faculty for thinking. Thinking is cognition through
concepts. Concepts, however, as predicates of possible judgments, are
related to some representation of a still undetermined object. The concept of body thus signifies something, e.g., metal, which can be cognized through that concept. It is therefore a concept only because other
representations are contained under it by means of which it can be reIn his copy of the first edition, Kant inserts here the word "other" (E XXIV; p. 2 3 ;
2 3 :45)·
b Kant's copy of the first edition replaces this parenthetical aside with the following
words, without parentheses: "which itself contains intuition only mediately or immedi­
ately" (E xxxv, p. 2 3 ; 2 3 :45)·
, Teilbar, rather than veranderlich, following the fourth edition.
d Kant's copy of the first edition changes "appearances" to "intuitions" (E XXXVI , p. 2 3 ;
2 3 :45)·
a

205

B 93

A69
B 94

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk I. Ch. I

lated to objects. It is therefore the predicate for a possible judgment,
e.g., "Every metal is a body." The functions of the understanding can
therefore all be found together if one can exhaustively exhibit the func­
tions of unity in judgments. The following section will make it evident
that this can readily be accomplished.
On the Clue to the Discovery of all Pure
Concepts of the Understanding
Second Section

<§ 9 . > a

On the logical function of the understanding
in judgments.
If we abstract from all content of a judgment in general, and attend only
to the mere form of the understanding in it, we find that the function
of thinking in that can be brought under four titles, each of which con­
tains under itself three moments. They can suitably be represented in
the following table.6
I.

Quantity o fJudgments
Universal
Particular
Singular
2.

3·

Quality
Mfirmative
Negative
Infinite

Relationb
Categorical
Hypothetical
Disjunctive
4·
Modality
Problematic
Assertoric
Apodictic

B 96
A7I

Since this division seems to depart in several points, although not es­
sential ones, from the customary technique of the logicians, the follow­
ing protests against a worrisome misunderstanding are not unnecessary.
a Here Kant resumes the numbering of paragraphs begun in the "Transcendental

Aesthetic" in the second edition. This will continue through the end of the "Transcen­
dental Deduction."
b Here Kant uses the latinate word Relation instead of either Beziehung or Verhidtnis.

2 06

Section II. On the logical function in judgments

I . The logicians rightly say that in the use of judgments in syllogisms
singular judgments can be treated like universal ones. For just because
they have no domain at all, their predicate is not merely related to some
of what is contained under the concept of the subject while being ex­
cluded from another part of it. The predicate therefore holds of that
concept without exception, just as if the latter were a generally valida
concept with a domain with the predicate applying to the whole of what
is signified. b If, on the contrary, we compare a singular judgment with a
generally valid one, merely as cognition, with respect to quantity," then
the formerd relates to the latter as unity relates to infinity, and is therefore in itself essentially different from the latter. Therefore, if! consider
a singular judgment ( judicium singulare) not only with respect to its
internal validity, but also, as cognition in general, with respect to the
quantitye it has in comparison with other cognitions, then it is surely
different from generally valid judgments (judicia communia), and deserves a special place in a complete table of the moments of thinking in
general (though obviously not in that logic that is limited only to the
use of judgments with respect to each other).
2 . Likewise, in a transcendental logic infinite judgments must also
be distinguished from affirmative ones, even though in general logic
they are rightly included with the latter and do not constitute a special
member of the classification. General logic abstracts from all content of
the predicate (even if it is negative), and considers only whether it is at­
tributed to the subject or opposed to it. Transcendental logic, however,
also considers the value or content of the logical affirmation made in a
judgment by means of a merely negative, predicate, and what sort of
gain this yields for the whole of cognition,Jf I had said of the soul that
it is not mortal, then I would at least have avoided an error by means of
a negative judgment. Now by means of the proposition "The soul is not
mortal" I have certainly made an actual affirmation as far as logical form
is concerned, for I have placed the soul within the unlimited domain of
undying beings. Now since that which is mortal contains one part of the
whole domain of possible beings, but that which is undying! the other,
a

b

ge11leingiiltiger. While this would normally be translated "commonly valid," in this con­
text it clearly refers to the universal (allge11lein) judgment; we have used "generally" to
preserve this reference while still marking the difference from allge11lein.
von dessen ganzer Bedeutung; here Kant uses Bedeutung, as Frege was later to use it, to
mean the reference or denotation of a concept; more typically, he uses it to mean some­
thing closer to what Frege called Sinn or sense, that is, the connotation.

, Grofle

d

The text has sie rather than es, but in spite of the shift in gender there is nothing for the
pronoun to refer to except "a singular judgment."

, Grofle

f In the second edition, Nichtsterbende; in the first, Nichtsterbliche, or "immortal."

207

i

B 97
A 72

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. 1.

B 98
A 73

B 99

A 74

Bk

I. Ch. I

nothing is said by my proposition but that the soul is One of the infinite
multitude of things that remain if I take away everything that is mortal.
But the infinite sphere of the possible is thereby limited only to the ex­
tent that that which is mortal is separated from it, and the soul is placed
in the remaining space of its domain.a But even with this exception this
space still remains infinite, and more parts could be taken away from it
without the concept of the soul growing in the least and being affirma­
tively determined. In regard to logical domain, therefore, this infinite
judgment is merely limiting with regard to the COntent of cognition in
general, and to this extent it must not be omitted from the transcen­
dental table of all moments of thinking in judgments, since the function
of understanding that is hereby exercised may perhaps be important in
the field of its pure a priori cognition.7
3. All relationsb of thinking in judgments are those a) of the predicate
to the subject, b) of the ground to the consequence, and c) between the
cognition that is to be divided andc all of the members of the division.
In the first kind of judgment only two concepts are considered to be in
relation to each other, in the second, two judgments, and in the third,
several judgments. The hypothetical proposition "If there is perfect jus­
tice, then obstinate evil will be punished" really contains the relation of
two propositions, "There is a perfect justice" and "Obstinate evil is pun­
ished." Whether both of these propositions in themselves are true re­
mains unsettled here. It is only the implication that is thought by means
of this judgment. Finally, the disjunctive judgment contains the relations
of two or more propositions to One another, though not the relation of
sequence, but rather that of logical opposition, insofar as the sphere of
one judgment excludes that of the other, yet at the same time the rela­
tion of community, insofar as the judgments together exhaust the sphere
of cognition proper; it is therefore a relation of the parts of the sphere
of a cognition where the sphere of each part is the complement of that
of the others in the sum total of the divided cognition, e.g., "The world
exists either through blind chance, or through inner necessity, or
through an external cause." Each of these propositions occupies one
part of the sphere of the possible cognition about the existence of a
world in general, and together they occupy the entire sphere. To remove
the cognition from one of these spheres means to place it in one of the
a Following the first edition, Raum ihres Umfangs, rather than the second, Umfangs ihres
b

C

Raums.
Verhaltnisse; although he is now speaking of the functions of judgment the table had
listed under the latinate heading Relation, Kant now reverts to Verhaltnis, and in the re­
mainder of this paragraph Verhaltnis is translated by "relation." Kant's reversion to
Verhaltnis here is consistent with his use of this term elsewhere, since he is talking of the
relation of parts of judgments to each other rather than to us.
Kant's copy of the first edition replaces "and" with "of" (E XXXVI I, p. 2 3 ; 2 3 :45).

208

Section II. On the logical function in judgments

others, and to place it in one sphere, on the contrary, means to remove
it from the others. In a disjunctive judgment there is therefore a certain
community of cognitions, consisting in the fact that they mutually ex­
clude each other, yet thereby determine the true cognition in its en­
tirety, since taken together they constitute the entire content of a
particular given cognition.8 And this is also all that I find it necessary to
remark upon for the sake of what follows."
4. The modality of judgments is a quite special function of them,
which is distinctive in that it contributes nothing to the content of the
judgment (for besides quantity, quality, and relationb there is nothing
more that constitutes the content of a judgment), but rather concerns
only the value of the copula in relation to thinking in genera1.9
Problematic judgments are those in which one regards the assertion 6fdenial as merely possible (arbitrary). Assertoric judgments are those in
which it is considered actual (true). Apodictic judgments are those in
which it is seen as necessary. * Thus the two judgments whose relation
constitutes the hypothetical judgment (antecedens and consequens), as well
as those in whose reciprocal relatione the disjunctive judgment consists
(the members of the division), are all merely problematic. In the above
example the proposition "There is a perfect justice" is not said assertorically, but is only thought of as an arbitrary judgment that it is possible
that someone might assume, and only the implication is assertoric. Thus
such judgments can be obviously false and yet, if taken problematically,
conditions of the cognition of truth. Thus the judgment "The world
exists through blind chance" is of only problematic significance in the
disjunctive judgment, that is, someone might momentarily assume this
proposition, and yet it serves (like the designation of the false path
among the number of all of those one can take) to find the true one. The
problematic proposition is therefore that which only expresses logical
possibility (which is not objective), i.e., a free choice to allow such a
proposition to count as valid, a merely arbitrary assumption of it in the
understanding. The assertoric proposition speaks of logical actuality or
truth, as say in a hypothetical syllogism the antecedent in the major
premise is problematic, but that in the minor premise assertoric, and in* It is just as if in the first case thought were a function of the understanding,
in the second of the power of judgment, and in the third of reason. This is
a remark the elucidation of which can be expected only in the sequel.
n

b

The following note occurs in Kant's copy of the first edition: "Judgments and proposi­
tions are different. That the latter are verbis expressa [explicit words] , since they are as­
sertoric" (E XXXVIII, p. 2 3 ; 2 3 :25).

Verhdltnis
, Wechselwirkung
209

B r oo

A 75

B IO I

A 76

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk I. Ch. I

dicates that the proposition is already bound to the understanding ac­
cording to its laws; the apodictic proposition thinks of the assertoric one
as determined through these laws of the understanding itself, and as
thus asserting a priori, and in this way expresses logical necessity. Now
since everything here is gradually incorporated into the understanding,
so that one first judges something problematically, then assumes it as­
sertorically as true, and finally asserts it to be inseparably connected
with the understanding, i.e., asserts it as necessary and apodictic, these
three functions of modality can also be called so many moments of
thinking in general.
B I02

On the Clue to the Discovery of all Pure
Concepts of the Understanding
Third Section
<§ I O. >
On the pure concepts of the understanding
or categories.
As

A 77

E

I03

has already been frequently said, general logic abstracts from all con­
tent of cognition, and expects that representations will be given to it
from elsewhere, wherever this may be, in order for it to transform them
into concepts analytically. Transcendental logic, on the contrary, has a
manifold of sensibility that lies before it a priori, which the transcendental aesthetic has offered to it, in order to provide the pure concepts
of the understanding with a matter, without which they would be with­
out any content, thus completely empty. Now space and time contain a
manifold of pure a priori intuition, but belong nevertheless among the
conditions of the receptivity of our mind, under which alone it can re­
ceive representations of objects, and thus they must always also affect
the concept of these objects. Only the spontaneity of our thought re­
quires that this manifold first be gone through, taken up, and combined
in a certain way in order for a cognition to be made out of it. I call this
action synthesis.
By synthesis in the most general sense, however, I understanda the
action of putting different representations together with each other and
comprehending their manifoldness in one cognition. Such a synthesis is
pure if the manifold is given not empirically but a priori (as is that in
space and time). Prior to all analysis of our representations these must
first be given, and no concepts can arise analytically as far as the COlla In his copy of the first edition, Kant changes this sentence to this point to "1 under­

stand by synthesis, however, the action through which synthetic judgments come to be,
in the general sense, .
" (E XXXIX, p. 2 3 ; 2 3 '45). Kant also adds the words
"Combination, composition, and nexus" (E XL, p. 24)·
.

.

2 10

Section III. On the pure concepts of the understanding

a

tent is concerned. The synthesis of a manifold, however, (whether it
be given empirically or a priorz) first brings forth a cognition, which to
be sure may initially still be raw and confused, and thus in need of
analysis; yet the synthesis alone is that which properly collects the elements for cognitions and unifies them into a certain content; it is therefore the first thing to which we have to attend if we wish to judge about
the first origin of our cognition.
Synthesis in general is, as we shall subsequently see, the mere effect
of the imagination, of a blind though indispensable function of the
souI,b without which we would have no cognition at all, but of which we
are seldom even conscious. Yet to bring this synthesis to concepts is a
function that pertains to the understanding, and by means of which it
first provides cognition in the proper sense."
Now pure synthesis, generally represented, yields the pure concept of the understanding. By this synthesis, however, I understand that
which rests on a ground of synthetic unity a priori; thus our counting (as
is especially noticeable in the case of larger numbers) is a synthesis in
accordance with concepts, since it takes place in accordance with a
common ground of unity (e.g., the decad). Under this concept, therefore, the synthesis of the manifold becomes necessary.
Different representations are brought under one concept analyti­
cally (a business treated by general logic). Transcendental logic, how­
ever, teaches how to bring under concepts not the representations but
the pure synthesis of representations. The first thing that must be
given to us a priori for the cognition of all objects is the manifold of
pure intuition; the synthesis of this manifold by means of the imagination is the second thing, but it still does not yield cognition. The
concepts that give this pure sythesis unity, and that consist solely in the
representation of this necessary synthetic unity, are the third thing necessary for cognition of an object that comes before us, and they depend
on the understanding. 1 0
The same function that gives unity to the different representations in
a judgment also gives unity to the mere synthesis of different representations in an intuition, which, expressed generally, is called the pure
concept of understanding. I I The same understanding, therefore, and indeed by means of the very same actions through which it brings the logical form of a judgment into concepts by means of the analytical unity,
also brings a transcendental content into its representations by means of
a In the first edition, the right-hand running head is " Section III. On the pure concepts
b

of understanding or categories"
In his copy of the first edition Kant replaces this clause with "of a function of the un­
derstanding" (E XLI, p. 24; 2 3 :45).

, in eigentlicher Bedeutung
211

A 78

B I04

A 79

B IOS

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk I. Ch. I

A80

the synthetic unity of the manifold in intuition in general, on account of
which they are called pure concepts of the understanding that pertain to
objects a a priori; this can never be accomplished by universal logic.
In such a way there arise exactly as many pure concepts of the un­
derstanding, which apply to objects of intuition in general a priori, as
there were logical functions of all possible judgments in the previous
table: for the understanding is completely exhausted and its capacity b
entirely measured by these functions.c Following Aristotle we will call
these concepts categories, for our aim is basically identical with his al­
though very distant from it in execution.d

B 106

Table of CategoriesIZ
I.

O f Quantity
Unity
Plurality
Totality
2.

3·
Of Relation'
Of Inherence and Subsistence
(substantia et accidens)
Of Causality and Dependence
(cause and effect)
Of Community (reciprocity
between agent and patient)

Of Quality
Reality
Negation
Limitation

4·
Of Modality
. Possibility - Impossibility
Existence - Non-existence
Necessity - Contingency
n

Objecte

b Vermijgen

, gedachte Functionen

,I

The following notes precede the ensuing table of the categories in Kant's copy of tbe
first edition:
"Logical functions are only forms for tbe relation of concepts in tbinking. Categor­
ies are concepts, through which certain intuitions are determined in regard to tbe syn­
thetic unity of tbeir consciousness as contained under tbese functions; e.g., what must
be tbought as subject and not as predicate." (E XLII, p. 24; 2 3 :25)
"On the use of the categories in tbe division of a system.
"On tbe analytic of tbe categories and tbe predicables.
"On a characteristic of concepts; of intellectual, empirical, and pure sensible represen­
tations.

,

" - Lex originaria: concept of tbe understanding." (E XLIII, p. 2 4; 2 3: 2 5)
Relation
2 12

Section III. On the pure concepts of the understanding

Now this is the listing of all original pure concepts of synthesisa that
the understanding contains in itself a priori, and on account of which it
is only a pure understanding; for by these concepts alone can it understand something in the manifold of intuition, i.e., think an objectb for
it. This division is systematically generated from a common principle,"
namely the faculty for judging (which is the same as the faculty for
thinking), and has not arisen rhapsodically from a haphazard search for
pure concepts, of the completeness of which one could never be certain,
since one would only infer it through induction, without reflecting that
in this way one would never see why just these and not other concepts
should inhabit the pure understanding. ruistotle's search for these fun­
damental concepts was an effort worthy of an acute man. But since he
had no principle,d he rounded them up as he stumbled on them, and
first got up a list of ten of them, which he called categories (predicaments). Subsequently he believed that he had found five more of them,
which he added under the name of post-pre dicaments. But his table still
had holes. Further, it also included several modi of pure sensibility
(quando, ubi, situs, as well as prius, simul,) e as well as an empirical one
(motus)/ which do not belong in this ancestral registryg of the under­
standing; derivative concepts were also included among the primary
ones (actio, passio),h and several of the latter were entirely missing.
For the sake of the primary concepts it is therefore still necessary to
remark that the categories, as the true ancestral conceptsi of pure un­
derstanding, also have their equally pure derivativej concepts, which
could by no means be passed over in a complete system of transcen­
dental philosophy, but with the mere mention of which I can be satisfied in a merely critical essay.
Let me be allowed to call these pure but derivative concepts the
predicables of pure understanding (in contrast to the predicaments). If
one has the original and primitive concepts, the derivative and subalternate ones can easily be added, and the family treek of pure under­
standing fully illustrated. Since I am concerned here not with the
a

The words "of synthesis" are stricken in Kant's copy of the first edition ( E XLIV, p. 24;
2 3 :46).

b Object

, Princip
d Principium

That is, the concepts of when, where, and position, and the relations of priority and simultaneity.
f motion
e

g
h

Stammregister
action, passion

, Stammbegriffe

J

k

Clearly emphasized only in the first edition.

Stammbaum
213

A8I
B 107

A82
B 108

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk 1. Ch. I

A83

B 1 09

completeness of the system but rather only with the principlesa for a
system, I reserve this supplementation for another job. But one could
readily reach this aim if one took the ontological textbooks in hand,
and, e.g., under the category of causality, subordinated the predicables
of force, action, and passion; under that of community, those of pres­
ence and resistance; under the predicaments of modality those of gen­
eration, corruption, alteration, and so on. The categories combined
either with the modis of sensibility or with each other yield a great mul­
titude of derivative a priori concepts, to take note of which and, as far as
possible, completely catalogue would be a useful and not unpleasant but
here dispensable effort.
I deliberately spare myself the definitions of these categories in this
treatise, although I should like to be in possession of them. 13 In the se­
quel I will analyze these concepts to the degree that is sufficient in relation to the doctrine of method that I am working up. In a system of
pure reason one could rightly demand these of me; but here they would
only distract us from the chief point of the investigation by arousing
doubts and objections that can well be referred to another occasion
without detracting from our essential aim. In any case, from the little
that I have here adduced it becomes clear that a complete lexicon with
all the requisite definitions should be not only possible but even easy to
produce. The headings already exist; it is merely necessary to fill them
out, and a systematic topic, such as the present one, will make it easy
not to miss the place where every concept properly belongs and at the
same time will make it easy to notice any that is still empty.b
<§ 1 1 . c
Subtle considerations about this table of categories could be made,
which could perhaps have considerable consequences with regard to the
scientific form of all cognitions of reason. For that this table is uncom­
monly useful, indeed indispensable in the theoretical part of philosophy
for completely outlining the plan for the whole of a science insofar
as it rests on a priori concepts, and dividing it mathematically in ac­
cordance with determinate principles,d is already self-evident from
the fact that this table completely contains all the elementary concepts
a

b

Principien

Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition:
"What are categories? - - That they extend only to objects of experience.
" I . Whence do they arise?
"
2 . How are they valid a priori of objects of experience?" ( E XLV; pp. 24-5; 2 3 : 2 5)
, Sections I I and 1 2 were added in the second edition. This explains how Kant can refer
to the Metaphysical Foundations o/Natural SCience, not published until 1 786.

d

Principien
214

Section III. On the pure concepts of the understanding

of the understanding, indeed even the form of a system of them in the
human understanding, consequently that it gives instruction about all
the moments, indeed even of their order, of a planned speculative science, as I have elsewhere given proof.* Now here are several of these
remarks.
The first is that this table, which contains four classes of concepts of
the understanding, can first be split into two divisions, the first of which
is concerned with objects of intuition (pure as well as empirical), the
second of which, however, is directed at the existence of these objects
(either in relation to each other or to the understanding).
I will call the first class the mathematical categories, the second, the
dynamical ones. As one sees, the first class has no correlates, which are
to be met with only in the second class. Yet this difference must have a
ground in the nature of the understanding.
Second remark: that each class always has the same number of cat­
egories, namely three, which calls for reflection, since otherwise all a
priori division by means of concepts must be a dichotomy. But here the
third category always arises from the combination of the first two in its
class.
Thus allness (totality) is nothing other than plurality considered as a
unity, limitation is nothing other than reality combined with negation,
community is the causality of a substance in the reciprocal determination of others, finally necessity is nothing other than the existence that
is given by possibility itself. But one should not think that the third category is therefore a merely derivative one and not an ancestral concept
of pure understanding. For the combination of the first and second in
order to bring forth the third concept requires a special act of the un­
derstanding, which is not identical with that act performed in the first
and second. Thus the concept of a number (which belongs to the category of allness) is not always possible wherever the concepts of multitude and of unity are (e.g., in the representation of the infinite); or
influence, i.e., how one substance can be the cause of something in another substance, is not to be understood immediately by combining the
concept of a cause and that of a substance. From this it is clear that a
special act of the understanding is requisite for this; and likewise in the
other cases.
Third remark: The agreement of a single category, namely that of
community, which is to be found under the third title, with the form
of a disjunctive judgment, which is what corresponds to it in the table
of logical functions, is not as obvious as in the other cases.
In order to be assured of this agreement one must note that in all dis­
junctive judgments the sphere (the multitude of everything that is con* Metaphysical Foundations ofNatural Science.
215

B I IO

B III

B I 12

B I IO

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk I. Ch. I

B II3

tained under it) is represented as a whole divided into parts (the subor­
dinated concepts), and, since none of these can be contained under any
other, they are thought of as coordinated with one another, not sub­
ordinated, so that they do not determine each other unilaterally, as in
a series, but reciprocally, as in an aggregate (if one member of the di­
vision is posited, all the rest are excluded, and vice versa).
Now a similar connection is thought of in an entirety of things,
since one is not subordinated,a as effect, under another, as the cause of
its existence, but is rather coordinatedb with the other simultaneously
and reciprocally as cause with regard to its determination (e.g., in a
body, the parts of which reciprocally attract yet also repel each other),
which is an entirely different kind of connection from that which is to
be found in the mere relation' of cause to effect (of ground to con­
sequence), in which the consequence does not reciprocally determine
the ground and therefore does not constitute a whole with the latter (as
the world-creator with the world). The understanding follows the same
procedure when it represents the divided sphere of a concept as when
it thinks of a thing as divisible, and just as in the first case the members
of the division exclude each other and yet are connected in one sphere,
so in the latter case the parts are represented as ones to which existence
(as substances) pertains to each exclusively of the others, and which are
yet connected in one whole.
§ 12.
But there is also yet another chapter in the transcendental philosophy
of the ancients that contains pure concepts of the understanding that,
although they are not reckoned among the categories, nevertheless ac­
cording to them should also count as a priori concepts of objects, in
which case, however, they would increase the number of the categories,
which cannot be. These are expounded in the proposition, so famous
among the scholastics: quodlibet ens est unum, verum, bonum.d Now al­
though the use of this principlee for inferences has turned out to be very
meager (they have yielded merely tautological propositions), so that in
modern times it has been customary to grant it a place in metaphysics
almost solely by courtesy, nevertheless a thought that has sustained it­
self so long, no matter how empty it seems, always deserves an investi­
gation of its origin, and justifies the conjecture that it must have its
" untergeordnet
b beygeordnet
, Verhaitnis
d
e

Every being is one, true, and good.

Princips

2 16

Section III. On the pure concepts of the understanding

ground in some rule of the understanding, which, as so often happens,
has merely been falsely interpreted. These supposedly transcendental
predicates of things are nothing other than logical requisites and criteria of all cognition of things in general, and ground it in the categories
of quantity, namely, the categories of unity, plurality, and totality; yet
these categories must really have been taken as material, as belonging
to the possibility of things itself, when in fact they should have been
used in a merely formal sense, as belonging to the logical requirements
for every cognition; thus these criteria of thinking were carelessly made
into properties of things in themselves. In every cognition of an objecta
there is, namely, unity of the concept, which one can call qualitative
unity insofar as by that only the unity of the comprehensionb of the
manifold of cognition is thought, as, say, the unity of the theme in a
play, a speech, or a fable. Second, truth in respect of the consequences.
The more true consequences from a given concept, the more indication
of its objective reality. One could call this the qualitative plurality of
the marks that belong to a concept as a common ground (not thought
of in it as a magnitude). Third, finally, perfection, which consists in this
plurality conversely being traced back to the unity of the concept, and
agreeing completely with this one and no other one, which one can call
qualitative completeness (totality). From this it is obvious that these
logical criteria of the possibility of cognition in general transform the
three categories of magnitude,c in which the unity in the generation of
the magnituded must be assumed to be completely homogeneous, into
a principle ' with the quality of a cognition for the connection of het­
erogeneous elements of cognition into one consciousness also. Thus
the criterion of the possibility of a concept (not of its object)! is the definition, in which the unity of the concept, the truth of everything that
may initially be derived from it, and finally the completeness of everything that is drawn from it, constitute everything that is necessary for
the production of the entire concept; or the criterion of a hypothesis
"
is also the intelligibility of the assumel ground of explanation or its
unity (without auxiliary hypotheses), the truth (agreement with itself
and with experience) of the consequences that are derived from it, and
finally the completeness of the ground of explanation of these conse­
quences, which do not refer us back to anything more or less than was
already assumed in the hypothesis, and which merely analytically give
back a posteriori and agree with that which was thought synthetically a

a

Objects

b Zusammenfassung

, Grofe
Quantum
, Princips
f Objects
d

217

B

1 14

B I I5

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. 1. Bk 1. Ch. I

priori. The transcendental table of the categories is thus not com­
pleted with the concepts of unity, truth, and perfection, as if it were
lacking something, but rather, the relationa of these concepts to objects b
being entirely set aside, our procedure with these concepts is only being
thought under general logical rules for the agreement of cognition with
itself.>
-

B I 16

Verhiiltnis
b Objecte
a

218

The Transcendental Analytic
Second Chapter
On the Deduction of the Pure Concepts of
the Understanding

First Section
<§ 1 3 ·>a
On the
principlesb of a transcendental deduction in general. '4
cJurists, when they speak of entitlements and claims, distinguish in a
legal matter between the questions about what is lawfuld (quidjuris) and
a

b

Paragraph number added in the second edition. In the first edition, the second chapter
of the "Transcendental Analytic," the "Transcendental Deduction," is divided into three
main sections, the first of which is in turn subdivided into two subsections. Apart from
a few minor changes in wording, which will be noted, and the addition of the section
numbers themselves, the two subsections of the first section are retained in the second
edition and are identical until the last paragraph of their second subsection, which is re­
placed by three new paragraphs in the second edition. The second and third sections of
the chapter in the first edition are then replaced by an entirely new second section in
the second edition, which is broken up into numbered paragraphs § ' 5 through § 2 7 .
We will present all o f this material i n the following sequence: the first section a s it ap­
peared in both editions, with the last paragraph of the first-edition version followed by
the last three paragraphs that replaced it in the second edition; the second and third sec­
tions as they appeared in the first edition; then the second section, consisting of num­
bered parts § ' 5 through § 2 7 , as it appeared in the second edition.

Principien

, The following notes are inserted here in Kant's copy of the first edition:
"Consciousness and inner sense are different. 'I think' is spontaneity and does not
depend on any object. The representation, however, with which I think, must be given
to me antecedently in intuition (through imagination). With regard to it I am affected."
(E XLVI, p. 25; 2 3 =26)
"It must be proved that if there were no sensible intuition a priori, and if this were
not the form of sensibility in the subject, with which all appearances must be in accord,
then:
" 1 . No categories would have significance.
" 2 . From mere categories no synthetic a priori propositions at all would be possible."
(E XLVII, p. 2 5 ; 2 3 '26)
d

was Rechtens ist

2 19

A 84

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II

B II7

A8S

B I 18

A86

that which concerns the fact (quid facti), and since they demand proof
of both, they call the first, that which is to establish the entitlement or
the legal claim, the deduction.'s We make use of a multitude of em­
pirical concepts without objection from anyone, and take ourselves to
be justified in granting them a sense and a supposed signification even
without any deduction, because we always have experience ready at
hand to prove their objective reality. But there are also concepts that
have been usurped, such as fortune and fate, which circulate with al­
most universal indulgence, but that are occasionally called upon to es­
tablish their claim by the question quid juris, and then there is not a
little embarrassment about their deduction because one can adduce no
clear legal ground for an entitlement to their use either from experience
or from reason.
Among the many concepts, however, that constitute the very mixed
fabric of human cognition, there are some that are also destineda for
pure use a priori (completely independently of all experience), and these
always require a deduction of their entitlement, since proofs from ex­
perience are not sufficient for the lawfulness of such a use, and yet one
must know how these concepts can be related to objectsb that they do
not derive from any experience. I therefore call the explanation of the
way in which concepts can relate to objects a priori their transcenden­
tal deduction, and distinguish this from the empirical deduction,
which shows how a concept is acquired through experience and reflec­
tion on it, and therefore concerns not the lawfulness but the fact from
which the possession has arisen.
Now we already have two sorts of concepts of an entirely different
kind,c which yet agree with each other in that they both relate to objects
completely a priori, namely the concepts of space and time, as forms of
sensibility, and the categories, as concepts of the understanding. To seek
an empirical deduction of them would be entirely futile work, for what
is distinctive in their nature is precisely that they are related to their ob­
jects without having borrowed anything from experience for their rep­
resentation. Thus if a deduction of them is necessary, it must always be
transcendental.
Nevertheless, in the case of these concepts, as in the case of all cog­
nition, we can search in experience, if not for the principled of their
possibility, then for the occasional causes of their generation, where the
impressions of the senses provide the first occasion for opening the ena bestimmt
b Objecte

, Kant's copy of the first edition inserts: "They are not borrowed from experience"
(E XLVIII, p. 25; 2 3 :46).
d

Principium

220

Section 1. On the principles of a transcendental deduction

tire power of cognition to them and for bringing about experience,
which contains two very heterogeneous elements, namely a matter for
cognition from the senses and a certain fonn for ordering it from the
inner source of pure intuiting and thinking, which, on the occasion of
the former, are first brought into use and bring forth concepts. Such a
tracing of the first endeavors of our power of cognition to ascend from
individual perceptions to general concepts is without doubt of great
utility, and the famous Locke is to be thanked for having first opened
the way for this. Yet a deduction of the pure a priori concepts can never
be achieved in this way; it does not lie down this path at all, for in regard to their future use, which should be entirely independent of experience, an entirely different birth certificate than that of an ancestry
from experiences must be produced. I will therefore call this attempted
physiological derivation,1 6 which cannot properly be called a deduction
at all because it concerns a quaestio jacti,a the explanation of the possession of a pure cognition. It is therefore clear that only a transcendental
and never an empirical deduction of them can be given, and that in regard to pure a priori concepts empirical deductions are nothing but idle
attempts, which can occupy only those who have not grasped the entirely distinctive nature of these cognitions.
But now even if the sole manner of a possible deduction of pure a pri­
ori cognition is conceded, namely that which takes the transcendental
path, it is still not obvious that it is unavoidably necessary. We have
above traced the concepts of space and time to their sources by means
of a transcendental deduction, and explained and determined their a priori objective validity. Geometry nevertheless follows its secure course
through strictly a priori cognitions without having to beg philosophy for
any certification of the pure and lawful pedigree of its fundamental concept of space. Yet the use of theb concept in this science concerns only
the external world of the senses, of which space is the pure form of its
intuition, and in which therefore all geometrical cognition is immediately evident because it is grounded on intuition a priori, and the objects
are given through the cognition itself a priori in intuition (as far as their
form is concerned). With the pure concepts of the understanding,
however, there first arises the unavoidable need to search for the tran­
scendental deduction not only of them but also of space, for since they
speak of objects not through predicates of intuition and sensibility but
through those of pure a priori thinking, they relate to objects generally
without any conditions of sensibility; and since they are not grounded in
experience and cannot exhibit any objectC in a priori intuition on which
a As in the first edition; the second, declining quaestio, prints quaestionem.
b

The first edition here reads "dieses" instead of the second's "des. "

, Object

221

B 1 19

A 87

B 120

A88

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II

B121

A89

B 122

A90

to ground their synthesis prior to any experience, they not only arouse
suspicion about the objective validity and limits of their use but also
make the concept of space ambiguous by inclining us to use it beyond
the conditions of sensible intuition, on which account a transcendental
deduction of it was also needed above. Thus the reader must be con­
vinced of the unavoidable necessity of such a transcendental deduction
before he has taken a single step in the field of pure reason; for he would
otherwise proceed blindly, and after much wandering around would still
have to return to the ignorance from which he had begun. But he must
also clearly understand from the outset its inevitable difficulty, so that
he will not complain of obscurity where the subject-matter itself is
deeply veiled or become annoyed too soon over the removal of hindrances, since we must either surrender completely all claims to insights
of pure reason in its favorite field, namely that beyond the boundaries
of all possible experience, or else perfect this critical investigation.
In the case of the concepts of space and time, we were able above to
make comprehensible with little effort how these, as a priori cognitions,
must nevertheless necessarily relate to objects, and made possible a syn­
thetic cognition of them independent of all experience. For since an ob­
ject can appear to us only by means of such pure forms of sensibility,
i.e., be an objecta of empirical intuition, space and time are thus pure
intuitions that contain a priori the conditions of the possibility of ob­
jects as appearances, and the synthesis in them has objective validity.
The categories of the understanding, on the contrary, do not repre­
sent to us the conditions under which objects are given in intuition at
all, hence objects can indeed appear to us without necessarily having to
be related to functions of the understanding, and therefore without the
understanding containing their a priori conditions. '7 Thus a difficulty is
revealed here that we did not encounter in the field of sensibility, .
namely how subjective conditions of thinking should have objective
validity, i.e., yield conditions of the possibility of all cognition of
objects; for appearances can certainly be given in intuition without
functions of the understanding. I take, e.g., the concept of cause, which
signifies a particular kind of synthesis, in which given something A
something entirely different B is posited according to a rule.b It is not
clear a priori why appearances should contain anything of this sort (one
cannot adduce experiences for the proof, for the objective validity of
this a priori concept must be able to be demonstrated), and it is there­
fore a priori doubtful whether such a concept is not perhaps entirely
empty and finds no object anywhere among the appearances. For that
a Object
b Emended in Kant's copy of the first edition to "posited according to an a priori rule, i.e.,
necessarily" (E XLIX, p. 25; 2 3 '46).

222

Section 1. On the principles of a transcendental deduction

objects of sensible intuition must accord with the formal conditions of
sensibility that lie in the mind a priori is clear from the fact that otherwise they would not b e objects for us; but that they must also accord
with the conditions that the understanding requires for the synthetic
unitya of thinking is a conclusion that is not so easily seen.b For ap­
pearances could after all be so constituted that the understanding would
not find them in accord with the conditions of its unity, and everything
would then lie in such confusion that, e.g., in the succession of appearances nothing would offer itself that would furnish a rule of synthesis
and thus correspond to the concept of cause and effect, so that this concept would therefore be entirely empty, nugatory, and without significance. Appearances would nonetheless offer objects to our intuition, for
intuition by no means requires the functions of thinking.
If one were to think of escaping from the toils of these investigations
by saying that experience constantly offers examples of a regularity of
appearances that give sufficient occasion for abstracting the concept
of cause from them, and thereby at the same time thought to confirm
the objective validity of such a concept, then one has not noticed that
the concept of cause cannot arise in this way at all, but must either be
grounded in the understanding completely a priori or else be entirely
surrendered as a mere fantasy of the brain. For this concept always requires that something A be of such a kind that something else B follows
from it necessarily and in accordance with an absolutely universal
rule. Appearances may well offer cases from which a rule is possible in
accordance with which something usually happens, but never a rule in
accordance with which the succession is necessary; thus to the synthesis of cause and effect there attaches a dignity that can never be expressed empirically, namely, that the effect does not merely come along
with the cause, but is posited through it and follows from it. The strict
universality of the rule is therefore not any property of empirical rules,
which cannot acquire anything more through induction than comparative universality, i.e., widespread usefulness. But now the use of the pure
concepts of the understanding would be entirely altered if one were to
treat them only as empirical products.
Following Erdmann in reading "Einheit" for "Einsicht"; Kant uses "Einheit" in a parallel
fashion in the next sentence.
b Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "If I were simply to say that without the
connection of causes and effects I would not grasp the sequence of alterations, it would
not at all follow from this that this must be precisely as an understanding needs it to
be to grasp it, but I would not be able to explain whence they continuously follow one
another. Only I would not raise this question if I did not already have the concept of
cause and of the necessity of such persistence. A subjective necessity, habit, would
make it worse. An implanted necessity would not prove necessity." (E L, pp. 2 5-6;
2 3:26)
a

223

B 123

A91

B 124

A92

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. 1. Bk. I. Ch. II

"Transition
to the transcendental deduction of the categories.

B 125

A 93

B 126

There are only two possible cases in which synthetic representation and
its objects can come together, necessarily relate to each other, and, as it
were, meet each other: Either if the object alone makes the representation possible, or if the representation alone makes the object possible.
If it is the first, then this relation is only empirical, and the representa­
tion is never possible a priori. And this is the case with appearance in re­
spect of that in it which belongs to sensation. But if it is the second,
then since representation in itself (for we are not here talking about its
causality by means of the will) does not produce its object as far as its
existence is concerned, the representation is still determinant of the
object a priori if it is possible through it alone to cognize something as
an object. But there are two conditions under which alone the cogni­
tion of an object is possible: first, intuition, through which it is given,
but only as appearance; second, concept, through which an object is
thought that corresponds to this intuition. It is clear from what has
been said above, however, that the first condition, namely that under
which alone objects can be intuited, in fact does lieh in the mind a pri­
ori as the ground of the form of objects.' All appearances therefore nec­
essarily agree with this formal condition of sensibility, because only
through it can they appear, i.e., be empirically intuited and given. The
question now is whether a priori concepts do not also precede, as con­
ditions under which alone something can be, if not intuited, neverthe­
less thought as object in general, for then all empirical cognition of
objects is necessarily i n accord with such concepts, since without their
presupposition nothing is possible as objectd of experience. Now,
however, all experience contains in addition to the intuition of the
senses, through which something is given, a concept of an object that
is given in intuition, or appears; I S hence concepts of objects in general
lie at the ground of all experiential cognition as a priori conditions; con­
sequently the objective validity of the categories, as a priori concepts,
rests on the fact that through them alone is experience possible (as far
as the form of thinking is concerned). For they then are related neces­
sarily and a priori to objects of experience, since only by means of them
can any object of experience be thought at all.
a No section number appears here in the second edition, but "§ 1 4" should have been
added to avoid an unnumbered section between § 13 and § 1 5 .
"liegt" for "liegen "; Kant seems to have confused the sin­
gular antecedent (Bedingnng) with the plural, perhaps because of the intervening occur­
rence of the plural "objects."

b Following Erdmann i n reading

C

d

Objecten
Object
224

Section I. On the principles of a transcendental deduction

The transcendental deduction of all a priori concepts therefore has a
principle toward which the entire investigation must be directed,
namely this: that they must be recognized as a priori conditions of the
possibility of experiences (whether of the intuition that is encountered
in them, or of the thinking). '9 Concepts that supply the objective
ground of the possibility of experience are necessary just for that reason. The unfolding of the experience in which they are encountered,
however, is not their deduction (but their illustration), since they would
thereby be only contingent. Without this original relation to possible
experience, in which all objects o f cognition are found, their relation to
any objectb could not be comprehended at all.
{[There are, however, three original sources (capacities or faculties of
the soul), which contain the conditions of the possibility of all experience, and cannot themselves be derived from any other faculty of the
mind, namely sense, imagination, and apperception. On these are
grounded I) the synopsis of the manifold a priori through sense; 2 ) the
synthesis of this manifold through the imagination; finally 3) the unity
of this synthesis through original apperception. In addition to their
empirical use, all of these faculties have a transcendental one, which is
concerned solely with form, and which is possible a priori. We have dis­
cussed this with regard to the senses in the first part above, however,
we will now attempt to understand the nature of the two other ones.]
d<The famous Locke, from neglect of this consideration, and because
he encountered pure concepts of the understanding in experience, also
derived them from this experience, and thus proceeded so inconsistently that he thereby dared to make attempts at cognitions that go far
beyond the boundary of all experience. David Hume recognized that in
order to be able to do the latter it is necessary that these concepts would
have to have their origin a priori. But since he could not explain at all
how it is possible for the understanding to think of concepts that in
themselves are not combined in the understanding as still necessarily
combined in the object, and it never occurred to him that perhaps the
understanding itself, by means of these concepts, could be the originator of the experience in which its objects are encountered, he thus,
driven by necessity, derived them from experience (namely from a subjective necessity arisen from frequent association in experience, which
is subsequently falsely held to be objective, i.e., custom);e however he
a Principium
b

Object

, This paragraph in the first edition is omitted in the second and replaced by three that
here follow it.
d The next three paragraphs are added in the second edition, replacing the previous one.

,

Gewohnheit

225

A 94

B 127

A 95
B I27

Doctrine of Elements. Pc II. Div. L Bk. I. Ch. II

B 128

B 129

A95

subsequently proceeded quite consistently in declaring it to be impos­
sible to go beyond the boundary of experience with these concepts and
the principles that they occasion. The empirical derivation,however, to
which both of them resorted, cannot b e reconciled with the reality of
the scientific cognition a priori that we possess, that namely of pure
mathematics and general natural science, and is therefore refuted by
the fact.a
The first of these two famous men opened the gates wide to enthu­
siasm, since reason, once it has authority on its side, will not be kept
within limits by indeterminate recommendations of moderation; the
second gave way entirely to skepticism, since he believed himself to
have discovered in what is generally held to be reason a deception of
our faculty of cognition. - We are now about to make an attempt to see
whether we cannot successfully steer human reason between these two
cliffs, assign its determinate boundaries, and still keep open the entire
field of its purposive activity.
I will merely precede this with the explanation of the categories.
They are concepts of an object in general, by means of which its intu­
ition is regarded as determined with regard to one of the logical func­
tions for judgments.2o Thus, the function of the categorical judgment
was that of the relationship of the subject to the predicate, e.g., "All
bodies are divisible." Yet in regard to the merely logical use of the un­
derstanding it would remain undetermined which of these two concepts
will b e given the function of the subject and which will b e given that of
the predicate. For one can also say: "Something divisible is a body."
Through the category of substance, however, if I bring the concept of
a body under it, it is determined that its empirical intuition in experi­
ence must always be considered as subject, never as mere predicate; and
likewise with all the other categories.>

The Deduction of the Pure Concepts of the
Understanding
Second Section
bOn the a priori grounds for the possibility

of experience.
It is entirely contradictory and impossible that a concept should be
generated completely a priori and be related to an object although it
a das Factum
b What follows is the version of the "Transcendental Deduction" as it appeared in the

first edition, where it is divided into the second and third sections of the present chap­
ter. In the second edition, these two sections will be replaced by a single second section,
divided into subsections numbered from § I S to § 2 7 . See B I 2 9-69 below.
226

Section II. Grounds of the possibility of experience <A>

neither belongs itself within the concept of possible experience nor
consists of elements of a possible experience. For it would then have no
content, since no intuition would correspond to it though intuitions in
general, through which objects can be given to us, constitute the field
or the entire object of possible experience. An a priori concept that was
not relateda to the latter would be only the logical form for a concept,
but not the concept itself through which something would be thought.
If there are pure a priori concepts, therefore, they can certainly con­
tain nothing empirical; they must nevertheless be strictly a priori condi­
tions for a possible experience, as that alone on which its objective
reality can rest.
Hence if one wants to know how pure concepts of the understanding
are possible, one must inquire what are the a priori conditions on which
the possibility of experience depends and that ground it even if one ab­
stracts from everything empirical in the appearances. A concept that ex­
presses this formal and objective condition of experience universally
and sufficiently would be called a pure concept of the understanding.
Once I have pure concepts of the understanding, I can also think up objects that are perhaps impossible, or that are perhaps possible in themselves but cannot be given in any experience since in the connection of
their concepts something may be omitted that yet necessarily belongs
to the condition of a possible experience (the concept of a spirit), or
perhaps pure concepts of the understanding will be extended further
than experience can grasp (the concept of God). But the elements for
all a priori cognitions, even for arbitrary and absurd fantasies, cannot indeed be borrowed from experience (for then they would not be a priori
cognitions), but must always contain the pure a priori conditions of a
possible experience and of an object of it, for otherwise not only would
nothing at all be thought through them, but also without data they
would not even be able to arise in thinking at all.
Now these concepts, which contain a priori the pure thinking in every
experience, we find in the categories, and it is already a sufficient de­
duction of them and justification of their objective validity if we can
prove that by means of them alone an object can be thought. But since
in such a thought there is more at work than the single faculty of thinking, namely the understanding, and the understanding itself, as a faculty
of cognition that is to be related to objects,b also requires an elucidation
of the possibility of this relation, we must first assess not the empirical
but the transcendental constitution of the subjective sources that comprise the a priori foundations for the possibility of experience.
If every individual representation were entirely foreign to the other, as
a beziige
b Objecte
227

A96

A97

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II <A>

A98

it were isolated and separated from it, then there would never arise any­
thing like cognition, which is a whole of compared and connected rep­
resentations. If therefore I ascribe a synopsis to sense, because it contains
a manifold in its intuition, a synthesis must always correspond to this,
and receptivity can make cognitions possible only if combined with
spontaneity. This is now the ground of a threefold synthesis, which is
necessarily found in all cognition: that, namely, of the apprehension of
the representations, as modifications of the mind in intuition; of the re­
production of them in the imagination; and of their recognition in the
concept.21 Now these direct us toward three subjective sources of cogni­
tion, which make possible even the understanding and, through the latter, all experience as an empirical product of understanding.

Preliminary reminder
The deduction of the categories is connected with so many difficulties,
and necessitates such deep penetration into the primary grounds of the
possibility of our cognition in general, that in order to avoid the long­
windedness of a complete theory and nevertheless not to omit anything
in such a necessary inquiry, I have found it more advisable to prepare
than to instruct the reader in the following four numbers, and only then
to represent the exposition of these elements of the understanding sys­
tematically in the immediately following third section.a For this reason
the reader should until then not be deterred by the obscurity that is ini­
tially unavoidable in a path that is thus far entirely unexplored, but
which will, as I hope, be completely illuminated in that section.

1.
On the synthesis
of apprehension in the intuition.

A 99

Wherever our representations may arise, whether through the influ­
ence of external things or as the effect of inner causes, whether they
have originated a priori or empirically as appearances - as modifications
of the mind they nevertheless belong to inner sense, and as such all of
our cognitions are in the end subjected to the formal condition of inner
sense, namely time, as that in which they must all be ordered, con­
nected, and brought into relations. This is a general remark on which
one must ground everything that follows. 2 2
Every intuition contains a manifold in itself, which however would
not be represented as such if the mind did not distinguish the time in
the succession of impressions on one another; for as contained in one
a

The third section, beginning

at

AI l S.

228

Section II. Grounds of the possibility of experience <A>

moment no representation can ever be anything other than absolute
unity. Now in order for unity of intuition to come from this manifold
(as, say, in the representation of space), it is necessary first to run
through and then to take together this manifoldness, which action I call
the synthesis of apprehension, since it is aimed directly at the intu­
ition, which to be sure provides a manifold but can never effect this as
such, and indeed as contained in one representation, without the oc­
currence of such a synthesis.
Now this synthesis of apprehension must also be exercised a priori,
i.e., in regard to representations that are not empirical. For without it
we could have a priori neither the representations of space nor of time,
since these can be generated only through the synthesis of the manifold
that sensibility in its original receptivity provides. We therefore have a
pure synthesis of apprehension.

A 100

2.
O n the synthesis
of reproduction in the imagination.
It is, to be sure, a merely empirical law in accordance with which rep­
resentations that have often followed or accompanied one another are
finally associated with each other and thereby placed in a connection in
accordance with which, even without the presence of the object, one of
these representations brings about a transition of the mind to the other
in accordance with a constant rule. This law of reproduction, however,
presupposes that the appearances themselves are actually subject to
such a rule, and that in the manifold of their representations an accom­
paniment or succession takes place according to certain rules; for with­
out that our empirical imagination would never get to do anything
suitable to its capacity,a and would thus remain hidden in the interior of
the mind, like a dead and to us unknown faculty. If cinnabar were now
red, now black, now light, now heavy, if a human being were now
changed into this animal shape, now into that one, if on the longest day
the land were covered now with fruits, now with ice and snow, then my
empirical imagination would never even get the opportunity to think of
heavy cinnabar on the occasion of the representation of the color red;
or if a certain word were attributed now to this thing, now to that, or if
one and the same thing were sometimes called this, sometimes that,
without the governance of a certain rule to which the appearances are
already subjected in themselves, then no empirical synthesis of repro­
duction could take place.
There must therefore be something that itself makes possible this ren Vermogen

229

A 101

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. 1. Bk. 1. Ch. II <.A>

A I02

production of the appearances by being the a priori ground of a neces­
sary synthetic unity of them. One soon comes upon this if one recalls
that appearances are not things in themselves, but rather the mere play
of our representations, which in the end come down to determinations
of the inner sense. Now if we can demonstrate that even our purest a
priori intuitions provide no cognition except insofar as they contain the
sort of combination of the manifold that makes possible a thorough­
going synthesis of reproduction, then this synthesis of the imagination
would be grounded even prior to all experience on a priori principles,a
and one must assume a pure transcendental synthesis of this power,
which grounds even the possibility of all experience (as that which the
reproducibility of the appearances necessarily presupposes). Now it is
obvious that if I draw a line in thought, or think of the time from one
noon to the next, or even want to represent a certain number to myself,
I must necessarily first grasp one of these manifold representations after
another in my thoughts. But if I were always to lose the preceding rep­
resentations (the first parts of the line, the preceding parts of time, or
the successively represented units) from my thoughts and not repro­
duce them when I proceed to the following ones, then no whole repre­
sentation and none of the previously mentioned thoughts, not even the
purest and most fundamental representations of space and time, could
ever arise.
The synthesis of apprehension is therefore inseparably combined
with the synthesis of reproduction. And since the former constitutes the
transcendental ground of the possibility of all cognition in general (not
only of empirical cognition, but also of pure a priori cognition), the re­
productive synthesis of the imagination belongs among the transcen­
dental actions of the mind, and with respect to this we will also call this
faculty the transcendental faculty of the imagination.
3·
On the synthesis
of recognition in the concept.

A 103

WIthout consciousness that that which we think is the very same as
what we thought a moment before, all reproduction in the series of rep­
resentations would be in vain. For it would be a new representation in
our current state, which would not belong at all to the actb through
which it had been gradually generated, and its manifold would never
constitute a whole, since it would lack the unity that only consciousness
can obtain for it. If, in counting, I forget that the units that now hover
a Principien

b

Actus; up to this point Kant has been using the word Handlung.

230

Section II. Grounds of the possibility of experience <A>

before my senses were successively added to each other by me, then I
would not cognize the generation of the multitudea through this suc­
cessive addition of one to the other, and consequently I would not cog­
nize the number; for this concept consists solely in the consciousness of
this unity of the synthesis.
The word "concept" itself could already lead us to this remark. For it
is this one consciousness that unifies the manifold that has been suc­
cessively intuited, and then also reproduced, into one representation.
This consciousness may often only be weak, so that we connect it with
the generation of the representation only in the effect, but not in the
actb itself, i.e., immediately; but regardless of these differences one consciousness must always be found, even if it lacks conspicuous clarity, and
without that concepts, and with them cognition of objects, would be entirely impossible.
And here then it is necessary to make understood what is meant by
the expression "an object of representations." We have said above that
appearances themselves are nothing but sensible representations, which
must not be regarded in themselves, in the same way, as objects (outside
the power of representation). What does one mean, then, if one speaks
of an object corresponding to and therefore also distinct from the cog­
nition? It is easy to see that this object must be thought of only as some­
thing in general = X, since outside of our cognition we have nothing
that we could set over against this cognition as corresponding to it.
We find, however, that our thought of the relation of all cognition to
its object carries something of necessity with it, since namely the latter
is regarded as that which is opposed to our cognitions being determined
at pleasure or arbitrarily rather than being determined a priori, since in­
sofar as they are to relate to an object our cognitions must also necessarily agree with each other in relation to it, i.e., they must have that
unity that constitutes the concept of an object. 2 3
It is clear, however, that since we have to do only with the manifold
of our representations, and that X which corresponds to them (the ob­
ject), because it should be something distinct from all of our represen­
tations, is nothing for us, the unity that the object makes necessary can
be nothing other than the formal unity of the consciousness in the syn­
thesis of the manifold of the representations. Hence we say that we cog­
nize the object if we have effected synthetic unity in the manifold of
intuition. But this is impossible if the intuition could not have been pro­
duced through a function of synthesis in accordance with a rule that
makes the reproduction of the manifold necessary a priori and a concept
in which this manifold is united possible. Thus we think of a triangle as
a Menge
b

Actus
231

A 104

A 105

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. 1. Bk. 1. Ch. II <A>

A 106

A 107

an object by being conscious of the composition of three straight lines
in accordance with a rule according to which such an intuition can al­
ways be exhibited. Now this unity of rule determines every manifold,
and limits it to conditions that make the unity of apperception possible,
and the concept of this unity is the representation of the object = X,
which I think through those predicates of a triangle.
All cognition requires a concept, however imperfect or obscure it
may be; but as far as its form is concerned the latter is always something
general, and something that serves as a rule. Thus the concept of body
serves as the rule for our cognition of outer appearances by means of
the unity of the manifold that is thought through it. However, it can be
a rule of intuitions only if it represents the necessary reproduction of
the manifold of given intuitions, hence the synthetic unity in the con­
sciousness of them. Thus in the case of the perception of something
outside of us the concept of body makes necessary the representation of
extension, and with it that of impenetrability, of shape, etc.
Every necessity has a transcendental condition as its ground. A tran­
scendental ground must therefore be found for the unity of the con­
sciousness in the synthesis of the manifold of all our intuitions, hence
also of the concepts of objectsa in general, consequently also of all ob­
jects of experience, without which it would be impossible to think of any
object for our intuitions; for the latter is nothing more than the some­
thing for which the concept expresses such a necessityb of synthesis.
Now this original and transcendental condition is nothing other than
the transcendental apperception.24 The consciousness of oneself in
accordance with the determinations of our state in internal perception
is merely empirical, forever variable; it can provide no standing or abid­
ing self in this stream of inner appearances, and is customarily called
inner sense or empirical apperception. That which should necessar-:­
ily be represented as numerically identical cannot be thought of as such
through empirical data. There must be a condition that precedes all ex­
perience and makes the latter itself possible, which should make such a
transcendental presupposition valid.
Now no cognitions can occur in us, no connection and unity among
them, without that unity of consciousness that precedes all data of the
intuitions, and in relation to which all representation of objects is alone
possible. This pure, original, unchanging consciousness I will now
name transcendental apperception. That it deserves this name is al­
ready obvious from this, that even the purest objective unity, namely
that of the a priori concepts (space and time) is possible only through
the relation of the intuitions to it. The numerical unity of this appera Objecte

b

Following Erdmann, reading Nothwendigkeit for Nothwendig.

232

Section II. Grounds of the possibility of experience <A>

ception therefore grounds all concepts a priori, just as the manifoldness
of space and time grounds the intuitions of sensibility.
Just this transcendental unity of apperception, however, makes out of
all possible appearances that can ever come together in one experience
a connection of all of these representations in accordance with laws. 2 5
For this unity of consciousness would be impossible if in the cognition
of the manifold the mind could not become conscious of the identity of
the function by means of which this manifold is synthetically combined
into one cognition. Thus the original and necessary consciousness of
the identity of oneself is at the same time a consciousness of an equally
necessary unity of the synthesis of all appearances in accordance with
concepts, i.e., in accordance with rules that not only make them necessarily reproducible, but also thereby determine an object for their intuition, i.e., the concept of something in which they are necessarily
connected; for the mind could not possibly think of the identity of itself in the manifoldness of its representations, and indeed think this a
priori, if it did not have before its eyes the identity of its action, which
subjects all synthesis of apprehension (which is empirical) to a tran­
scendental unity, and first makes possible their connection in accordance with a priori rules. Further, we are now also able to determine our
concepts of an object in general more correctly. All representations, as
representations, have their object, and can themselves be objects of
other representations in turn. Appearances are the only objects that can
be given to us immediately, and that in them which is immediately related to the object is called !ntuition. However, these appearances are
not things in themselves, but themselves only representations, which in
turn have their object, which therefore cannot be further intuited by us,
and that may therefore be called the non-empirical, i.e., transcendental
object = X 2 6
The pure concept of this transcendental object (which in all of our
cognitions is really always one and the same X) is that which in all of
our empirical concepts in general can provide relation to an object, i.e.,
objective reality. Now this concept cannot contain any determinate in­
tuition at all, and therefore concerns nothing but that unity which
must be encountered in a manifold of cognition insofar as it stands in
relation to an object. This relation, however, is nothing other than the
necessary unity of consciousness, thus also of the synthesis of the man­
ifold through a common function of the mind for combining it in one
representation. Now since this unity must be regarded as necessary a
priori (since the cognition would otherwise be without an object), the
relation to a transcendental object, i.e., the objective reality of our empirical cognition, rests on the transcendental law that all appearances,
insofar as objects are to be given to us through them, must stand under
a priori rules of their synthetic unity, in accordance with which their re-

A r a8

A 109

=

233

A I 10

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II <A>

lationa in empirical intuition is alone possible, i.e., that in experience
they must stand under conditions of the necessary unity of appercep­
tion just as in mere intuition they must stand under the formal condi­
tions of space and time; indeed, it is through those conditions that
every cognition is first made possible.

4·
Provisional explanation of the possibility of the
categories as a priori cognitions.

AIII

There is only one experience, in which all perceptions are represented
as in thoroughgoing and lawlike connection, just as there is only one
space and time, in which all forms of appearance and all relationb of
being or non-being take place. If one speaks of different experiences,
they are only so many perceptions insofar as they belong to one and the
same universal experience. The thoroughgoing and synthetic unity of
perceptions is precisely what constitutes the form of experience, and it
is nothing other than the synthetic unity of the appearances in accor­
dance with concepts.
Unity of synthesis in accordance with empirical concepts would be
entirely contingent, and, were it not grounded on a transcendental
ground of unity, it would be possible for a swarm of appearances to fill
up our soul without experience ever being able to arise from it. But in
that case all relation of cognition to objects would also disappear, since
the appearances would lack connection in accordance with universal
and necessary laws, and would thus be intuition without thought, but
never cognition, and would therefore be as good as nothing for us.
The a priori conditions of a possible experience in general are at the
same time conditions of the possibility of the objects of experience,
Now I assert that the categories that have just been adduced are noth­
ing other than the conditions of thinking in a possible experience,
just as space and time contain the conditions of the intuition for the
very same thing. They are therefore also fundamental concepts for
thinking objectsC in general for the appearances, and they therefore
have a priori objective validity, which was just what we really wanted to
know.
However, the possibility, indeed even the necessity of these cate­
gories rests on the relation that the entire sensibility, and with it also all
possible appearances, have to the original apperception, in which every­
thing is necessarily in agreement with the conditions of the thorougha Verha/tnis
b Verhaltnis
Objecte
,

2 34

Section II. Grounds of the possibility of experience <A>

going unity of self-consciousness, i.e., must stand under universal functions of synthesis, namely o f the synthesis in accordance with concepts,
as that in which alone apperception can demonstrate a priori its thor­
oughgoing and necessary identity. Thus the concept of a cause is nothing other than a synthesis (of that which follows in the temporal series
with other appearances) in accordance with concepts; and without
that sort of unity, which has its rule a priori, and which subjects the ap­
pearances to itself, thoroughgoing and universal, hence necessary unity
of consciousness would not be encountered in the manifold perceptions. But these would then belong to no experience, and would conse­
quently be without an object,a and would be nothing but a blind play of
representations, i.e., less than a dream.
All attempts to derive these pure concepts of the understanding from
experience and to ascribe to them a merely empirical origin are therefore entirely vain and futile. I will not mention that, e.g., the concept of
a cause brings the trait of necessity with it, which no experience at all
can yield, for experience teaches us that one appearance customarily follows another, but not that it must necessarily follow that, nor that an inference from a condition to its consequence can be made a priori and
entirely universally. But that empirical rule of association, which one
must assume throughout if one says that everything in the series of oc­
currences stands under rules according to which nothing happens that
is not preceded by something upon which it always follows - on what, I
ask, does this, as a law of nature, rest, and how is this association even
possible? The ground of the possibility of the association of the manifold, insofar as it lies in the object,b is called the affinity of the manifold.
I ask, therefore, how do you make the thoroughgoing affinity of the ap­
pearances (by means of which they stand under constant laws and must
belong under them) comprehensible to yourselves?
On my principles it is easily comprehensible. All possible appearances
belong, as representations, to the whole possible self-consciousness. But
from this, as a transcendental representation, numerical identity is insep­
arable, and certain a priori, because nothing can come into cognition ex­
cept by means of this original apperception. Now since this identity must
necessarily enter into the synthesis of all the manifold of appearances in­
sofar as they are to become empirical cognition, the appearances are thus
subject to a priori conditions with which their synthesis (of apprehension)
must be in thoroughgoing accord. Now, however, the representation of
a universal condition in accordance with which a certain manifold (of
whatever kind) can be posited is called a rule, and, if it must be so
posited, a law. All appearances therefore stand in a thoroughgoing cona Object
b

Objecte
235

A I 12

AII3

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I . Bk. I . Ch. II <A>

A I I4

nection according to necessary laws, and hence in a transcendental
affinity, of which the empirical affinity is the mere consequence.
That nature should direct itself according to our subjective ground of
apperception, indeed in regard to its lawfulness even depend on this,
may well sound quite contradictory and strange. But if one considers
that this nature is nothing in itself but a sum of appearances, hence not
a thing in itself but merely a multitude of representations of the mind,
then one will not be astonished to see that unity on account of which
alone it can be called object a of all possible experience, i.e., nature,
solely in the radical faculty of all our cognition, namely, transcendental
apperception; and for that very reason we can cognize this unity a pri­
ori, hence also as necessary, which we would certainly have to abandon
if it were given in itself independently of the primary sources of our
thinking. For then I would not know whence we should obtain the syn­
thetic propositions of such a universal unity of nature, since in this case
one would have to borrow them from the objects of nature itself. But
since this could happen only empirically, from that nothing but merely
contingent unity could be drawn, which would fall far short of the nec­
essary connection that one has in mind when one speaks of nature.

AII5

Of the Deduction of the Pure Concepts of the Understanding
Third Section
On the relationb of the understanding to objects
in general and the
possibility of cognizing these a priori.

A I I6

What we have expounded separately and individually in the previous
section we will now represent as unified and in connection. The possi­
bility of an experience in general and cognition of its objects rest on
three subjective sources of cognition: sense, imagination, and apper­
ception; each of these can be considered empirically, namely in appli­
cation to given appearances, but they are also elements or foundations
a priori that make this empirical use itself possible. Sense represents the
appearances empirically in perception, the imagination in association
(and reproduction), and apperception in the empirical consciousness
of the identity of these reproductive representations with the appear­
ances through which they were given, hence in recognition.
But pure intuition (with regard to it as representation, time, the form
of inner intuition) grounds the totality of perception a priori; the pure
synthesis of the imagination grounds association a priori; and pure apa Object
b

Verhilltnisse
236

Section III. On the relation of understanding to objects <A>

perception, i.e., the thoroughgoing identity of oneself in all possible
representations, grounds empirical consciousness a priori. 27
Now if we wish to follow the inner ground of this connection of rep­
resentations up to that point in which they must all come together in
order first to obtain unity of cognition for a possible experience, then
we must begin with pure apperception. All intuitions are nothing for us
and do not in the least concern us if they cannot be taken up into con­
sciousness, whether they influence it directly or indirectly, and through
this alone is cognition possible.28 We are conscious a priori of the thor­
oughgoing identity of ourselves with regard to all representations that
can ever belong to our cognition, as a necessary condition of the possibility of all representations (since the latter represent something in me
only insofar as they belong with all the others to one consciousness,
hence they must at least be capable of being connected in it). This principle holds a priori, and can be called the transcendental principleb
of the unity of all the manifold of our representations (thus also in in­
tuition). Now the unity of the manifold in a subject is synthetic; pure
apperception therefore yields a principle of the synthetic unity of the
manifold i n all possible intuition.*
This synthetic unity, however, presupposes a synthesis, or includes it,
and i f the former i s to b e necessary a priori then the latter must also be
* One should attend carefully to this proposition, which is of great importance.
All representations have a necessary relation to a possible empirical con­
sciousness: for if they did not have this, and if it were entirely impossible to become conscious of them, that would be as much as to say that they did not exist
at all. All empirical consciousness, however, has a necessary relation to a tran­
scendental consciousness (preceding all particular experience), namely the con­
sciousness of myself, as original apperception. It is therefore absolutely
necessary that in my cognition all consciousness belong to one consciousness
(of myself). Now here is a synthetic unity of the manifold (of consciousness)
that is cognized a priori, and that yields the ground for synthetic a priori propositions concerning pure thinking in exactly the same way that space and time
yield such propositions concerning the form of mere intuition. The synthetic
proposition that every different empirical consciousness must be combined
into a single self-consciousness is the absolutely first and synthetic principle of
our thinking in general. But it should not go unnoticed that the mere repre­
sentation I in relation to all others (the collective unity of which it makes possible) is the transcendental consciousness. Now it does not matter here
whether this representation be clear (empirical consciousness) or obscure, even
whether it be actual; but the possibility of the logical form of all cognition necessarily rests on the relationship to this apperception as a faculty.
a Princip
b Princip
, Principium
237

A I 17
A I 18
AII7

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. 1. Bk.

A I I9

A I 20

1.

Ch. II <A>

a synthesis a priori. Thus the transcendental unity of apperception is re­
lated to the pure synthesis of the imagination, as an a priori condition of
the possibility of all composition of the manifold in a cognition. But
only the productive synthesis of the imagination can take place a pri­
ori; for the reproductive synthesis rests on conditions of experience.
The principlea of the necessary unity of the pure (productive) synthesis
of the imagination prior to apperception is thus the ground of the pos­
sibility of all cognition, especially that of experience.29
Now we call the synthesis of the manifold in imagination transcen­
dental if, without distinction of the intuitions, it concerns nothing but
the connection of the manifold a priori, and the unity of this synthesis
is called transcendental if it is represented as necessary a priori in rela­
tion to the original unity of apperception. Now since this latter is the
ground of the possibility of all cognitions, the transcendental unity of
the synthesis of the imagination is the pure form of all possible cogni­
tion, through which, therefore, all objects of possible experience must
be represented a priori.
The unity of apperception in relation to the synthesis of the
imagination is the understanding, and this very same unity, in relation
to the transcendental synthesis of the imagination, is the pure un­
derstanding. In the understanding there are therefore pure a priori
cognitions that contain the necessary unity of the pure synthesis of the
imagination in regard to all possible appearances.30 These, however, are
the categories, i.e., pure concepts of the understanding; consequently
the empirical power of cognition of human beings necessarily contains
an understanding, which is related to all objects of the senses, though
only by means of intuition, and to their synthesis by means of imagi­
nation, under which, therefore, all appearances as data for a possible ex­
perience stand. Now since this relation of appearances to possible
experience is likewise necessary (since without it we could not obtain
any cognition at all through them, and they would thus not concern us
at all), it follows that the pure understanding, by means of the cate­
gories, is a formal and synthetic principleb of all experiences, and that
appearances have a necessary relation to the understanding.
Now we will set the necessary connection of the understanding with
the appearances by means of the categories before our eyes by begin­
ning from beneath, namely with what is empirical. The first thing that
is given to us is appearance, which, if it is combined with consciousness,
is called perception (without the relatione to an at least possible con­
sciousness appearance could never become an object of cognition for us,
Principium
Principium
, Verhiiltnis

a

b

238

j

Section III. On the relation of understanding to objects <A>

and would therefore be nothing for us, and since it has no objective re­
ality in itself and exists only in cognition it would be nothing at all). But
since every appearance contains a manifold, thus different perceptions
by themselves are encountered dispersed and separate in the mind, a
combination of them, which they cannot have in sense itself, is therefore
necessary. There is thus an active faculty of the synthesis of this mani­
fold in us, which we call imagination, and whose action exercised im­
mediately upon perceptions I call apprehension.* For the imagination is
to bring the manifold of intuition into an image;a it must therefore an­
tecedently take up the impressions into its activity, i.e., apprehend them.
It is, however, clear that even this apprehension of the manifold alone
would bring forth no image and no connection of the impressions were
there not a subjective ground for calling back a perception, from which
the mind has passed on to another, to the succeeding ones, and thus for
exhibiting entire series of perceptions, i.e., a reproductive faculty of
imagination, which is then also merely empirical.
Since, however, if representations reproduced one another without
distinction, just as they fell together, there would in turn be no deter­
minate connection but merely unruly heaps of them, and no cognition
at all would arise; their reproduction must thus have a rule in accor­
dance with which a representation enters into combination in the imag­
ination with one representation rather than with any others. This
subjective and empirical ground of reproduction in accordance with
rules is called the association of representations.
But now if this unity of association did not also have an objective
ground, so that it would be impossible for appearances to be appre­
hended by the imagination otherwise than under the condition of a pos­
sible synthetic unity of this apprehension, then it would also be entirely
contingent whether appearances fit into a connection of human cogni­
tions. For even though we had the faculty for associating perceptions, it
would still remain in itself entirely undetermined and contingent
whether they were also associable; and in case they were not, a multitude of perceptions and even an entire sensibility would be possible in
which much empirical consciousness would be encountered in my
mind, but separated, and without belonging to one consciousness of
* No psychologist has yet thought that the imagination is a necessary ingredient of perception itself. This is so partly because this faculty has been limited
to reproduction, and partly because it has been believed that the senses do not
merely afford us impressions but also put them together, and produce images
of objects, for which without doubt something more than the receptivity of
impressions is required, namely a function of the synthesis of them.
a Bild

239

AI2I

A I22

A I 20

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II <A>

AI23

myself, which, however, is impossible. For only because I ascribe all
perceptions to one consciousness (of original apperception) can I say of
all perceptions that I am conscious of them. There must therefore be an
objective ground, i.e., one that can be understood a priori to all empir­
ical laws of the imagination, on which rests the possibility, indeed even
the necessity of a law extending through all appearances, a law, namely,
for regarding them throughout as data of sense that are associable in
themselves and subject to universal laws of a thoroughgoing connection
in reproduction. I call this objective ground of all association of ap­
pearances their affinity. But we can never encounter this anywhere ex­
cept in the principle of the unity of apperception with regard to all
cognitions that are to belong to me. In accordance with this principle
all appearances whatever must come into the mind or be apprehended
in such a way that they are in agreement with the unity of apperception,
which would be impossible without synthetic unity in their connection,
which is thus also objectively necessary.
The objective unity of all (empirical) consciousness in one con­
sciousness (of original apperception) is thus the necessary condition
even of all possible perception, and the affinity of all appearances (near
or remote) is a necessary consequence of a synthesis in the imagination
that is grounded a priori on rules.
The imagination is therefore also a faculty of a synthesis a priori, on
account of which we give it the name of productive imagination, and,
insofar as its aim in regard to all the manifold of appearance is nothing
further than the necessary unity in their synthesis, this can be called the
transcendental function of the imagination. It is therefore certainly
strange, yet from what has been said thus far obvious, that it is only by
means of this transcendental function of the imagination that even the
affinity of appearances, and with it the association and through the lat­
ter finally reproduction in accordance with laws, and consequently ex­
perience itself, become possible; for without them no concepts of
objects at all would converge into an experience.
For the standing and lasting I (of pure apperception) constitutes the
correlate of all of our representations, so far as it is merely possible to
become conscious of them, and all consciousness belongs to an all-em­
bracing pure apperception just as all sensible intuition as representation
belongs to a pure inner intuition, namely that of time. It is this apper­
ception that must be added to the pure imagination in order to make its
function intellectual. For in itself the synthesis of the imagination, al­
though exercised a priori, is nevertheless always sensible, for it combines
the manifold only as it appears in intuition, e.g., the shape of a triangle.
Through the relationa of the manifold to the unity of apperception,
a Verhiiltnis
240

Section III. On the relation of understanding to objects <A>

however, concepts that belong to the understanding can come about, but
only by means of the imagination in relation to the sensible intuition.
We therefore have a pure imagination, as a fundamental faculty of the
human soul, that grounds all cognition a priori. By its means we bring
into combination the manifold of intuition on the one side and the con­
dition of the necessary unity of apperception on the other. Both ex­
tremes, namely sensibility and understanding, must necessarily be con­
nected by means of this transcendental function of the imagination,
since otherwise the former would to be sure yield appearances but no
objects of an empirical cognition, hence there would be no experience.
Actual experience, which consists in the apprehension, the association
(the reproduction), and finally the recognition of the appearances, contains in the last and highest (of the merely empirical elements of experience) concepts that make possible the formal unity of experience and
with it all objective validity (truth) of empirical cognition. These
grounds of the recognition of the manifold, so far as they concern
merely the form of an experience in general, are now those categories. On them is grounded, therefore, all formal unity in the synthesis of the imagination, and by means of the latter also all of its empirical
use (in recognition, reproduction, association, and apprehension) down
to the appearances, since the latter belong to our consciousness at all
and hence to ourselves only by means of these elements of cognition.
Thus we ourselves bring into the appearances that order and regu­
larity in them that we call nature,JI and moreover we would not be able
to find it there if we, or the nature of our mind, had not originally put
it there. For this unity of nature should be a necessary, i.e., a priori cer­
tain unity of the connection of appearances. But how should we be able
to establish a synthetic unity a priori if subjective grounds of such a
unity were not contained a priori among the original sources of cogni­
tion in our mind, and if these subjective conditions were not at the same
time objectively valid, being the grounds of the possibility of cognizing
any objecta in experience at all?b
a Object

b Question mark added. At this point, the following note is inserted in Kant's copy of the

first edition:
"That the laws of nature really have their origin in the understanding, and are just
as little to be encountered outside it as space and time are, is already proved by the in
any case already acknowledged assertion that we cognize them a priori and as necessary;
for if, on the contrary, they had to be borrowed from outside, we could only cognize
them as contingent. But then what sort of laws are those? No greater and no less than
is necessary in order to bring appearances into a general connection with one con­
sciousness, only in order to cognize objects as such - for that is the form of their intu­
ition and at the same time the condition of their unity in apperception given, and given
a priori. " (E LI, pp. 26-7; 2 3 :26-7)
Erdmann observes that this is the only substantial note in Kant's copy of the first-

241

A 125

A I 26

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II <A>

A I2 7

A I 28

We have above explained the understanding in various ways - through
a spontaneity of cognition (in contrast to the receptivity of the sensibil­
ity), through a faculty for thinking, or a faculty of concepts, or also of
judgments - which explanations, if one looks at them properly, come
down to the same thing. Now we can characterize it as the faculty of
rules. This designation is more fruitful, and comes closer to its essence.
Sensibility gives us forms (of intuition), but the understanding gives us
rules. It is always busy poring through the appearances with the aim of
finding some sort of rule in them. Rules, so far as they are objectivea (and
thus necessarily pertain to the cognition of objects) are called laws.
Although we learn many laws through experience, these are only partic­
ular determinations of yet higher laws, the highest of which (under
which all others stand) come from the understanding itself a priori, and
are not borrowed from experience, but rather must provide the appear­
ances with their lawfulness and by that very means make experience pos­
sible. The understanding is thus not merely a faculty for making rules
through the comparison of the appearances; it is itself the legislation for
nature, i.e., without understanding there would not be any nature at all,
i.e. synthetic unity o f the manifold o f appearances in accordance with
rules; for appearances, as such, cannot occur outside us, but exist only in
our sensibility. The latter, however, as the object of cognition in an ex­
perience, with everything it may contain, is possible only in the unity of
apperception. The unity of apperception, however, is the transcendental
ground of the necessary lawfulness of all appearances in an experience.
This very same unity of apperception with regard to a manifold of rep­
resentations (that namely of determining it out of a single one) is the
rule, and the faculty of these rules is the understanding. All appearances
as possible experiences, therefore, lie a priori in the understanding, and
receive their formal possibility from it, just as they lie in the sensibility
as mere intuitions, and are only possible through the latter as far as their
form is concerned.
Thus as exaggerated and contradictory as it may sound to say that the
understanding is itself the source of the laws of nature, and thus of the
formal unity of nature, such an assertion is nevertheless correct and ap­
propriate to the object, namely experience. To be sure, empirical laws,
as such, can by no means derive their origin from the pure understand­
ing, just as the immeasurable manifoldness of the appearances cannot
be adequately conceived through the pure form of sensible intuition.
But all empirical laws are only particular determinations of the pure
edition deduction, from which he infers that Kant in fact very early gave up hope of im­
proving the deduction by minor changes.
a Changed to "Rules, so far as they [represent] existence as necessary . . . " in Kant's copy
of the first edition (E LII, p. 27; 2 3 :46).

2 42

Section III. On the relation of understanding to objects <A>

laws of the understanding, under which and in accordance with whose
norm they are first possible, and the appearances assume a lawful form,
just as, regardless of the variety of their empirical form, all appearances
must nevertheless always be in accord with the pure form of sensibility.
The pure understanding is thus in the categories the law of the syn­
thetic unity of all appearances, and thereby first and originally makes
experience possible as far as its form is concerned. But we did not have
to accomplish more in the transcendental deduction of the categories
than to make comprehensible this relationa of the understanding to sen­
sibility and by means of the latter to all objects of experience, hence to
make comprehensible the objective validity of its pure a priori concepts,
and thereby determine their origin and truth.
Summary representation
of the correctness and unique possibility of this
deduction
of the pure concepts of the understanding.
If the objects with which our cognition has to do were things in them­
selves, then we would not be able to have any a priori concepts of them
at all. For whence should we obtain them? If we take them from the ob­
jectb (without even investigating here how the latter could become
known to us), then our concepts would be merely empirical and not a
priori concepts. If we take them from ourselves, then that which is
merely in us cannot determine the constitution of an object distinct
from our representations, i.e., be a ground why there should be a thing
that corresponds to something we have in our thoughts, and why all
this representation should not instead be empty. But if, on the contrary,
we have to do everywhere only with appearances, then it is not only
possible but also necessary that certain a priori concepts precede the
empirical cognition of objects. For as appearances they constitute an
object that is merely in us, since a mere modification of our sensibility
is not to be encountered outside us at all. Now even this representation - that all these appearances and thus all objects with which we can
occupy ourselves are all in me, i.e., determinations of my identical
self - expresses a thoroughgoing unity of them in one and the same ap­
perception as necessary. The form of all cognition of objects (through
which the manifold is thought as belonging to one object),c however,
also consists in this unity of possible consciousness. Thus the way in
which the manifold of sensible representation (intuition) belongs to a
a

b
,

Verhdltnis
Object
zu Einem Object
243

A I 29

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II <A>

A I 30

consciousness precedes all cognition of the object, as its intellectual
form, and itself constitutes an a priori formal cognition of all objects
in general, insofar as they are thought (categories). Their synthesis
through the pure imagination, the unity of all representations in rela­
tion to original apperception, precede all empirical cognition. Pure
concepts of the understanding are therefore possible, indeed necessary
a priori in relation to experience, only because our cognition has to do
with nothing but appearances, whose possibility lies in ourselves,
whose connection and unity (in the representation of an object) is en­
countered merely in us, and thus must precede all experience and first
make it possible as far as its form is concerned. And from this ground,
the only possible one among all, our deduction of the categories has
been conducted.

244

Of the Deduction of the Pure Concepts of "
the Understanding
Second Section
Transcendental deduction of the pure
concepts of the understanding a,32

B 129

<§

15·
O n ,ilie possibility of a combination i n general.
The manifold of representations can be given in an intuition that is
merely sensible, i.e., nothing but receptivity, and the form of this intu­
ition can lie a priori in our faculty of representation without being any­
thing other than the way in which the subject is affected. Yet the
combination (conjunctio) of a manifold in general can never come to us
through the senses, and therefore cannot already be contained in the
pure form of sensible intuition; for it is an actb of the spontaneity of the
power of representation, and, since one must call the latter understanding, in distinction from sensibility, all combination, whether we are
conscious of it or not, whether it is a combination of the manifold of intuition or of several concepts, and in the first case either of sensible or
non-sensible intuition, is an action of the understanding, which we
would designate with the general title synthesis in order at the same
time to draw attention to the fact that we can represent nothing as combined in the objectC without having previously combined it ourselves,
and that among all representations combination is the only one that is
not given through objectsd but can be executed only by the subject itself, since it is an acte of its self-activity. One can here easily see that this
action must originally be unitary! and equally valid for all combination,
n In the second edition, the following § 15 through § 27 replace the second and third secb

tions of the "Transcendental Deduction" in the first edition (A 95 to A I 30)'

Actus
, Object
d Objecte
, Actus
f einig; in modern German this is used only in idioms connoting being in agreement or
harmony; perhaps Kant meant to write einzig, i.e., unique.
245

B 1 30

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II. <B>

B I31

and that the dissolution (analysis) that seems to be its opposite, in fact
always presupposes it; for where the understanding has not previously
combined anything, neither can it dissolve anything, for only through
it can something have been given to the power of representation as
combined.
But in addition to the concept of the manifold and of its synthesis, the
concept of combination also carries with it the concept of the unity of
the manifold. Combination is the representation of the synthetic unity
of the manifold. * The representation of this unity cannot, therefore,
arise from the combination; rather, by being added to the representa­
tion of the manifold, it first makes the concept of combination possi­
ble.33 This unity, which precedes all concepts of combination a priori, is
not the former category of unity 1 0); for all categories are grounded
on logical functions in judgments, but in these combination, thus the
unity of given concepts, is already thought. The category therefore al­
ready presupposes combination. We must therefore seek this unity (as
qualitative, § 12) someplace higher, namely in that which itself contains
the ground of the unity of different concepts in judgments, and hence
of the possibility of the understanding, even in its logical use.

(§

§ 1 6.

On the original-synthetic unity of
apperception.
B 132

B 131

The I think must be able to accompany all my representations; for
otherwise something would b e represented in me that could not be
thought at all, which is as much as to say that the representation would
either be impossible or else at least would be nothing for me. That rep­
resentation that can be given prior to all thinking is called intuition.
Thus all manifold of intuition has a necessary relation to the I think in
the same subject in which this manifold is to be encountered. But this
representation is an acta of spontaneity, i.e., it cannot be regarded as
belonging to sensibility. I call it the pure apperception, in order to dis­
tinguish it from the empirical one, or also the original apperception,
since it is that self-consciousness which, because it produces the repre­
sentation I think, which must be able to accompany all others and
* Whether the representations themselves are identical, and whether therefore
one could be thought through the other analytically, does not come into con­
sideration here. The consciousness of the one, as far as the manifold is con­
cerned, is still always to be distinguished from the consciousness of the other,
and it is only the synthesis of this (possible) consciousness that is at issue here.
a Actus
246

Section II. Trans. deduction of pure concepts of understanding <B>

which in all consciousness is one and the same, cannot be accompanied
by any further representation. I also call its unity the transcendental
unity of self-consciousness in order to designate the possibility of a pri­
ori cognition from it. For the manifold representations that are given in
a certain intuition would not all together be my representations if they
did not all together belong to a self-consciousness; i.e., as my represen­
tations (even if I am not conscious of them as such) they must yet nec­
essarily be in accord with the condition under which alone they can
stand together in a universal self-consciousness, because otherwise they
would not throughout belong to me. From this original combination
much may be inferred.
Namely, this thoroughgoing identity of the apperception of a manifold given in intuition contains a synthesis of the representations, and is
possible only through the consciousness of this synthesis. For the empirical consciousness that accompanies different representations is by
itself dispersed and without relation to the identity of the subject. The
latter rel� tion therefore does not yet come about by my accompanying
each representation with consciousness, but rather by my adding one
representation to the other and being conscious of their synthesis.
Therefore it is only because I can combine a manifold of given repre­
sentations in one consciousness that it is possible for me to represent
the identity of the consciousness in these representations itself, i.e.,
the analytical unity of apperception is only possible under the presup­
position of some synthetic one.*,34 The thought that these representations given in intuition all together belong to me means, accordingly,
the same as that I unite them in a self-consciousness, or at least can
unite them therein, and although it is itself not yet the consciousness of
the synthesis of the representations, it still presupposes the possibility
of the latter, i.e., only because I can comprehend their manifold in a
consciousness do I call them all together my representations; for otherwise I would have as multicolored, diverse a self as I have representa-

* The analytical unity of consciousness pertains to all common concepts as
such, e.g., if I think of red in general, I thereby represent to myself a feature
that (as a mark) can be encountered in anything, or that can be combined with
other representations; therefore only by means of an antecedently conceived
possible synthetic unity can I represent to myself the analytical unity. A rep­
resentation that is to be thought of as common to several must be regarded
as belonging to those that in addition to it also have something different in
themselves; consequently they must antecedently be conceived in synthetic
unity with other (even if only possible representations) before I can think of
the analytical unity of consciousness in it that makes it into a conceptus communis. And thus the synthetic unity of apperception is the highest point to which
one must affix all use of the understanding, even the whole of logic and, after
it, transcendental philosophy; indeed this faculty is the understanding itself.
247

B 133

B 134

B 133

B 1 34

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II. <B>

B 135

:B

136

tions of which I am conscious. Synthetic unity of the manifold of in­
tuitions, as given a priori, is thus the ground of the identity of ap­
perception itself, which precedes a priori all my determinate thinking.
Combination does not lie in the objects, however, and cannot as it were
be borrowed from them through perception and by that means first
taken up into the understanding, but i s rather only an operation o f the
understanding, which is itself nothing further than the faculty of com­
bining a priori and bringing the manifold of given representations under
unity of apperception, which principle is the supreme one in the whole
of human cognition.35
Now this principle of the necessary unity of apperception is, to be
sure, itself identical, thus an analytical proposition, yet it declares as
necessary a synthesis of the manifold given in an intuition, without
which that thoroughgoing identity of self-consciousness could not be
thought. For through the I, as a simple representation, nothing mani­
fold is given; it can only be given in the intuition, which is distinct from
it, and thought through combination in a consciousness. An under­
standing, in which through self-consciousness all of the manifold would
at the same time be given, would intuit; ours can only think and must
seek the intuition in the senses. I am therefore conscious of the identi­
cal self in regard to the manifold of the representations that are given
to me in an intuition because I call them all together my representa­
tions, which constitute one. But that is as much as to say that I am con­
scious a priori of their necessary synthesis, which is called the original
synthetic unity of apperception, under which all representations given
to me stand, but under which they must also be brought by means of a
synthesis.

§

1 7·
The principle of the synthetic unity of apperception
is the supreme principle of all use of the understanding.
The supreme principle of the possibility of all intuition in relation to
sensibility was, according to the Transcendental Aesthetic, that all the
manifold of sensibility stand under the formal conditions of space and
time. The supreme principle of all intuition in relation to the under­
standing is that all the manifold of intuition stand under conditions of
the original synthetic unity of apperception.*,36 All the manifold repre* Space and time and all their parts are intuitions, thus individual representa­
tions along with the manifold that they contain in themselves (see the
Transcendental Aesthetic), thus they are not mere concepts by means of which
the same consciousness is contained in many representations, but rather are
many representations that are contained in one and in the consciousness of it;
they are thus found to be composite, and consequently the unity of con248

Section II. Trans. deduction of pure concepts of understanding <B>

sentations of intuition stand under the first principle insofar as they are
given to us, and under the second insofar as they must be capable of
being combined in one consciousness; for without that nothing could
b e thought o r cognized through them, since the given representations
would not have in common the acta of apperception, I think, and
thereby would not be grasped together in a self-consciousness.
Understanding is, generally speaking, the faculty of cognitions.
These consist in the determinate relation of given representations to an
object." An object,c however, is that in the concept of which the mani­
fold of a given intuition is united.37 Now, however, all unification of
representations requires unity of consciousness in the synthesis of
them. Consequently the unity of consciousness is that which alone con­
stitutes the relation of representations to an object, thus their objective
validity, and consequently is that which makes them into cognitions and
on which even the possibility of the understanding rests.
The first pure cognition of the understanding, therefore, on which
the whole of the rest of its use is grounded, and that is at the same time
also entirely independent from all conditions of sensible intuition, is the
principle of the original synthetic unity of apperception. Thus the
mere form of outer sensible intuition, space, is not yet cognition at all;
it only gives the manifold of intuition a priori for a possible cognition.
But in order to cognize something in space, e.g., a line, I must draw it,
and thus synthetically bring about a determinate combination of the
given manifold, s o that the unity o f this action i s at the same time the
unity of consciousness (in the concept of a line), and thereby is an objectd (a determinate space) first cognized. The synthetic unity of con­
sciousness is therefore an objective condition of all cognition, not
merely something I myself need in order to cognize an objecte but
rather something under which every intuition must stand in order to
become an objectf for me, since in any other way, and without this
synthesis, the manifold would not be united in one consciousness.
This last proposition is, as we said, itself analytic, although, to be
sure, it makes synthetic unity into the condition of all thinking; for it
says nothing more than that all my representations in any given intu­
ition must stand under the condition under which alone I can ascribe
sciousness, as synthetic and yet as original, is to be found in them. This sin­
gularity of theirs is important in its application (see § 2 5).
a Actus
b Object
Object
d Object
, Object
f Object
C

249

B 137

B 138

Doctrine o f Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II. <B>

B I 39

them to the identical self as my representations, and thus can grasp
them together, as synthetically combined in an apperception, through
the general expression I think.
This principle, however, is not a principle a for every possible under­
standing, but only for one through whose pure apperception in the rep­
resentation I am nothing manifold is given at all. That understanding
through whose self-consciousness the manifold of intuition would at
the same time be given, an understanding through whose representa­
tion the objectsb of this representation would at the same time exist,
would not require a special actC of the synthesis of the manifold for the
unity of consciousness, which the hlunan understanding, which merely
thinks, but does not intuit, does require. But for the human under­
standing it is unavoidably the first principle, so that the human under­
standing cannot even form for itself the least concept of another
possible understanding, either one that would intuit itself or one that,
while possessing a sensible intuition, would possess one of a different
kind than one grounded in space and time.
§ 18.
What objective unity o f self-consciousness is.

B 140

The transcendental unity of apperception is that unity through
which all of the manifold given in an intuition is united in a concept of
the object.d It is called objective on that account, and must be distin­
guished from the subjective unity of consciousness, which is a deter­
mination of inner sense, through which that manifold of intuition is
empirically given for such a combination. Whether I can become
empirically conscious of the manifold as simultaneous or successive
depends on the circumstances, or empirical conditions. Hence the empirical unity of consciousness, through association of the representa­
tions, itself concerns an appearance, and is entirely contingent. The
pure form of intuition in time, on the contrary, merely as intuition in
general, which contains a given manifold, stands under the original
unity of consciousness, solely by means of the necessary relation of the
manifold of intuition to the one I think, thus through the pure syn­
thesis of the understanding, which grounds a priori the empirical syn­
thesis. That unity alone is objectivity valid; the empirical unity of
apperception, which we are not assessing here, and which is also de­
rived only from the former, under given conditions in concreto, has
a Princip
b Objecte
, Actus
d Object

2 50

Section II. Trans. deduction of pure concepts of understanding <B>

merely subjective validity. One person combines the representation of
a certain word with one thing, another with something else; and the
unity of consciousness in that which is empirical is not, with regard to
that which is given, necessarily and universally valid.
§ 1 9·
The logical form of all judgments consists in the
objective unity of the apperception
of the concepts contained therein.38
I have never been able to satisfy myself with the explanation that the lo­
gicians give of a judgment in general: it is, they say, the representation
of a relationa between two concepts. Without quarreling here about
what is mistaken in this explanation, that in any case it fits only categorical but not hypothetical and disjunctive judgments (which latter
two do not contain a relationb of concepts but of judgments themselves)
(though from this error in logic many troublesome consequences have
arisen),*,39 I remark only that it is not here determined wherein this relatione consists.
If, however, I investigate more closely the relationd of given cogni­
tions in every judgment, and distinguish that relation, as something be­
longing to the understanding, from the relatione in accordance with
laws of the reproductive imagination (which has only subjective valid­
ity), then I find that a judgment is nothing other than the way to bring
given cognitions to the objective unity of apperception.40 That is the
aim of the copula! is in them: to distinguish the objective unity of given
representations from the subjective. For this word designates the relation of the representations to the original apperception and its necessary unity, even if the judgment itself is empirical, hence contingent,
* The widespread doctrine of the four syllogistic figures concerns only the categorical inferences, and, although it is nothing more than an art for surreptitiously producing the illusion of more kinds of inference than that in the first
figure by hiding immediate inferences (consequentiae immediatiae) among the
premises of a pure syllogism, still it would not have achieved any special success by this alone if it had not succeeded in focusing attention exclusively on
categorical judgments as those to which all others have to be related, which
according to § 9, however, is false.
a Verhdltnisses
b

Verhdltnis
, Verhdltnis

Here Kant uses Beziehung when he might have used Verhdltnis.
, Verhdltnisse
f Verhdltnisw;jrtchen
d

251

B 141

B 142

B 141

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. 1. Ch. II. <B>

e.g., "Bodies are heavy." By that, to be sure, I do not mean to say that
these representations necessarily belong to one another in the empir­
ical intuition, but rather that they belong to one another in virtue of
the necessary unity of the apperception in the synthesis of intuitions,
i.e., in accordance with principles a of the objective determination of all
representations insofar as cognition can come from them, which prin­
ciplesb are all derived from the principle of the transcendental unity of
apperception. Only in this way does there arise from this relatione a
judgment, i.e., a relation that is objectively valid, and that is suffi­
ciently distinguished from the relation of these same representations in
which there would be only subjective validity, e.g., in accordance with
laws of association. In accordance with the latter I could only say "If I
carry a body, I feel a pressure of weight," but not "It, the body, is
heavy," which would be to say that these two representations are com­
bined in the object,d i.e., regardless of any difference in the condition of
the subject, and are not merely found together in perception (however
often as that might be repeated).
B I43

§ 20.
All sensible intuitions stand under the
categories, as conditions under which alone
their manifold can come together in one consciousness.
The manifold that is given in a sensible intuition necessarily belongs
under the original synthetic unity of apperception, since through this
alone is the unity of the intuition possible (§ 1 7)' That action of the un­
derstanding, however, through which the manifold of given representa­
tions (whether they be intuitions or concepts) is brought under an
apperception in general, is the logical function of judgments (§ I 9)'
Therefore all manifold, insofar as it is given in onee empirical intuition,
is determined in regard to one of the logical functions for judgment,
by means of which, namely, it is brought to a consciousness in general.
But now the categories are nothing other than these very functions for
judging, insofar as the manifold of a given intuition is determined with
regard to them (§ I 3).41 Thus the manifold in a given intuition also nec­
essarily stands under categories.
Principien
Principien
, Verbaltnisse; the further occurrences of "relation" in this sentence translate further oc­
currences of Verbalmis.
d
Object
, Einer. Not ordinarily capitalized, suggesting the translation "one" instead of merely

n

b

"an."

252

Section II. Trans. deduction of pure concepts of understanding <B>

§ 21.
Remark.

B I44

A manifold that is contained in an intuition that I call mine is repre­
sented as belonging to the necessary unity of self-consciousness
through the synthesis of the understanding, and this takes place by
means of the category. * This indicates, therefore, that the empirical
consciousness of a given manifold of onea intuition stands under a pure
a priori self-consciousness, just as empirical intuitions stand under :1
pure sensible one, which likewise holds a priori. In the above proposi­
tion, therefore, the beginning of a deduction of the pure concepts of
the understanding has been made, in which, since the categories arise
independently from sensibility merely in the understanding, I must
abstract from the way in which the manifold for an empirical intuition
is given, in order to attend only to the unity that is added to the intu­
ition through the understanding by means of the category. In the sequel
(§ 26) it will be shown from the way in which the empirical intuition is
given in sensibility that its unity can be none other than the one the category prescribes to the manifold of a given intuition in general according to the preceding § 20; thus by the explanation of its b a priori validity
in regard to all objects of our senses the aim of the deduction will first
be fully attained.
In the above proof, however, I still could not abstract from one point,
namely, from the fact that the manifold for intuition must already be
given prior to the synthesis of understanding and independently from
it; how, however, is here left undetermined. For if I wanted to think of
an understanding that itself intuited (as, say, a divine understanding,
which would not represent given objects, but through whose represen­
tation the objects would themselves at the same time be given, or pro­
duced), then the categories would have no significance at all with regard
to such a cognition. They are only rules for an understanding whose en­
tire capacityc consists in thinking, i.e., in the action of bringing the syn­
thesis of the manifold that is given to it in intuition from elsewhere to
the unity of apperception, which therefore cognizes nothing at all by
-

* The ground of proof rests on the represented unity of intuition through
which an object is given, which always includes a synthesis of the manifold
that is given for an intuition, and already contains the relation of the latter to
unity of apperception.
a

b

Einer, again capitalized.
The antecedent is probably "the category" in the preceding clause, but it could also be
"the unity," and thus the translation has been left ambiguous.

, Vermijgen
253

B 145

B 144

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk.

B I46

I.

Ch. II. <B>

itself, a but only combines and orders the material for cognition, the in­
tuition, which must be given to it through the object.b But for the pe­
culiarity of our understanding, that it is able to bring about the unity of
apperception a priori only by means of the categories and only through
precisely this kind and number of them, a further ground may be of­
fered just as little as one can be offered for why we have precisely these
and no other functions for judgment or for why space and time are the
sole forms of our possible intuition.
§ 22.

The category has no other use for
the cognition of things than its application
to objects of experience.

B 147

To think of an object and to cognize an object are thus not the same.
For two components belong to cognition: first, the concept, through
which an object is thought at all (the category), and second, the intu­
ition, through which it is given; for if an intuition corresponding to the
concept could not be given at all, then it would be a thought as far as its
form is concerned, but without any object, and by its means no cogni­
tion of anything at all would be possible, since, as far as I would know,
nothing would be given nor could be given to which my thought could
be applied. Now all intuition that is possible for us is sensible (Aes­
thetic), thus for us thinking of an object in general through a pure con­
cept of the understanding can become cognition only insofar as this
concept is related to objects of the senses. Sensible intuition is either
pure intuition (space and time) or empirical intuition of that which,
through sensation, is immediately represented as real in space and time.
Through determination of the former we can acquire a priori cognitions
of objects (in mathematics), but only as far as their form is concerned,
as appearances; whether there can be things that must be intuited in this
form is still left unsettled. Consequently all mathematical concepts are
not by themselves cognitions, except insofar as one presupposes that
there are things that can be presented to us only in accordance with the
form of that pure sensible intuition. Things in space and time, how­
ever, are only given insofar as they are perceptions (representations ac­
companied with sensation), hence through empirical representation.
The pure concepts of the understanding, consequently, even if they are
applied to a priori intuitions (as in mathematics), provide cognition only
insofar as these a priori intuitions, and by means of them also the con­
cepts of the understanding, can be applied to empirical intuitions. Cona

b

for sich
Object
2 54

Section II. Trans. deduction of pure concepts of understanding <B>

sequently the categories do not afford us cognition of things by means
of intuition except through their possible application to empirical in­
tuition, i.e., they serve only for the possibility of empirical cognition.
This, however, is called experience. The categories consequently have
no other use for the cognition of things except insofar as these are taken
as objects of possible experience.

The above proposition is of the greatest importance, for it determines
the boundaries of the use of the pure concepts of the understanding in
regard to objects, just as the Transcendental Aesthetic determined the
boundaries of the use of the pure form of our sensible intuition. Space
and time are valid, as conditions of the possibility of how objects can be
given to us, no further than for objects of the senses, hence only for ex­
perience. Beyond these boundaries they do not represent anything at
all, for they are only in the senses and outside of them have no reality.
The pure concepts of the understanding are free from this limitation
and extend to objects of intuition in general, whether the latter be similar to our own or not, as long as it is sensible and not intellectual. But
this further extension of concepts beyond our sensible intuition does
not get us anywhere. For they are then merely empty concepts of objects,a through which we cannot even judge whether the latter are possible or not - mere forms of thought without objective reality - since
we have available no intuition to which the synthetic unity of apper­
ception, which they alone contain, could be applied, and that could thus
determine an object. Our sensible and empirical intuition alone can
provide them with sense and significance.
Thus if one assumes an objectb of a non-sensible intuition as given,
one can certainly represent it through all of the predicates that already
lie in the presupposition that nothing belonging to sensible intuition
pertains to it: thus it is not extended, or in space, that its duration is
not a time, that no alteration (sequence of determinations in time) is to
be encountered in it, etc. But it is not yet a genuine cognition ifI merely
indicate what the intuition of the object' is not, without being able to
say what is then contained in it; for then I have not represented the pos­
sibility of an objectd for my pure concept of the understanding at all,
since I cannot give any intuition that would correspond to it, but could
only say that ours is not valid for it. But what is most important here is
that not even a single category could be applied to such a thing, e.g., the
a Objecten
b Object
, Object
d Objects
255

B 148

B 149

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II. <B>

concept of a substance, i.e., that of something that could exist as a sub­
ject but never as a mere predicate; for I would not even know whether
there could be anything that corresponded to this determination of
thought if empirical intuition did not give me the case for its applica­
tion. But more of this in the sequel.

B I50

B 151

§ 2 4·
On the application of the categories to objects
of the senses in general.
The pure concepts of the understanding are related through the mere
understanding to objects of intuition in general, without it being deter­
mined whether this intuition is our own or some other but still sensible
one, but they are on this account mere forms of thought, through
which no determinate object is yet cognized. The synthesis or combi­
nation of the manifold in them was related merely to the unity of ap­
perception, and was thereby the ground of the possibility of cognition
a priori insofar as it rests on the understanding, and was therefore not
only transcendental but also merely purely intellectual. But since in us
a certain form of sensible intuition a priori is fundamental, which rests
on the receptivity of the capacity for representation (sensibility), the
understanding, as spontaneity, can determine the manifold of given rep­
resentations in accord with the synthetic unity of apperception, and
thus think a priori synthetic unity of the apperception of the manifold
of sensible intuition, as the condition under which all objects of our
(human) intuition must necessarily stand, through which then the cate­
gories, as mere forms of thought, acquire objective reality, i.e., application to objects that can b e given to us in intuition, but only as appear­
ances; for of these alone are we capable of intuition a priori.
This synthesis of the manifold of sensible intuition, which is possible
and necessary a priori, can be called figurative (synthesis speciosa), as dis­
tinct from that which would be thought in the mere category in regard
to the manifold of an intuition in general, and which is called combina­
tion of the understanding (synthesis intellectualis); both are transcenden­
tal, not merely because they themselves proceed a priori but also because
they ground the possibility of other cognition a priori.
Yet the figurative synthesis, if it pertains merely to the original syn­
thetic unity of apperception, i.e., this transcendental unity, which is
thought in the categories, must be called, as distinct from the merely in­
tellectual combination, the transcendental synthesis of the imagina­
tion. Imaginationa is the faculty for representing an object even with­
out its presence in intuition. Now since all of our intuition is sensible,
a Here Kant uses both large type and spacing for extra emphasis.

256

Section II. Trans. deduction of pure concepts of understanding <B>

the imagination, on account of the subjective condition under which
alone it can give a corresponding intuition to the concepts of under­
standing, belongs to sensibility; but insofar as its synthesis is still an exercise of spontaneity, which is determining and not, like sense, merely
determinable, and can thus determine the form of sense a priori in accordance with the unity o f apperception, the imagination i s t o this extent a faculty for determining the sensibility a priori, and its synthesis of
intuitions, in accordance with the categories, must be the transcendental synthesis of the imagination, which is an effect of the under­
standing on sensibility and its first application (and at the same time
the ground of all others) to objects of the intuition that is possible for
us. As figurative, it is distinct from the intellectual synthesis without
any imagination merely through the understanding. Now insofar as the
imagination is spontaneity, I also occasionally call it the productive
imagination, and thereby distinguish it from the reproductive imagination, whose synthesis is subject solely to empirical laws, namely those
of association, and that therefore contributes nothing to the explanation
of the possibility of cognition a priori, and on that account belongs not
in transcendental philosophy but in psychology.

B 152

* * *

Here is now the place to make intelligible the paradox that must have
struck everyone in the exposition of the form of inner sense (§ 6):
namely how this presents even ourselves to consciousness only as we
appear to ourselves, not as we are in ourselves, since we intuit ourselves
only a s we are internally affected, which seems to b e contradictory,
since we would have to relate to ourselves passively; for this reason it is
customary in the systems of psychology to treat inner sense as the
same as the faculty of apperception (which we carefully distinguish)Y
That which determines the inner sense is the understanding and its
original faculty of combining the manifold of intuition, i.e., of bring­
ing it under an apperception (as that on which its very possibility rests).
Now since in us humans the understanding is not itself a faculty of in­
tuitions, and even if these were given in sensibility cannot take them
up into itself, in order as it were to combine the manifold of its own
intuition, thus its synthesis, considered in itselfa alone, is nothing other
than the unity of the action of which it is conscious as such even with­
out sensibility, but through which it is capable of itself determining
sensibility internally with regard to the manifold that may be given to
it in accordance with the form of its intuition. Under the designation
of a transcendental synthesis of the imagination, it therefore exera for sich

257

B 153

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II. <B>

B 1 54

B ISS

cises that action on the passive subject, whose faculty it is, about
which we rightly say that the inner sense is thereby affected. Apper­
ception and its synthetic unity is so far from being the same as the
inner sense that the former, rather, as the source of all combination,
applies to all sensible intuition of objects a in general, to the manifold
of intuitions in general, under the name of the categories; inner
sense, on the contrary, contains the mere form of intuition, but with­
out combination of the manifold in it, and thus it does not yet contain
any determinate intuition at all, which is possible only through the
consciousness of the determination of the manifold through the tran­
scendental action of the imagination (synthetic influence of the un­
derstanding on the inner sense), which I have named the figurative
synthesis.
We also always perceive this in ourselves. We cannot think of a line
without drawing it in thought, we cannot think of a circle without de­
scribing it, we cannot represent the three dimensions of space at all
without placing three lines perpendicular to each other at the same
point, and we cannot even represent time without, in drawing a
straight line (which is to be the external figurative representation of
time), attending merely to the action of the synthesis of the manifold
through which we successively determine the inner sense, and thereby
attending to the succession of this determination in inner sense.
Motion, as action of the subject (not as determination of an object),*,b
consequently the synthesis of the manifold in space, if we abstract from
this manifold in space and attend solely to the action in accordance with
which we determine the form of inner sense, first produces the con­
cept of succession at all. The understanding therefore does not find
some sort of combination of the manifold already in inner sense, but
produces it, by affecting inner sense. But how the I that I think is to
differ from the I that intuits itself (for I can represent other kinds of in­
tuition as at least possible) and yet be identical with the latter as the
same subject, how therefore I can say that I as intelligence and think-

* Motion of an object' in space does not belong in a pure science, thus also not
in geometry; for that something is movable cannot be cognized a priori but
only through experience. But motion, as description of a space, is a pure acrt
of the successive synthesis of the manifold in outer intuition in general
through productive imagination, and belongs not only to geometry but even
to transcendental philosophy.
Objecte
Objects
, Object
d Actus

n

b

258

Section II. Trans. deduction of pure concepts of understanding <B>

ing subject cognize my self as an objecta that is thought, insofar as I am
also given to myself in intuition, only, like other phenomena, not as I
am for the understanding but rather as I appear to myself, this is no
more and no less difficult than how I can be an objectb for myself in
general and indeed one of intuition and inner perceptions. But that it
really must b e s o can b e clearly shown, i f one lets space count a s a mere
pure form of the appearances of outer sense, from the fact that time, although is not itself an object of outer intuition at all, cannot be made
representable to us except under the image of a line, insofar as we draw
it, without which sort of presentation we could not know the unity of
its measure at all, or likewise from the fact that we must always derive
the determination of the length of time or also of the positions in time
for all inner perceptions from that which presents external things to us
as alterable; hence we must order the determinations of inner sense as
appearances in time in just the same way as we order those of outer
sense in space; hence if we admit about the latter that we cognize objectsC by their means only insofar as we are externally affected, then we
must also concede that through inner sense we intuit ourselves only as
we are internally affected by our selves, i.e., as far as inner intuition is
concerned we cognize our own subject only as appearance but not in ac­
cordance with what it is in itself.*A3
§ 25·

B 156

B I57

I n the transcendental synthesis of the manifold of representations in
general, on the contrary, hence in the synthetic original unity of apper­
ception, I am conscious of myself not as I appear to myself, nor as I am
in myself, but only that I am. This representation is a thinking, not
an intuiting. Now since for the cognition of ourselves, in addition to
the action of thinking that brings the manifold of every possible intuition to the unity of apperception, a determinate sort of intuition,
through which this manifold is given, is also required, my own existence
* I do not see how one can find so many difficulties in the fact that inner sense
is affected by ourselves. Every actd of attention can give us an example of this.
In such acts the understanding always determines the inner sense, in accordance with the combination that it thinks, to the inner intuition that corresponds to the manifold in the synthesis of the understanding. How much the
mind is commonly affected by this means, everyone will be able to perceive in
himself.
a Object
b

Object
, Objecte
d Actus
2 59

B 156
B 157

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II. <B>
B 1 58

B 159

B 157

B 1 58

is not indeed appearance (let alone mere illusion), but the determination of my existence*>44 can only occur in correspondence with the form
of inner sense, according to the particular way in which the manifold
that I combine is given in inner intuition, and I therefore have no cog­
nition of myself as I am, but only as I appear to myself. The con­
sciousness of oneself is therefore far from being a cognition of oneself,
regardless of all the categories that constitute the thinking of an objeCt"
in general through combination of the manifold in an apperception.
Just as for the cognition of an objectb distinct from me I also need an
intuition in addition to the thinking of an objectC in general (in the cat­
egory), through which I determine that general concept, so for the cog­
nition of myself I also need in addition to the consciousness, or in
addition to that which I think myself, an intuition of the manifold in
me, through which I determine this thought; and I exist as an intelli­
gence that is merely conscious of its faculty for combination but which,
in regard to the manifold that it is to combine, is subject to a limiting
condition that it calls inner sense, which can make that combination in­
tuitable only in accordance with temporal relationsd that lie entirely
outside of the concepts of the understanding proper, and that can there­
fore still cognize itself merely as it appears to itself with regard to an in­
tuition (which is not intellectual and capable of being given through the
understanding itself), not as it would cognize itself if its intuition were
intellectual.
* The I think expresses the act" of determining m y existence. The existence is
thereby already given, but the way in which I am to determine it, i.e., the man­
ifold that I am to posit in myself as belonging to it, is not yet thereby given.
For that self-intuition is required, which is grounded in an a priori given form,
i.e., time, which is sensible and belongs to the receptivity of the determinable.
Now I do not have yet another self-intuition, which would give the deter­
mining in me, of the spontaneity of which alone I am conscious, even before
the actf of determination, in the same way as time gives that which is to be
determined, thus I cannot determine my existence as that of a self-active
being, rather I merely represent the spontaneity of my thought, i.e., of the de­
termining, and my existence always remains only sensibly determinable, i.e.,
determinable as the existence of an appearance. Yet this spontaneity is the rea­
son I call myself an intelligence.
a Object
b Objects

, Object
d

Zeitverhiiltnissen

, Actus
f Actus

260

Section II. Trans. deduction of pure concepts of understanding <B>
§ 2 6.
Transcendental deduction of the universally possible
use of the pure
concepts of the understanding in experience.

In the metaphysical deduction45 the origin of the a priori categories in
general was established through their complete coincidence with the
universal logical functions of thinking, in the transcendental deduction, however, their possibility as a priori cognitions of objects of an intuition in general was exhibited (§§ 20, 2 I). Now the possibility of
cognizing a priori through categories whatever objects may come before our senses, not as far as the form of their intuition but rather as
far as the laws of their combination are concerned, thus the possibility
of as it were prescribing the law to nature and even making the latter
possible, is to be explained. For if the categories did not serve in this
way, it would not become clear why everything that may ever come before our senses must stand under the laws that arise a priori from the un­
derstanding alone.
First of all I remark that by the synthesis of apprehension I under­
stand the composition of the manifold in an empirical intuition,
through which perception, i.e., empirical consciousness of it (as ap­
pearance), becomes possible.
We have forms of outer as well as inner sensible intuition a priori in
the representations of space and time, and the synthesis of the appre­
hension of the manifold of appearance must always be in agreement
with the latter, since it can only occur in accordance with this form. But
space and time are represent.ed a priori not merely as forms of sensible
intuition, but also as intuitions themselves (which contain a manifold),
and thus with the determination of the unity of this manifold in them
(see the Transcendental Aesthetic).*A6 Thus even unity of the synthe* Space, represented a s object (as is really required i n geometry), contains more
than the mere form of intuition, namely the comprehensiona of the manifold
given in accordance with the form of sensibility in an intuitive representation,
so that the form of intuition merely gives the manifold, but the formal intuition gives unity of the representation. In the Aesthetic I ascribed this unity
merely to sensibility, only in order to note that it precedes all concepts,
though to b e sure i t presupposes a synthesis, which does not belong to the
senses but through which all concepts of space and time first become possible.
, For since through it (as the understanding determines the sensibility) space or
time are first given as intuitions, the unity of this a priori intuition belongs to
space and time, and not to the concept of the understanding (§ 2 4) .
•

ZusammenJassung

261

B 1 60

B 161
B 160

B 161

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. 1. Bk. 1. Ch. II. <B>

sis of the manifold, outside or within us, hence also a combination
with which everything that is to be represented as determined in space
or time must agree, is already given a priori, along with (not in) these
intuitions, as condition of the synthesis of all apprehension. But this
synthetic unity can be none other than that of the combination of the
manifold of a given intuition in general in an original consciousness,
in agreement with the categories, only applied to our sensible intu­
ition. Consequently all synthesis, through which even perception itself
becomes possible, stands under the categories, and since experience is
cognition through connected perceptions, the categories are conditions
of the possibility of experience, and are thus also valid a priori of all ob­
jects of experience.
* * *

B 162

B 163

B 162

Thus if, e.g., I make the empirical intuition of a house into perception through apprehension of its manifold, my ground is the necessary
unity of space and of outer sensible intuition in general, and I as it were
draw its shape in agreement with this synthetic unity of the manifold in
space. This very same synthetic unity, however, if I abstract from the
form of space, has its seat in the understanding, and is the category of
the synthesis of the homogeneous in an intuition in general, i.e., the
category of quantity,a with which that synthesis of apprehension, i.e.,
the perception, must therefore be in thoroughgoing agreement.*
If (in another example) I perceive the freezing of water, I apprehend
two states (of fluidity and solidity) as ones standing in a relationb of time
to each other. But in time, on which I ground the appearance as inner
intuition, I represent necessary synthetic unity of the manifold, with­
out which that relatione could not be determinate1y given in an intu­
ition (with regard to the temporal sequence). But now this synthetic
unity, as the a priori condition under which I combine the manifold of
an intuition in general, if I abstract from the constant form of my
inner intuition, time, is the category of cause, through which, if ! apply
it to my sensibility, I determine everything that happens in time in
* In such a way it is proved that the synthesis of apprehension, which is em­
pirical, must necessarily be in agreement with the synthesis of apperception,
which is intellectual and contained in the category entirely a priori. It is one
and the same spontaneity that, there under the name of imagination and here
under the name of understanding, brings combination into the manifold of
intuition.
a Grofie
b Relation
, Relation
262

Section II. Trans. deduction of pure concepts of understanding <B>

general as far as its relation° is concerned. Thus the apprehension in
such an occurrence, hence the occurrence itself, as far as possible per­
ception is concerned, stands under the concept of the relationb of ef­
fects and causes, and so in all other cases.
* * *

Categories are concepts that prescribe laws a priori to appearances,
thus to nature as the sum total of all appearances (natura materialiter
spectata),c and, since they are not derived from nature and do not follow
it as their pattern (for they would otherwise be merely empirical), the
question now arises how it is to be conceived that nature must follow
them, i.e., how they can determine a priori the combination of the man­
ifold of nature without deriving from the latter. Here is the solution to
this riddle.
It is by no means stranger that the laws of appearances in nature must
agree with the understanding and its a priori form, i.e., its faculty of
combining the manifold in general, than that the appearances themselves must agree with the form of sensible intuition a priori. For laws
exist just a little in the appearances, but rather exist only relative to the
subject in which the appearances inhere, insofar as it has understanding,
as appearances do not exist in themselves, but only relative to the same
being, insofar as it has senses. The lawfulness of things in themselves
would necessarily pertain to them even without an understanding that
cognizes them. But appearances are only representations of things that
exist without cognition of what they might be in themselves. As mere
representations, however, they stand under no law of connection at all
except that which the connecting faculty prescribes. Now that which
connects the manifold of sensible intuition is imagination, which depends on understanding for the unity of its intellectual synthesis and on
sensibility for the manifoldness of apprehension. Now since all possible
perception depends on the synthesis of apprehension, but the latter itself, this empirical synthesis, depends on the transcendental one, thus
on the categories, all possible perceptions, hence everything that can
ever reach empirical consciousness, i.e., all appearances of nature, as far
as their combination is concerned,47 stand under the categories, on
which nature (considered merely as nature in general) depends, as the
original ground of its necessary lawfulness (as natura flrmaliter spectata).d The pure faculty of understanding does not suffice, however, to
Relation
b Verhiiltnisses
a

, "Nature regarded materially," i.e., nature in the sense of its material.
d "Nature formally regarded," i.e., nature considered with regard to its form rather than
its matter.

263

B

1 64

B

r65

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II. <B>

prescribe to the appearances through mere categories a priori laws
beyond those on which rests a nature in general, as lawfulness of ap­
pearances in space and time. Particular laws, because they concern em­
pirically determined appearances, cannot be completely derived from
the categories, although they all stand under them. Experience must be
added in order to come to know particular laws at all; but about expe­
rience in general, and about what can be cognized as an object of expe­
rience, only those a priori laws offer instruction.
§ 2 7·
Result of this deduction of the concepts of the understanding.

B 166

B 167

B r 66

We cannot think any object except through categories; we cannot cog­
nize any object that is thought except through intuitions that corre­
spond to those concepts. Now all our intuitions are sensible, and this
cognition, so far as its object is given, is empirical. Empirical cognition,
however, is experience. Consequently no a priori cognition is possible
for us except solely of objects of possible experience.*
But this cognition, which is limited merely to objects of experience,
is not on that account all borrowed from experience; rather, with regard
to the pure intuitions as well as the pure concepts of the understanding,
there are elements of cognition that are to be encountered in us a pri­
ori. Now there are only two ways in which a necessary agreement of
experience with the concepts of its objects can be thought: either the
experience makes these concepts possible or these concepts make the
experience possible. The first is not the case with the categories (nor
with pure sensible intuition); for they are a priori concepts, hence inde­
pendent of experience (the assertion of an empirical origin would be a
sort of generatio aequivoca).a Consequently only the second way remains

* So that one may not prematurely take issue with the worrisome and disad­
vantageous consequences of this proposition, I will only mention that the cat­
egories are not restricted in thinking by the conditions of our sensible
intuition, but have an unbounded field, and only the cognition of objects that
we think, the determination of the object,b requires intuition; in the absence
of the latter, the thought of the object ' can still have its true and useful con­
sequences for the use of the subject's reason, which, however, cannot be ex­
pounded here, for it is not always directed to the determination of the object,
thus to cognition, but rather also to that of the subject and its willing.
a The generation of one sort of thing out of something essentially different, e.g., the sup­
posed generation of flies from rotting meat.

Object
, Object
b

'.

264

Section II. Trans. deduction of pure concepts of understanding <B>

(as it were a system of the epigenesis48 of pure reason): namely that the
categories contain the grounds of the possibility of all experience in
general from the side of the understanding. But more about how they
make experience possible, and which principles of its possibility they
yield in their application to appearances, will be taught in the following
chapter on the transcendental use of the power of judgment.
If someone still wanted to propose a middle way between the only
two, already named ways, namely, that the categories were neither self­
thought a priori first principlesa of our cognition nor drawn from ex­
perience, but were rather subjective predispositions for thinking,
implanted in us along with our existence by our author in such a way
that their use would agree exactly with the laws of nature along which
experience runs (a kind of prefonnation-system49 of pure reason),
then (besides the fact that on such a hypothesis no end can be seen to
how far one might drive the presupposition of predetermined predis­
positions for future judgments) this would be decisive against the supposed middle way: that in such a case the categories would lack the
necessity that is essential to their concept. For, e.g., the concept of
cause, which asserts the necessity of a consequent under a presupposed
condition, would be false if it rested only on a subjective necessity, ar­
bitrarily implanted in us, of combining certain empirical representations according to such a rule of relation.b I would not be able to say
that the effect is combined with the cause in the object:" (i.e., necessarily), but only that I am so constituted that I cannot think of this repre­
sentation otherwise than as so connected; which is precisely what the
skeptic wishes most, for then all of our insight through the supposed
objective validity of our judgments is nothing but sheer illusion, and
there would be no shortage of people who would not concede this subjective necessity (which must be felt) on their own; at least one would
not be able to quarrel with anyone about that which merely depends on
the way in which his subject is organized.

B 1 68

Brief concept of this deduction.
It is the exhibition of the pure concepts of the understanding (and with
them of all theoretical cognition a priori) as principlesd of the possi­
bility of experience, but of the latter as the detennination of appearances in space and time in general - and the latter, finally, from the
a Principien

b Verhii/tnisses
, Objecte
d Principien

265

B 169

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II. <B>

principlea of the original synthetic unity of apperception, as the form
of the understanding in relation to space and time, as original forms of
sensibility.
* * *

I hold the division into paragraphs to be necessary only this far, because
we have been dealing with the elementary concepts. Now that we will
represent their use, the exposition may proceed in a continuous fashion,
without this division.>
a Princip

266

The Transcendental Analytic
Second Book
The Analytic of Principles

General logic is constructed on a plan that corresponds quite precisely
with the division of the higher faculties of cognition. These are: un­
derstanding, the power of judgment, and reason. In its analytic that
doctrine accordingly deals with concepts, judgments, and inferences,
corresponding exactly to the functions and the order of those powers of
mind, which are comprehended under the broad designation of under­
standing in general.
Since merely formal logic, so conceived, abstracts from all content of
cognition (whether it be pure or empirical), and concerns itself merely
with the form of thinking (of discursive cognition) in general, it can also
include in its analytical part the canon for reason, the form of which has
its secure precept, into which there can be a priori insight through mere
analysis of the actions of reason into their moments, without taking into
consideration the particular nature of the cognition about which it is
employed.
Transcendental logic, since it is limited to a determinate content,
namely that of pure a priori cognitions alone, cannot imitate general
logic in this division. For it turns out that the transcendental use of
reason is not objectively valid at all, thus does not belong to the logic
of truth, i.e., the analytic, but rather, as a logic of illusion, requires a
special part of the scholastic edifice, under the name of the transcen­
dental dialectic.
Understanding and the power of judgment accordingly have their
canon of objectively valid, thus true use in transcendental logic, and
therefore belong in its analytical part. Only reason in its attempts to
make out something about objects a priori and to extend cognition beyond the bounds of possible experience is wholly and entirely dialectical, and its illusory assertions do not fi t into a canon of the sort that the
analytic ought to contain.
The analytic of principles will accordingly be solely a canon for the
power of judgment that teaches it to apply to appearances the con­
cepts of the understanding, which contain the condition for rules a pri2 67

B I69

A131
B 1 70

B 1 7 1 /A l p

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II

ori. For this reason,a as I take the actual principles of the understand­
ing as my theme I will make use of the designation of a doctrine of the
power of judgment, through which this enterprise may be more pre­
cisely designated.
Introduction
On the transcendental power of judgment
in general.

A I 3 3 /B I 72

A I 341B 1 7 3

A I 3 3 1B 1 7 2

A I 341 B 1 7 3

If the understanding in general is explained as the faculty of rules, then
the power of judgment is the faculty of subsuming under rules, i.e., of
determining whether something stands under a given rule (casus datae
legis)h or not. General logic contains no precepts at all for the power of
judgment, and moreover cannot contain them. For since it abstracts
from all content of cognition, nothing remains to it but the business
of analytically dividing the mere form of cognition into concepts, judgments, and inferences, and thereby achieving formal rules for all use of
the understanding. Now if it wanted to show generally how one ought
to subsume under these rules, i.e., distinguish whether something
stands under them or not, this could not happen except once again
through a rule. But just because this is a rule, it would demand another
instruction for the power of judgment, and so it becomes clear that al­
though the understanding is certainly capable of being instructed and
equipped through rules, the power of judgment is a special talent that
cannot be taught but only practiced. Thus this is also what is specific to
so-called mother-wit, the lack of which cannot be made good by any
school; for,c although such a school can provide a limited understanding
with plenty of rules borrowed from the insight of others and as it were
graft these onto it, nevertheless the faculty for making use of them cor­
rectly must belong to the student himself, and in the absence of such a
natural gift no rule that one might prescribe to him for this aim is safe
from misuse.*, d A physician therefore, a judge, or a statesman, can have
* The lack of the power o f judgment is that which is properly called stupidity,
and such a failing is not to be helped. A dull or limited head, which is lacking
nothing but the appropriate degree of understanding and its proper concepts,
may well be trained through instruction, even to the point of becoming
learned. But since it would usually still lack the power of judgment (the secunda Petn),e it is not at all uncommon to encounter very learned men who in
n Ursache
b case of the given law
C

In the first edition, "since."
Kant struck this footnote from his copy of the first edition (E, p. 27), but nevertheless
let it remain in the second.
, the companion of Peter

d

268

Introduction

many fine pathological, juridical, or political rules in his head, of which
he can even be a thorough teacher, and yet can easily stumble in their
application, either because he is lacking in natural power of judgment
(though not in understanding), and to be sure understands the univer­
sal in abstracto but" cannot distinguish whether a case in concreto belongs
under it, or also because he has not received adequate training for this
judgment through examples and actual business. This is also the sole
and great utility of examples: that they sharpen the power of judgment.
F or as far as the correctness and precision of the insight of the under­
standing is concerned, examples more usually do it some damage, since
they only seldom adequately fulfill the condition of the rule (as casus in
terminis)b and beyond this often weaken the effort of the understanding
to gain sufficient insight into rules in the universal and independently
of the particular circumstances of experience, and thus in the end ac­
custom us to use those rules more like formulas than like principles.
Thus examples are the leading-strings of the power of judgment, which
he who lacks the natural talent for judgment can never do without. 50
But now although general logic can give no precepts to the power
of judgment, things are quite different with transcendental logic, so
that it even seems that the latter has as its proper business to correct
and secure the power of judgment in the use of the pure understanding
through determinate rules. For although for expansion of the role of
the understanding in the field of pure cognitions a priori, hence as a
doctrine, philosophy seems entirely unnecessary or rather ill-suited,
since after all its previous attempts little or no territory has been won,
yet as critique, in order to avoid missteps in judgment (lapsusjudici)d in
the use of the few pure concepts of the understanding that we have, phi­
losophy with all of its perspicacity and art of scrutiny is called up (even
though its utility is then only negative).
But the peculiar thing about transcendental philosophy is this: that in
addition to the rule (or rather the general condition for rules), which is
given in the pure concept of the understanding, it can at the same time
indicate a priori the case to which the rules ought to be applied. The
cause o f the advantage that it has in this regard over all other didactic
sciences (except for mathematics) lies just here: that it deals with conthe use of their science frequently give glimpses of that lack, which is never to
be ameliorated.
a "but" added in the second edition.

b

I.e., as a limiting case.
, Following Erdmann in reading "derselben" instead of "desselben, thus taking "the power
of judgment" as its antecedent.
d lapses of judp:lent
"

269

B 1 74
A I35

B 175

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II
cepts that are to be related to their objects
A 136

a priori,

hence its objective

validity cannot b e established a posteriori, for that would leave that dig­
nity of theirs entirely untouched; rather it must at the same time offer
a general but sufficient characterization of the conditions under which
objects in harmony with those concepts can be given, for otherwise they
would be without all content, and thus would be mere logical forms and
not pure concepts of the understanding.
This

transcendental doctrine of the power of judgment will con­
first, which deals with the sensible condition

tain two chapters: the

under which alone pure concepts of the understanding can be employed,
i.e., with the schematism of the pure understanding; and the second,
which deals with those synthetic judgments that How a priori from pure
concepts of the understanding under these conditions and ground all
other cognitions

a

priori,

i.e., with the principles of pure understanding.

270

aThe Transcendental Doctrine
of the Power ofJudgment
(or Analytic of Principles)
First Chapter
On the schematism b of the
pure concepts of the understanding5I

In all subsumptions of an object under a concept the representations of
the former must be homogeneous with the latter, i.e., the concept
must contain that which is represented in the object that is to be sub­
sumed under it, for that is just what is meant by the expression "an ob­
ject is contained under a concept." Thus the empirical concept of a
plate has homogeneity with the pure geometrical concept of a circle,
for the roundness that is thought in the former can be intuited in the
l atter.
Now pure concepts of the understanding, however, in comparison
with empirical (indeed in general sensible) intuitions, are entirely un­
homogeneous, and can never be encountered in any intuition. Now

n

The following notes pertaining to the general argument of the next section are all in­
serted on A I 3 7 in Kant's copy of the first edition :
"We cannot think any intuitions or relations [Verhiiltni.l:,e] of intuitions for the cate­
gories, rather they must be given in experience. Thus all principles pertain merely to
possible experience, since this is possible only in accordance with the form of the unity

of understanding." (E LUI, p. 2 7 ; 2 3 : 2 7)
"The incomprehensibility of the categories sterns from the fact that we cannot have
insight into the synthetic unity of appercepti on. " (E LIv, p. 27; 23:27)
"The schema of time a line." (E LV; p. 2 7; 2 3 : 2 7)
"The possibility of an object

cause

[Objects]

of the concept of the understanding, e.g., a

or alf1tntcrciultt, canno t be thought a priori, consequently only an experience can

be thought with the conditions under which it can become experience in combination
b

with the concept of the understanding." (E LVI, p. 2 7; 2 3 : 2 7)
Kant's copy of the first edition adds this note: "The synthesis of the understanding is
called thus if it determines the inner sense in accordance with the unity of appercep­
tion." (E LVII, p.

27; 2 3 :2 7)
271

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. I

B I77/A I 3 8

B 1 78
A139

how is the subsumption of the latter under the former, thus the appli­
cation of the category to appearances possible, since no one would say
that the category, e.g., causality, could also be intuited through the
senses and is contained in the appearance? This question, so natural and
important, is really the cause which makes a transcendental doctrine of
the power of judgment necessary, in order, namely, to show the possi­
bility of applying pure concepts of the understanding to appearances
in general. In all other sciences, where the concepts through which the
object is thought in general are not so different and heterogeneous
from those that represent it in concreto, as it is given, it is unnecessary to
offer a special discussion of the application of the former to the latter.
Now it is clear that there must be a third thing, which must stand in
homogeneity with the category on the one hand and the appearance on
the other, and makes possible the application of the former to the lat­
ter. This mediating representation must be pure (without anything em­
pirical) and yet intellectual on the one hand and sensible on the other.
Such a representation is the transcendental schema.
The concept of the understanding contains pure synthetic unity of
the manifold in general. Time, as the formal condition of the manifold
of inner sense, thus of the connection of all representations, contains an
a priori manifold in pure intuition. Now a transcendental time-deter­
mination is homogeneous with the category (which constitutes its
unity) insofar as it is universal and rests on a rule a priori. But it is on
the other hand homogeneous with the appearance insofar as time is
contained in every empirical representation of the manifold. Hence an
application of the category to appearances becomes possible by means
of the transcendental time-determination which, as the schema of the
concept of the understanding, mediates the subsumption of the latter
under the former.
After what has been shown in the deduction of the categories, hope­
fully no one will be in doubt about how to decide the question, whether
these pure concepts of the understanding are of merely empirical or also
of transcendental use, i.e., whether, as conditions of a possible experi­
ence, they relate a priori solely to appearances, or whether, as conditions
of the possibility of things in general, they can be extended to objects in
themselves (without any restriction to our sensibility). For we have seen
there that concepts are entirely impossible,a and cannot have any signif­
icance, where an object is not given either for them themselves or at
least for the elements of which they consist, consequently they cannot
pertain to things in themselves (without regard to how and whether they
may be given to us) at all; that, further, the modification of our sensibila

Altered in Kant's copy of the first edition to "are for us without sense" (E LVIII, p. 2 8;

2 3 :46).

2 72

On the schematism of pure concepts of understanding"

ity is the only way in which objects are given to us; and, finally, that pure
concepts a priori, in addition to the function of the understanding in the
category, must also contain a priori formal conditions of sensibility
(namely of the inner sense) that contain the general condition under
which alone the category can be applied to any object. We will call this
formal and pure condition of the sensibility, to which the use of the concept of the understanding is restricted, the schema of this concept of
the understanding, and we will call the procedure of the understanding
with these schemata the schematism of the pure understanding.
The schema is in itself always only a product of the imagination; but
since the synthesis of the latter has as its aim no individual intuition but
rather only the unity in the determination of sensibility, the schema is
to be distinguished from an image. Thus, if I place five points in a
row, . . . . . , this is an image of the number five. On the contrary, if I
only think a number in general, which could be five or a hundred, this
thinking is more the representation of a method for representing a mul­
titude (e.g., a thousand) in accordance with a certain concept than the
image itself, which in this case I could survey and compare with the
concept only with difficulty. Now this representation of a general procedure of the imagination for providing a concept with its image is what
I call the schema for this concept.
In fact it is not images of objects but schemata that ground our pure
sensible conceptsY No image of a triangle would ever be adequate to
the concept of it. For it would not attain the generality of the concept,
which makes this valid for all triangles, right or acute, etc., but would
always be limited to one part of this sphere. The schema of the triangle
can never exist anywhere except in thought, and signifies a rule of the
synthesis of the imagination with regard to pure shapes in space. Even
less does an object of experience or an image of it ever reach the empirical concept, rather the latter is always related immediately to the
schema of the imagination, as a rule for the determination of our intuition in accordance with a certain general concept. The concept of a
dog signifies a rule in accordance with which my imagination can specify the shape of a four-footed animal in general, without being re­
stricted to any single particular shape that experience offers me or any
possible image that I can exhibit in concreto. This schematism of our un­
derstanding with regard to appearances and their mere form is a hidden
art in the depths of the human soul, whose true operations we can divine from nature and lay unveiled before our eyes only with difficulty.
We can say only this much: the image is a product of the empirical faculty of productive imagination, the schema of sensible concepts (such
a

In the first edition the right-hand heading here changes to "On the Schematism of the
Categories."

273

B 1 79

A 140

B 1 80
A I41

B 181

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. I
A 142

B 182

A 143

as figures in space) is a product and as it were a monogram of pure a pri­
ori imagination, through which and in accordance with which the im­
ages first become possible, but which must be connected with the
concept, to which they are in themselves never fully congruent, always
only by means of the schema that they designate. The schema of a pure
concept of the understanding, on the contrary, is something that can
never be brought to an image at all, but is rather only the pure synthe­
sis, in accord with a rule of unity according to concepts in general,
which the category expresses, and is a transcendental product of the
imagination, which concerns the determination of the inner sense in
general, in accordance with conditions of itsa form (time) in regard to
all representations, insofar as these are to be connected together a pri­
ori in one concept in accord with the unity of apperception.
Rather than pausing now for a dry and boring analysis of what is re­
quired for transcendental schemata of pure concepts of the understand­
ing in general, we would rather present them according to the order of
the categories and in connection with these.
The pure image of all magnitudes (quantorum) for outer sense is
space; for all objects of the senses in general, it is time. The pure
schema of magnitude (quantitatis), however, as a concept of the un­
derstanding, is number, which is a representation that summarizes the
successive addition of one (homogeneous) unit to another. Thus number is nothing other than the unity of the synthesis of the manifold of a
homogeneous intuition in general, becauseb I generate time itself in the
apprehension of the intuition.53
Realityc is in the pure concept of the understanding that to which a
sensationd in general corresponds, that, therefore, the concept of which
in itself indicates a being (in time). Negation is that the concept of
which represents a non-being (in time). The opposition of the two thus
takes place in the distinction of one and the same time as either a filled
or an empty time. Since time is only the form of intuition, thus of ob­
jects as appearances, that which corresponds to the sensation in these is
the transcendental matter of all objects, as things in themselves (thinga

b

In his copy of the first edition, Kant changed this from "ihrer" to "seiner, " perhaps
thereby intending to change its antecedent from "determination" to "inner sense" (E
LIX, p. 2 8; 2 3 =46).

dadurch, daft
, Realitdt
d

Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition:
"Sensation is that which is really empirical in our cognition, and the real of the rep­
resentations of inner sense in contrast to their form, time. Sensation therefore lies out­
side all a priori cognition. Only therein, how one sensation differs from another with
regard to quality, beyond the a priori degrees, but not of their quantity. [sic]" (E LX, p.
28; 2 3: 2 7)

2 74

On the schematism of pure concepts of understanding

hood,a reality). Now every sensation has a degree or magnitude,
through which it can more or less fill the same time, i.e., the inner sense
in regard to the same representation of an object, until it ceases in noth­
ingness (= 0 = negatio). Hence there is a relationb and connection between, or rather a transition from reality to negation, that makes every
reality representable a s a quantum, and the schema o f a reality, as the
quantity of something insofar as it fills time, is just this continuous and
uniform generation of that quantity in time, as one descends in time
from the sensation that has a certain degree to its disappearance or
gradually ascends from negation to its magnitude.
The schema of substance is the persistence of the real in time, i.e., the
representation of the real as a substratum of empirical time-determination in general, which therefore endures while everything else changes.
(Time itself does not elapse, but the existence of that which is changeable elapses in it. To time, therefore, which is itself unchangeable and
lasting, there corresponds in appearance that which is unchangeable in
existence, i.e., substance, and in it alone can the succession and simultaneity of appearances be determined in regard to time.)
The schema of the cause and of the causalityc of a thing in general is
the real upon which, whenever it is posited, something else always fol­
lows. It therefore consists in the succession of the manifold insofar as it
is subject to a rule.
The schema of community (reciprocity), or of the reciprocal causal­
ity of substances with regard to their accidents, is the simultaneity of
the determinations of the one with those of the other, in accordance
with a general rule.
The schema of possibility is the agreement of the synthesis of various
representations with the conditions of time in general (e.g., since op­
posites cannot exist in one thing at the same time, they can only exist
one after another), thus the determination of the representation of a
thing to some time.
The schema of actualityd is existence at a determinate time.
The schema of necessity ise the existence of an object at all times.54
Now one sees from all this that the schema of each category contains
and makes representable: in the case of magnitude, the generation (syn­
thesis) of time itself, in the successive apprehension of an object; in the
case of the schema of quality, the synthesis of sensation (perception)
with the representation of time, or the filling of time; in the case of the
Sachheit
Verhiiltnis
, der Ursache und der Causalitiit
d Wirklichkeit
a

b

, "is" added in the second edition.

275

B I8 3

A 144

B 1 84

A 145

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. I

B 1 85

A 146

B 1 86

schema of relation,a the relationb of the perceptions among themselves
to all time (i.e., in accordance with a rule of time-determination); fi­
nally, in the schema of modality and its categories, time itself, as the
correlate of the determination of whether and how an object belongs to
time. The schemata are therefore nothing but a priori time-determi­
nations in accordance with rules, and these concern, according to the
order of the categories, the time-series, the content of time, the
order of time, and finally the sum total of timec in regard to all pos­
sible objects.
From this it is clear that the schematism of the understanding
through the transcendental synthesis of imagination comes down to
nothing other than the unity of all the manifold of intuition in inner
sense, and thus indirectly to the unity of apperception, as the function
that corresponds to inner sense (to a receptivity). Thus the schemata of
the concepts of pure understanding are the true and sole conditions for
providing them with a relation to objects/ thus with significance, and
hence the categories are in the end of none but a possible empirical use,
since they merely serve to subject appearances to general rules of syn­
thesis through grounds of an a priori necessary unity (on account of the
necessary unification of all consciousness in an original apperception),
and thereby to make them fit for a thoroughgoing connection in one
experience.
All of our cognitions, however, lie in the entirety of all possible ex­
perience, and transcendental truth, which precedes all empirical truth
and makes it possible, consists in the general relation to this.
But it is also obvious that, although the schemata of sensibility first
realize the categories, yet they likewise also restrict them, i.e., limit
them to conditions that lie outside the understanding (namely, in sensi­
bility). Hence the schema is really only the phenomenon, or the sensi­
ble concept of an object, in agreement with the category. (Numerus est
quantitas phaenomenon, sensatio realitas phaenomenon, constans et per­
durabile rerum substantia phaenomenon aeternitas, necessitas phaenomena
etc.).e Now if we leave aside a restricting condition, it may seem as if we
amplify the previously limited concept; thus the categories in their pure
significance, without any conditions of sensibility, should hold for
things in general, as they are, instead of their schemata merely repre­
senting them how they appear, and they would therefore have a sig-

A 147

a Relation
b

Verhiiltnis
, Zeitinbewiff
d Objecte
, "Number is the quantity [of the] phenomenon, sensation the reality [of the] phenomenon,
constancy and the endurance of things the substance [of the] phenomenon, eteruity the
necessity [of] phenomena, etc."

276

On the schematism of pure concepts of understanding

nificance independent of all schemata and extending far beyond them.
In fact, even after abstraction from all sensible condition, significance,
but only a logical significance of the mere unity of representations, is
left to the pure concepts of the understanding, but no object and thus
no significance is given to them that could yield a concepta of the obj ect.b Thus, e.g., if one leaves out the sensible determination of persistence, substance would signify nothing more than a something that can
be thought as a subject (without being a predicate of something else).
Now out of this representation I can make nothing, as it shows me
nothing at all about what determinations the thing that is to count as
such a first subject i s to have. Without schemata, therefore, the categories are only functions of the understanding for concepts, but do not
represent any object. This significance comes to them from sensibility,
which realizes the understanding at the same time as it restricts it.
a

h

Changed in Kant's copy of the first edition to "cognition" (E LXI, p. 28; 2 3 :46).

Object

2 77

B 187

Transcendental Doctrine of the
Power ofJudgment
(or Analytic of Principles)
Second Chapter
System of aU principles ofpure
understanding

B 188

A 149

In the previous chapter we have considered the transcendental power
of judgment only in accordance with the general conditions under
which alone it is authorized to use the pure concepts of the under­
standing for synthetic judgments. Now our task is to exhibit in sys­
tematic combination the judgments that the understanding actually
brings about a priori subject to this critical warning, for which our table
of the categories must doubtless give us natural and secure guidance.
For it is precisely these whose relation to possible experience must
constitute all pure cognition of the understanding a priori, and whose
relationa to sensibility in general will, on that very account, display all
transcendental principles of the use of the understanding completely
and in a system.
A priori principles bear this name not merely because they contain in
themselves the grounds of other judgments, but also because they are
not themselves grounded in higher and more general cognitions. Yet
this property does not elevate them beyond all proof. For although this
could not be carried further objectively, but rather grounds all cogni­
tion of its object,b yet this does not prevent a proof from the subjective
sources of the possibility of a cognition of an object in general from
being possible, indeed even necessary, since otherwise the proposition
would raise the greatest suspicion of being a merely surreptitious
assertion.
Second, we will limit ourselves merely to those principles that are rea Verhdltnis
b

Objects
278

Section I. On the highest principle of all analytic judgments

lated to the categories. The principlesfl of the transcendental aesthetic,
therefore, according to which space and time are the conditions of the
possibility of all things as appearances, as well as the restriction of these
principles, namely that they cannot be related to things in themselves,
do not belong within our confined field of investigation. Likewise the
mathematical principles do not constitute any part of this system, since
they are drawn only from intuition, not from the pure concept of the
understanding; yet their possibility, since they are likewise synthetic a
priori judgments, necessarily finds a place here, not in order to prove
their correctness and apodictic certainty, which is not at all necessary,
but only to make comprehensible and to deduce the possibility of such
evident cognitions a priori.
But we must also speak of the principle of analytic judgments, in contrast, to be sure, to that of synthetic judgments, with which we are properly concerned, since precisely this contrast will free the theory of the
latter from all misunderstanding and lay their particular nature clearly
before our eyes.

B 1 89

A I 50

The System of the Principles of Pure Understanding
First Section
On the supreme principle
of all analytic judgments.55
Whatever the content of our cognition may be, and however it may be
related to the object,b the general though to be sure only negative con­
dition of all of our judgments whatsoever is that they do not contradict
themselves; otherwise these judgments in themselves (even without regard to the objecty are nothing. But even if there is no contradiction
within our judgment, it can nevertheless combine concepts in a way not
entailed by the object, or even without any ground being given to us either a priori or a posteriori that would justify such a judgment, and thus,
for all that a judgment may be free of any internal contradiction, it can
still be either false or groundless.
Now the proposition that no predicate pertains to a thing that contradicts it is called the principled of contradiction, and is a general
though merely negative criterion of all truth, but on that account it also
belongs merely to logic, since it holds of cognitions merely as cogni-

Principien
Object
, Object
d Satz: ordinarily translated as "proposition," it will be translated as "principle" in the
phrase "Satz des Widerspruchs" throughout this section.

a

b

279

B 1 90

AI51

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 191

AI 52

B 192

tions in general, without regard to their content, and says that contra­
diction entirely annihilates and cancels them.
But one can also make a positive use of it, i.e., not merely to ban false­
hood and error (insofar as it rests on contradiction), but also to cognize
truth. For, if the judgment is analytic, whether it be negative or affir­
mative, its truth must always be able to be cognized sufficiently in ac­
cordance with the principle of contradiction. For the contrary of that
which as a concept already lies and is thought in the cognition of the
objecta is always correctly denied, while the concept itself must necessarily be affirmed of it, since its opposite would contradict the object.b
Hence we must also allow the principle of contradiction to count
as the universal and completely sufficient principle' of all analytic
cognition; but its authority and usefulness does not extend beyond this,
as a sufficient criterion of truth. For that no cognition can be opposed
to it without annihilating itself certainly makes this principled into a conditio sine qua non, but not into a determining ground of the truth of our
cognition. Since we now really have to do only with the synthetic part
of our cognition, we will, to be sure, always be careful not to act con­
trary to this inviolable principle, but we cannot expect any advice from
it in regard to the truth of this sort of cognition.
There is, however, still one formula of this famous principle, al­
though denuded of all content and merely formal, which contains a syn­
thesis that is incautiously and entirely unnecessarily mixed into it. This
is: "It is impossible for something to be and not to be at the same
time." In addition to the fact that apodictic certainty is superfluously
appended to this (by means of the word "impossible"), which must yet
be understood from the proposition itself, the proposition is affected by
the condition of time, and as it were says: "A thing A, which is some­
thing B, cannot at the same time be non-B, although it can easily be
both (B as well as non-B) in succession." E.g., a person who is young
cannot be old at the same time, but one and the same person can very
well be young at one time and not young, i.e., old, at another. Now the
principle of contradiction, as a merely logical principle, must not limit
its claims to temporal relations.' Hence such a formula is entirely con­
trary to its aim. The misunderstanding results merely from our first ab­
stracting a predicate of a thing from its concept and subsequently
connecting its opposite with this predicate, which never yields a con­
tradiction with the subject, but only with the predicate that is combined
with it synthetically, and indeed only when both the first and the sec=

=

AI53

a Objects

b Objecte
, Principium
d

Satz

, Zeitverhiiltnisse
2 80

Section II. On the highest principle of synthetic judgments

ond predicate are affirmed at the same time. If I say "A person who is
unlearned is not learned," the condition at the same time must hold;
for one who is unlearned at one time can very well be learned at another
time. But if I say that "No unlearned person is learned," then the
proposition is analytic, since the mark (of unlearnedness) is now com­
prised in the concept of the subject, and then the negative proposition
follows immediately from the principle of contradiction, without the
condition at the same time having to be added. This is also then the
cause why I have above so altered the formula of it that the nature of an
analytic proposition is thereby clearly expressed.
Of the System of the Principles of Pure Understanding
Second Section

B 193

A 1 54

On the supreme principle of all synthetic judgments.56
The explanation of the possibility of synthetic judgments is a problem
with which general logic has nothing to do, indeed whose name it need
not even know. But in a transcendental logic it is the most important
business of all, and indeed the only business if the issue is the possibil­
ity of synthetic a priori judgments and likewise the conditions and the
domain of their validity. For by completing this task transcendental
logic can fully satisfy its goal of determining the domain and boundaries
of pure understanding.
In the analytic judgment I remain with the given concept in order to
discern something about it. If it is an affirmative judgment, I only as­
cribe to this concept that which is already thought in it; if it is a nega­
tive judgment, I only exclude the opposite of this concept from it. In
synthetic judgments, however, I am to go beyond the given concept in
order to consider something entirely different from what is thought in
it as in a relation° to it, a relationb which is therefore never one of either
identity, or contradiction, and one where neither the truth nor the error
of the judgment can be seen in the judgment itself.
If it is thus conceded that one must go beyond a given concept in
order to compare it synthetically with another, then a third thing is nec­
essary in which alone the synthesis of two concepts can originate. But
now what is this third thing, as the medium of all synthetic judgments?
There is only one totalityc in which all of our representations are con­
tained, namely inner sense and its a priori form, time. The synthesis of
representations rests on the imagination, but their synthetic unity
(which is requisite for judgment), on the unity of apperception. Herein
a Verhdltnis
b
,

Verhdltnis

Inbegriff

281

B 194
A 155

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B I95
A

I 56

B I96
A I 57

therefore is the possibility of synthetic judgments, and, since all three
contain the sources of a priori representations, also the possibility of
pure synthetic judgments, to be sought, indeed on these grounds they
will even be necessary if a cognition of objects is to come about which
rests solely on the synthesis of the representations.
If a cognition is to have objective reality, i.e., to be related to an ob­
ject, and is to have significance and sense in that object, the object must
be able to be given in some way. Without that the concepts are empty,
and through them one has, to be sure, thought but not in fact cognized
anything through this thinking, but rather merely played with representations. To give an object, if this is not again meant only mediately,
but it is rather to be exhibited immediately in intuition, is nothing other
than to relate its representation to experience (whether this be actual or
still possible). Even space and time, as pure as these concepts are from
everything empirical and as certain as it is that they are represented in
the mind completely a priori, would still be without objective validity
and without sense and significance if their necessary use on the objects
of experience were not shown; indeed, their representation is a mere
schema, which is always related to the reproductive imagination that
calls forth the objects of experience, without which they would have no
significance; and thus it is with all concepts without distinction.
The possibility of experience is therefore that which gives all of our
cognitions a priori objective reality. Now experience rests on the syn­
thetic unity of appearances, i.e., on a synthesis according to concepts of
the object of appearances in general, without which it would not even
be cognition but rather a rhapsody of perceptions, which would not fit
together in any context in accordance with rules of a thoroughly con­
nected (possible) consciousness, thus not into the transcendental and
necessary unity of apperception. Experience therefore has principles a of
its form which ground it a priori, namely general rules of unity in the
synthesis of appearances, whose objective reality, as necessary condi­
tions, can always be shown in experience, indeed in its possibility. But
apart from this relation synthetic a priori propositions are entirely im­
possible, since they would then have no third thing, namely a pure ob­
ject,b in which the synthetic unity of their concepts could establish
objective reality.
Thus although in synthetic judgments we cognize a priori so much
about space in general or about the shapes that the productive imagi­
nation draws in it that we really do not need any experience for this, still
this cognition would be nothing at all, but an occupation with a mere
figment of the brain, if space were not to be regarded as the condition
a Principien
b

reinen Gegenstand; Erdmann suggests keinem Gegenstand, i.e., "no object."
282

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

of the appearances which constitute the matter of outer experience;
hence those pure synthetic judgments are related, although only medi­
ately, to possible experience, or rather to its possibility itself, and on
that alone is the objective validity of their synthesis grounded.
Thus since experience, as empirical synthesis, is in its possibility the
only kind of cognition that gives all other synthesis reality, as a priori
cognition it also possesses truth (agreement with the object)O only insofar as it contains nothing more than what is necessary for the synthetic
unity of experience in general.
The supreme principleb of all synthetic judgments is, therefore: Every
object stands under the necessaty conditions of the synthetic unity of the
manifold of intuition in a possible experience.
In this way synthetic a priori judgments are possible, if we relate the
formal conditions of a priori intuition, the synthesis of the imagination,
and its necessary unity in a transcendental apperception to a possible
cognition of experience in general, and say: The conditions of the pos­
sibility of experience in general are at the same time conditions of the
possibility of the objects of experience, and on this account have ob­
jective validity in a synthetic judgment a priori.'

B 1 97
A I 58

Of the System of the Principles of Pure Understanding
Third Section
Systematic representation of all synthetic
principles of pure understanding.
That there are principles anywhere at all is to be ascribed solely to the
pure understanding, which is not only the faculty of rules in regard to
that which happens, but is rather itself the source of the principles in
accordance with which everything (that can even come before us as an
object) necessarily stands under rules, since, without such rules, ap­
pearances could never amount to cognition of an object corresponding
to them. Even laws of nature, if they are considered as principles of the
empirical use of the understanding, at the same time carry with them an
expression of necessity, thus at least the presumption of determination
by grounds that are a priori and valid prior to all experience.57 But witha Object
b

C

Principium

The following two notes are entered in Kant's copy at A 1 5 8 :
"How are the objects determined i n accordance with the concept a priori?" ( E LXII,
p. 2 8; 2 3 :28)
"The [principles] can never be proved from mere concepts, as if they dealt with
things in themselves, but can only be proved from the possibility of the perception of
things." (E LXIII, p. 29; 2 p 8)

283

B 198
A 159

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B I99
A I 60

B 200

out exception all laws of nature stand under higher principles of the un­
derstanding, as they only apply the latter to particular cases of appear­
ance. Thus these higher principles alone provide the concept, which
contains the condition and as it were the exponents for a rule in gen­
eral, while experience provides the case which stands under the rule.
There can really be no danger that one will regard merely empirical
principles as principles of the pure understanding, or vice versa; for the
necessity according to concepts that distinguishes the latter, and whose
lack in every empirical proposition, no matter how generally it may hold,
is easily perceived, can easily prevent this confusion. There are, however,
pure principles a priori that I may nevertheless not properly ascribe to
the pure understanding, since they are not derived from pure concepts
but rather from pure intuitions (although by means of the understand­
ing); the understanding, however, is the faculty of concepts. Mathe­
matics has principles of this sort, but their application to experience,
thus their objective validity, indeed the possibility of such synthetic a pri­
ori cognition (its deduction) still always rests on the pure understanding.
Hence I will not count among my principles those of mathematics,
but I will include those on which the possibility and objective a priori
validity of the latter are grounded, and which are thus to be regarded as
the principle of these principles,a and that proceed from concepts to
the intuition but not from the intuition to concepts.
In the application of the pure concepts of understanding to possible
experience the use of their synthesis is either mathematical58 or dy­
namical: for it pertains partly merely to the intuition, partly to the ex­
istence of an appearance in general. The a priori conditions of intuition,
however, are necessary throughout in regard to a possible experience,
while those of the existence of the objectsb of a possible empirical intu­
ition are in themselves only contingent. Hence the principles of the
mathematical use will be unconditionally necessary, i.e., apodictic, while
the principles of the dynamical use, to be sure, also carry with them the
character of an a priori necessity, but only under the condition of em­
pirical thinking in an experience, thus only mediately and indirectly;
consequently these do not contain the immediate evidence that is char­
acteristic of the former (though their universal certainty in relation to
experience is not thereby injured). Yet this will be better judged at the
conclusion of this system of principles.
The table of categories gives us entirely natural direction for the
table of principles, since these principles are nothing other than rules of
a als Principium dieser Grundsdtze, i.e., as the general principle giving objective validity to

b

the propositions of mathematics which are themselves synthetic a priori according to the
"Transcendental Aesthetic."

Objecte
2 84

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

the objective use of the categories. All principles of the pure under­
standing are, accordingly, 59

I.
Axioms
of intuition.
3·
Analogies
of experience.

2.
Anticipations
of perception.

4·
Postulates
of empirical thinking
in general. a

I have chosen these titles with care, in order not to leave unnoted the
distinctions with respect to the evidence and the exercise of these principles. But it will soon be shown that as far as the evidence as well as the
a priori determination of appearances according to the categories of
magnitude and quality are concerned (if one attends solely to the form
of the latter), their principles are importantly distinct from those of the
two others; while the former are capable of an intuitive certainty, the
latter are capable only of a discursive certainty, though in both cases
they are capable of a complete certainty. I will therefore call the former
the mathematical and the latter the dynamical principles.*,b,60 But one
* [Note added in the second edition:] <All combination (conjunctio) is either
composition' (compositio) or connectiond (nexus). The former is the syna

The following note is inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition:
" 1 . Axioms of Intuition. Formal.
pure mathematics pura
applied mathematics dynamics.
Mathematics
2. Anticipations of Perception. Real.
-

-

}

Perception is the consciousness
ofan appearance (J;efore any concept)
3. Analogies of Experience
4. Postulates of empirical
Thinking in general

Physiology

{ I,

Physical

2 . Metaphysical

Sensation not beyond
experience"

b
,

d

(E uav, p. 29; � 3 '2 8)
Changed in Kant's copy of the first edition to: "the physiological principles" (E Lxv, p.
29; 2 3:46), though obviously this change was not incorporated into the second edition.

Zusammenhang
Verknupfung
285

B 201
A 162

B 20!

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 202

should note well that I here have in mind the principles of mathematics just as little in the one case as the principles of general (physical) dy­
namics in the other, but rather have in mind only the principles of the
pure understanding in relationo to the inner sense (without distinction
of the representations which are given therein), through which the for­
mer principles all acquire their possibility. I am therefore titling them
more with respect to their application than on account of their content,
and I now proceed to the consideration of them in the same order in
which they are represented in the table.
1.

<Axioms of Intuition.>b
[In the first edition:]
Principle of pure understanding: All appearances are, as
regards their intuition, extensive magnitudes.
[In the second edition:]
<Their principle is: All intuitions are
extensive magnitudes.>c,d, 6 r

e<Proof
All appearances contain, as regards their form, an intuition in space
and time, which grounds all of them a priori. They cannot be apprethesis of a manifold of what does not necessarily belong to each other, as
e.g., the two triangles into which a square is divided by the diagonal do not of
themselves necessarily belong to each other, and of such a sort is the synthesis
of the homogeneous in everything that can be considered mathematically
(which synthesis can be further divided into that of aggregation and of coali­
tion, of which the first is directed to extensive magnitudes and the second to
intensive magnitudes). The second combination (nexus) is the synthesis of that
which is manifold insofar as they necessarily belong to one another, as e.g.,
an accident belongs to some substance, or the effect to the cause - thus also as
represented as unhomogeneous but yet as combined a priori, which combina­
tion, since it is not arbitrary, I call dynamical, since it concerns the combina­
tion of the existence of the manifold (which can again be divided into the
physical combination of the appearances with one another and the meta­
physical, their combination in the a priori faculty of cognition).>

B 202

a Verhiiltnis
b

In the first edition: "On the Axioms of Intuition."

, Groflen. In this section, Kant uses the word "Grofte" as the German equivalent for both
quantitas and quantum, as is shown by his parenthetical inclusion of the Latin words.
According to C. C. E. Schmid's Wo'rterbuch zum leichteren Gebrauch der Kantischen
Schriften (Jena: Crocker, ' 798), Grofte as quantitas refers primarily to the pure concept
286

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

hended, therefore, i.e., taken up into empirical consciousness, except
through the synthesis of the manifold through which the representa­
tions of a determinate space or time are generated, i.e., through the
composition of that which is homogeneous a and the consciousness of
the synthetic unity of this manifold (of the homogeneous). Now the
consciousness of the homogeneous mal1ifol<:l�_il!: iE�tion in general, inso"f:ir as through it the representation of an objectC fi;st bC(;9meS possible, is the concept of a magnitude (Quanti). Thus even the perception
of an object,d as appea�ance, is possible only through the same synthetic
unity of the manifold of given sensible intuition through which the
unity of the composition of the homogeneous manifold is thought in
the concept of a magnitude, i.e., the appearances are all magnitudes,
and indeed extensive magnitudes, since as intuitions in space or time
they must be represented through the same synthesis as that through
which space and time in general are determined.>
I call an extensive magnitude that in which the representation of the
parts makes possible the representation of the whole (and therefore
necessarily precedes the latter).62 I cannot represent to myself any line,
no matter how small it may be, without drawing it in thought, i.e., suc­
cessively generating all its parts from one point, and thereby first
sketching this intuition. It is exactly the same with even the smallest
time. I think therein only the successive progress from one moment to
another, where through all parts of time and their addition a determi-

of quantity, while Griffie as quantum refers to "eine Griffie in concreto" (pp. 298, 300).
This distinction can be marked in English as that between "quantity" and "magnitude."
However, we will follow our practice in earlier sections, using "magnitude" as the trans­
lation of Grofe and reserving "quantity" for Quantitiit.
d The following notes are inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition at the start of this
section:
"One must subsume the perceptions under the categories. But one can infer noth­
ing from those categories themselves, but only from the possibility of perception, which
can only happen through the determination of time and in time, in which the act [Actus]
that determines the intuition is possible only in accordance with a category." (E LXVI,
p. 29; 2 3 :28)
"Since we can all arrange perceptions only through apprehension in time, but this is
a synthesis of the homogeneous, which the concept of magnitude corresponds to in the
unity of consciousness, we cannot cognize the objects of outer and inner sense other­
wise than as magnitudes in experience. Limitation of the concept of magnitude." ( E
LXVII, p . 30; 2 3 = 2 8-9)
, The heading "Proof" and the following paragraph were added in the second edition.
a Gleichartigen, syntactically singular but semantically plural, thus meaning "homogeneous units"; see the expression Gleichartigen (der Einheiten) at A I 64/ B 205 below.

b des mannigfaltigen Gleichartigen
, Objects
d Objects

287

B 20 3

A 1 62

A I63

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 204

A I64

B 205

nate magnitude of time is finally generated.a Since the mere intuition in
all appearances is either space or time, every appearance as intuition is
an extensive magnitude, as it can only be cognized through successive
synthesis (from part to part) in apprehension. All appearances are ac­
cordingly already intuited as aggregates (multitudes of antecedently
given parts),b which is not the case with every kind of magnitude, but
rather only with those that are represented and apprehended by us as
extensive.'
On this successive synthesis of the productive imagination, in the
generation of shapes, is grounded the mathematics of extension (geom­
etry) with its axioms, which express the conditions of sensible intuition
a priori, under which alone the schema of a pure concept of outer ap­
pearance can come about; e.g., between two points only one straight
line is possible; two straight lines do not enclose a space, etc. These are
the axioms that properly concern only magnitudes (quanta) as such.
But concerning magnitude (quantitas), i.e., the answer to the ques­
tion "How big is something? ", although various of these propositions
are synthetic and immediately certain (indemonstrabilia), there are nev­
ertheless no axioms in the proper sense. For that equals added to or
subtracted from equals give an equal are analytic propositions, since I
am immediately conscious of the identity of one generation of a mag­
nitude with the other; but axioms ought to be synthetic a priori propo­
sitions. The self-evident propositions of numerical relation,d on the
contrary, are to be sure, synthetic, but not general, like those of geom­
etry, and for that reason also cannot be called axioms, but could rather
be named numerical formulas. That 7 + 5 1 2 is not an analytic propo­
sition. For I do not think the number 1 2 either in the representation
of 7 nor in that of 5 nor in the representation of the combinatione of
the two (that I ought to think this in the addition of the two is not
here at issue; in the case of an analytic proposition the question is only
=

Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "Hence the concept of an extensive magni­
tude does not pertain merely to that wherein there is extension, i.e., merely to our in­
tuition. Satisfaction has extensive magnitude in accordance with the length of the time
that is agreeably spent, although it also has magnitude intensive [intensively] according
to the degree of this agreeableness." (E LXVIII, p. 30; 2 3 :29)
b These words are stricken in Kant's copy of the first edition (E LXIX, p. 30; 2 3 :46).
, Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "We can never take up a manifold as such in
perception without doing so in space and time. But since we do not intuit these for
themselves, we must take up the homogeneous manifold in general in accordance with
concepts of magnitude." (E LXX, p. 30; 2 3 :29)
a

d

Zahlverhdltnis
, Zusammensetzung

288

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

whether I actually think the predicate in the representation of the sub­
ject). Although it is synthetic, however, it is still only a singular propo­
sition. Insofar as it is only the synthesis of that which is homogeneous
(of units) that is at issue here, the synthesis here can take place only in
a single way, even though the subsequent use of these numbers is gen­
eral. If I say: "With three lines, two of which taken together are greater
than the third, a triangle can be drawn," then I have here the mere
function of the productive imagination, which draws the lines greater
or smaller, thus allowing them to abut at any arbitrary angle. The
number 7 / on the contrary, is possible in only a single way, and likewise the number I 2 , which is generated through the synthesis of the
former with 5 . Such propositions must therefore not be called axioms
(for otherwise there would be infinitely many of them) but rather numerical formulas.
This transcendental principle of the mathematics of appearances
yields a great expansion of our a priori cognition. For it is this alone that
makes pure mathematics in its complete precision applicable to objects
of experience, which without this principle would not be so obvious,
and has indeed caused much contradiction. Appearances are not things
in themselves. Empirical intuition is possible only through the pure in­
tuition (of space and time); what geometry says about the latter is there­
fore undeniably valid of the former, and evasions, as if objects of the
senses did not have to be in agreement with the rules of construction in
space (e.g., the rules of the infinite divisibility of lines or angles), must
cease. For one would thereby deny all objective validity to space, and
with it at the same time to all mathematics, and would no longer know
why and how far they are to be applied to appearances. The synthesis
of spaces and times, as the essential form of all intuition, is that which
at the same time makes possible the apprehension of the appearance,
thus every outer experience, consequently also all cognition of its objects, and what mathematics in its pure use proves about the former is
also necessarily valid for the latter. All objections to this are only the
chicanery of a falsely instructed reason, which erroneously thinks of
freeing the objects of the senses from the formal condition of our sensibility, and, though they are mere appearances, represents them as objects in themselves, given to the understanding; in which case, certainly,
nothing synthetic could be cognized of them a priori at all, thus not
even through pure concepts of space, and the science that they determine, namely geometry, would not itself be possible.

a

Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "in the proposition 7 + 5 = 1 2 " (E LXXI, pp.
30-1; 2 3 :46).

2 89

A I65

B 206

A I66
B 20 7

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

2.
<Anticipations o f Perception.>a

[In the first edition:]
The principle, which anticipates all perceptions, as such,
runs thus: In all appearances the sensation, and the real,
which corresponds to it in the obiect (realitas
phaenomenon), has an intensive magnitude, i.e., a degree.

[In the second edition:]

<Its principleb is: In all appearances the real, which is an object
of the sensation, has intensive magnitude, i.e., a degree.>63
« Proof

B 208

Perception is empirical consciousness, i.e., one in which there is at the
same time sensation. Appearances, as objects of perception, are not
pure (merely formal) intuitions, like space and time (for these cannot be
perceived in themselves). They therefore also contain in addition to the
intuition the materials for some object! in general (through which
something existing in space or time is represented), i.e., the real of the
sensation, as merely subjective representation, by which one can only
be conscious that the subject is affected, and which one relates to an object' in general. Now from the empirical consciousness to the pure con­
sciousness a gradual alteration is possible, where the real in the former
entirely disappears, and a merely formal (a priort) consciousness of the
manifold in space and time remains;64 thus there is also possible a syn­
thesis of the generation of the magnitude of a sensation from its begin­
ning, the pure intuition 0, to any arbitrary magnitude. Now since
sensation in itself is not an objective representation, and in it neither
the intuition of space nor that of time is to be encountered, it has, to be
sure, no extensive magnitude, but yet it still has a magnitude (and in­
deed through its apprehension, in which the empirical consciousness
can grow in a certain time from nothing ° to its given measure), thus
it has an intensive magnitude, corresponding to which all objects! of
perception, insofar as they contain sensation, must be ascribed an in­
tensive magnitude, i.e., a degree of influence on sense.>
One can call all cognition through which I can cognize and determine a priori what belongs to empirical cognition an anticipation, and
==

==

A I 66

a In the first edition: "The Anticipations of Perception."

b

Princip

, The heading "Proof" and the following paragraph were added in the second edition.

d

Objecte
, Object
f Objecten
290

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

without doubt this is the significance with which Epicurus used his expression 'iTpOA llt\JL<;. 65 But since there is something in the appearances
that is never cognized a priori, and which hence also constitutes the real
difference between empirical and a priori cognition, namely the sensation (as matter of perception), it follows that it is really this that cannot
be anticipated at all. On the contrary, we would call the pure determi­
nations in space and time, in regard to shape as well as magnitude, an­
ticipations of appearances, since they represent a priori that which may
always be given a posteriori in experience. But if it were supposed that
there is something which can be cognized a priori in every sensation, as
sensation in general (without a particular one being given), then this
would deserve to be called an anticipation in an unusual sense, since it
seems strange to anticipate experience precisely in what concerns its
matter, which one can draw out of it. And this is actually how things
stand.
Apprehension, merely by means of sensation, fills only an instant (if I
do not take into consideration the succession of many sensations). As
something in the appearance, the apprehension of which is not a succes­
sive synthesis, proceeding from the parts to the whole representation, it
therefore has no extensive magnitude; the absence of sensation in the
same moment would represent this as empty, thus = o. Now that in the
empirical intuition which corresponds to the sensation is reality (realitas
phaenomenon); that which corresponds to its absence is negation = o.
Now, however, every sensation is capable of a diminution, so that it can
decrease and thus gradually disappear.66 Hence between reality in ap­
pearance and negation there is a continuous nexus of many possible in­
termediate sensations, whose difference from one another is always
smaller than the difference between the given one and zero, or complete
negation. That is, the real in appearance always has a magnitude, which
is not, however, encountered in apprehension, as this takes place by
means of the mere sensation in an instant and not through successive
synthesis of many sensations, and thus does not proceed from the parts
to the whole; it therefore has a magnitude, but not an extensive one.
Now I call that magnitude which can only be apprehended as a unity,
and in which multiplicity can only be represented through approxima­
tion to negation = 0, intensive magnitude. Thus every reality in the
appearance has intensive magnitude, i.e., a degree. If one regards this
reality as cause (whether of the sensation or of another reality in ap­
pearance, e.g., an alteration), then one calls the degree of reality as
cause a "moment," e.g., the moment of gravity, because, indeed, the degree designates only that magnitude the apprehension of which is not
successive but instantaneous. But I touch on this here only in passing,
for at present I am not yet dealing with causality.
Accordingly every sensation, thus also every reality in appear291

A I 67

B209

A I68
B 2 10

A 1 69
B2II

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

A I 70

B2I2

AI71

ance,a however small it may be, has a degree, i.e., an intensive magni­
tude, which can still always be diminished, and between reality and
negation there is a continuous nexus of possible realities, and of possi­
ble smaller perceptions. Every color, e.g., red, has a degree, which,
however small it may be, is never the smallest, and it is the same with
warmth, with the moment of gravity, etc.
The property of magnitudes on account of which no part of them is
the smallest (no part is simple) is called their continuity. Space and time
are quanta continua, b because no part of them can be given except as en­
closed between boundaries (points and instants), thus only in such a way
that this part is again a space or a time. Space therefore consists only of
spaces, time of times. Points and instants are only boundaries, i.e., mere
places of their limitation; but places always presuppose those intuitions
that limit or determine them, and from mere places, as components that
could be given prior to space or time, neither space nor time can be
composed. Magnitudes of this sort can also be called flowing, since the
synthesis (of the productive imagination) in their generation is a
progress in time, the continuity of which is customarily designated by
the expression "flowing" ("elapsing").
All appearances whatsoever are accordingly continuous magnitudes,
either in their intuition, as extensive magnitudes, or in their mere per­
ception (sensation and thus reality), as intensive ones. If the synthesis of
the manifold of appearance is interrupted, then it is an aggregate of many
appearances, and not really appearance as a quantum, which is not gen­
erated through the mere continuation of productive synthesis of a certain
kind, but through the repetition of an ever-ceasing synthesis. If! call thir­
teen dollars a quantum of money, I do so correctly insofar as I mean by
that an amount of a mark of fine silver, which is to be sure a continuous
magnitude, in which no part is the smallest but each part could constitute
a coin that would always contain material for still smaller ones. But if by
the term "thirteen round dollars" I mean so many coins (whatever their
amount of silver might be), then it would not be suitable to call this a
quantum of dollars, but it must instead be called an aggregate, i.e., a number of coins. Now since there must still be a unity grounding every num­
ber, appearance as unity is a quantum, and is as such always a continuum.
Now if all appearances, considered extensively as well as intensively, are
continuous magnitudes, then the proposition that all alteration' (transia Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "I do not say that all reality has a degree any
more than that every thing has an extensive magnitude." ( E LXXII, p. 3 I ; 2 3 :29)
continuous magnitudes
, Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: " [ The] possibility of which, just like that of
all other objects [Objecte) of pure concepts of the understanding, cannot be given oth­
erwise than in sensible intuition. It is not cognizable in itself." (E LXXIII, p. 3 I ; 2 3 :29)
b

292

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

tion of a thing from one state into another) is also continuous could be
proved here easily and with mathematical self-evidence, if the causality of
an alteration in general did not lie entirely beyond the boundaries of a
transcendental philosophy and presuppose empirical principles.a For the
understanding gives us no inkling a priori that a cause is possible which
alters the state of things, i.e., determines them to the opposite of a certain
given state, not merely because it simply does not give us insight into the
possibility of this (for this insight is lacking in many a priori cognitions),
but rather because alterability concerns only certain determinations of
appearances, about which experience alone can teach us, while their cause
is to be found in the unalterable. But since we have before us here nothing that we can use except the pure fundamental concepts of all possible
experience, in which there must be nothing at all empirical, we cannot
anticipate general natural science, which is built upon certain fundamental experiences, without injuring the unity of the system.
Nevertheless, we are not lacking proofs of the great influence that
our principle has in anticipating perceptions, and even in making good
their absence insofar as it draws the bolt against all the false inferences
that might be drawn from that.
If all reality in perception has a degree, between which and negation
there is an infinite gradation of ever lesser degrees, and if likewise every
sense must have a determinate degree of receptivity for the sensations,
then no perception, hence also no experience, is possible that, whether
immediately or mediately (through whatever detour in inference one
might want), would prove an entire absence of everything real in ap­
pearance, i.e., a proof of empty space or of empty time can never be
drawn from experience. For, first, the entire absence of the real in sensible intuition cannot itself be perceived, and, second, it cannot be deduced from any single appearance and the difference in the degree of its
reality, nor may it ever be assumed for the explanation of that. For even
if the entire intuition of a determinate space or time is real through and
through, i.e., no part of it is empty, yet, since every reality has its degree
that can decrease to nothing (emptiness) through infinite steps while the
extensive magnitude of the appearance remains unaltered, it must yield
infinitely different degrees with which space or time is filled, and the intensive magnitude in different appearances can be smaller or greater
even though the extensive magnitude of the intuition remains identical.
We will give an example of this. Nearly all natural philosophers,b since
they perceive a great difference in the quantity of matter of different
sorts in the same volumes (partly through the moment of gravity, or
weight, partly through the moment of resistance against other, moved
a Principien

h

Naturlehrer
293

B 2I3

A I72

B 2 I4

A I 73

B2I5

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

A 1 74

B 2 16

A 1 75

B217

matter), unanimously infer from this that this volume (extensive magni­
tude of the appearance) must be empty in all matter, although to be sure
in different amounts. But who among these for the most part mathe­
matical and mechanical students of nature ever realized that their infer­
ence rested solely on a metaphysical presupposition, which they make so
much pretense of avoiding? - for they assume that the real in space (l
cannot call it here impenetrability or weight, since these are empirical
concepts), is everywhere one and the same, and can be differentiated
only according to its extensive magnitude, i.e., amount .a Against this
presupposition, for which they can have no ground in experience and
which is therefore merely metaphysical, I oppose a transcendental proof,
which, to be sure, will not explain the variation in the filling of space, but
which still will entirely obviate the alleged necessity of the presupposi­
tion that the difference in question cannot be explained except by the as­
sumption of empty spaces, and which has the merit of at least granting
the understanding the freedom also to think of this difference in another
way, if the explanation of nature should make some hypothesis necessary
for this end. For there we see that, although equal spaces can be com­
pletely filled with different matters in such a way that in neither of them
is there a point in which the presence of matter is not to be encountered,
nevertheless everything real has for the same quality its degree (of resis­
tance or of weight) which, without diminution of the extensive magni­
tude or amount/ can become infinitely smaller until it is transformed
into emptiness and disappears. Thus an expansion that fills a space, e.g.
warmth, and likewise every other reality (in appearance) can, without in
the least leaving the smallest part of this space empty, decrease in degree
infinitely, and nonetheless fill the space with this smaller degree just as
well as another appearance does with a larger one. My aim here is by no
means to assert that this is how it really is concerning the specific grav­
ity of the variety of matters, but only to establish, on the basis of a principle of pure understanding, that the nature of our perceptions makes an
explanation of this sort possible, and that it is false to assume that the real
in appearance is always equal in degree and differs only in aggregation
and its extensive magnitude, especially when this is allegedly asserted on
the basis of a principle of understanding a priori.
Nevertheless there must always be something striking about this anticipation of perception for a researcher who has become accustomed to
transcendental consideration and thereby become cautious, and some
reservation is aroused about the fact that the understanding can antici­
pate a synthetic proposition of the sort which that concerning the de­
gree of everything real in appearance is, and thus about the possibility
a

b

Menge
Menge
2 94

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

of the inner variation of the sensation itself if one abstracts from its em­
pirical quality, and it is therefore a question not unworthy of solution,
how the understanding can assert something synthetic a priori about ap­
pearances, and indeed anticipate them in that which is really merely
empirical, namely what pertains to sensation.
The quality of sensation is always merely empirical and cannot be
represented a priori at all (e.g. colors, taste, etc.). But the real, which cor­
responds to sensations in general, in opposition to the negation = 0, only
represents something whose concept in itself contains a being, and does
not signify anything except the synthesis in an empirical consciousness
in general. In inner sense, namely, the empirical consciousness can be
raised from ° up to any greater degree, so that the very same extensive
magnitude of intuition (e.g., an illuminated surface) can excite as great a
sensation as an aggregate of many other (less illuminated) surfaces taken
together. One can therefore abstract entirely from the extensive magnitude of appearance and yet represent in the mere sensation in one moment a synthesis of uniform increase from ° up to the given empirical
consciousness. All sensations are thus, as such, given only a posteriori,a
but their property of having a degree can be cognized a priori. It is re­
markable that we can cognize a priori of all magnitudes in general only a
single quality, namely continuity, but that in all quality (the real of ap­
pearances) we can cognize a priori nothing more than their intensive
quantity/ namely that they have a degree, and everything else is left to
expenence.
3·
<Analogies of Experience.>c,67

[In the first edition:]

Their general principle is: As regards their existence, all
appearances stand a priori under rules of the determination
of their relation to each other in one time.

[In the second edition:]

<Their principled is: Experience is possible only through the
representation of a necessary connection of perceptions.>

e<proof
Experience is an empirical cognition, i.e., a cognition that detennines an
object! through perceptions. It is therefore a synthesis of perceptions,
a Following Erdmann, reading "a posteriori" instead of "a priori. "
b

Quantitiit

, In the first edition: "The Analogies of Experience."

d

Princip

, The heading "Proof" and the following paragraph were added in the second edition

.

f Object

295

A I 76

B2 18

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 2 19

A I77

B 220

which is not itself contained in perception but contains the synthetic
unity of the manifold of perception in one consciousness, which consti­
tutes what is essential in a cognition of objects a of the senses, i.e., of experience (not merely of the intuition or sensation of the senses). Now in
experience, to be sure, perceptions come together only contingently, so
that no necessity of their connection is or can become evident in the per­
ceptions themselves, since apprehension is only a juxtapositionb of the
manifold of empirical intuition, but no representation of the necessity of
the combined existence of the appearances that it juxtaposes in space and
time is to be encountered in it. But since experience is a cognition of ob­
jectsC through perception, consequently the relationd in the existence of
the manifold is to be represented in it not as it is juxtaposed in time but
as it is objectively in time, yet since time itself cannot be perceived, the
determination of the existence of objectse in time can only come about
through their combination in time in general, hence only through a pri­
ori connecting concepts. Now since these always carry necessity along
with them, experience is thus possible only through a representation of
the necessary connection of the perceptions.>
fThe three modi o f time are persistence, succession, and simultaneity. Hence three rules of all temporal relations of appearances, in accor­
dance with which the existenceg of each can be determined with regard
to the unity of all time, precede all experience and first make it possible.
The general principle of all three analogies rests on the necessary
unity of apperception with regard to all possible empirical conscious­
ness (of perception) at every time, consequently, since that is an a pri­
ori ground, it rests on the synthetic unity of all appearances according
to their relations in time. For the original apperception is related to
inner sense (the sum of all representations), and indeed related a priori
a

Objecte

b Zusammenstellung

, Objecte

d

Throughout this section of the work, "relation" will translate. Verba/tnis unless other­
wise noted.

, Objecte

f The text common to the two editions resumes here, although in his copy of the first edi­

g

tion Kant had struck out the next two paragraphs and instead written the following two
notes:
"For the proposition that I myself am simultaneous with all time in me so far as I
think it, i.e., with the whole time that I think, or its form, would be tautologous." (E
LXXIv, p. 3 I ; 2 3 :29)
"The principle of persistence does not concern things in themselves, hence the sub­
ject of the representations of things as itself, i.e., apperception, but only appearances.
For the concept of time does not apply to anything else, not even to the subject. of time
itself." (E Lxxv, p. 3 1; 2 3 :29)
In Kant's copy of the first edition, "existence" is replaced with "the relation [Verhaltnis]
of the real in appearance" (E LXXVI, p. 3 1 ; 2 3:47).

296

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

to its form, i.e., the relation of the manifold empirical consciousness in
time. Now in the original apperception all of this manifold, so far as its
temporal relations are concerned, is to be unified; for this is what its
transcendental unity, under which everything stands that is to belong to
my (i.e., my united)a cognition, and thus can become an object for me,
asserts a priori. This synthetic unity in the temporal relation of all per­
ceptions, which is detennined a priori, is thus the law that all empirical time-determinations must stand under rules of general time­
determination, and the analogies of experience, with which we will now
deal, must be rules of this sort.
These principles have the peculiarity that they do not concern the
appearances and the synthesis of their empirical intuition, but merely
their existence and their relation to one another with regard to this
their existence. Now the way in which something is apprehended in appearance can be determined a priori so that the rule of its synthesis at
the same time yields this intuition a priori in every empirical example,
i.e., can bring the former about from the latter. Yet the existence of ap­
pearances cannot be cognized a priori, and even if we could succeed on
this path in inferring to some existence or other, we still would not be
able to cognize it determinately, i.e., be able to anticipate that through
which its empirical intuition is differentiated from others.
The preceding two principles, which I named the mathematical ones
in consideration of the fact that they justified applying mathematics to
appearances, pertained to appearances with regard to their mere possi­
bility, and taught how both their intuition and the real in their percep­
tion could be generated in accordance with rules of a mathematical syn­
thesis, hence how in both cases numerical magnitudes and, with them,
the determination of the appearance as magnitude, could be used. E.g.,
I would be able to compose and determine a priori, i.e., construct the degree of the sensation of sunlight out of about 200,000 illuminations from
the moon. Thus we can call the former principles constitutive.
Things must be entirely different with those principles that are to
bring the existence of appearances under rules a pr·iori. For, since this existence cannot be constructed, these principles can concern only the relationb of existence, and can yield nothing but merely regulative principles.c Here therefore neither axioms nor intuitions are to be thought of;
rather, if a perception is given to us in a temporal relation to others (even
though indeterminate), it cannot be said a priori which and how great
this other perception is, but only how it is necessarily combined with the
first, as regards its existence, in this modus of time. In philosophy analogies signify something very different from what they represent in matheeinigen
Verhdltnis
, Principien
a

b

297

A 1 78

B 221

A I 79

B 22 2

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

A l80

B 223

A 181

B 2 24

matics. In the latter they are formulas that assert the identity of two rela­
tions of magnitude,a and are always constitutive, so that if two members
of the proportion are given the third is also thereby given, i.e., can be
constructed. In philosophy, however, analogy is not the identity of two
quantitative but of two qualitative relations, where from three given
members I can cognize and give a priori only the relation to a fourth
member but not this fourth member itself, although I have a rule for
seeking it in experience and a mark for discovering it there. An analogy
of experience will therefore be only a rule in accordance with which unity
of experience is to arise from perceptions (not as a perception itself, as
empirical intuition in general), and as a principle it will not be valid of the
objects (of the appearances) constitutively but merely regulatively.68
The very same thing will also hold for the postulates o f empirical think­
ing in general, which together concern the synthesis of mere intuition (of
the form of appearance), of perception (of its matter), and of experience
(of the relation of these perceptions), namely that they are only regula­
tive principles, and that they differ from the mathematical principles,
which are constitutive, not, to be sure, in their certainty, which is estab­
lished a priori in both cases, but yet in the manner of their evidence, i.e.,
with regard to their intuitiveness (thus also their demonstration).
But what must be remembered about all synthetic principles and es­
pecially noted here is this: that these analogies have their sole signifi­
cance and validity not as principles of the transcendental use of the
understanding but merely as principles of its empirical use, hence they
can b e proven only as such; consequently the appearances must not be
subsumed under the categories per se, but only under their schemata.
For if the objects to which these principles were to be related were things
in themselves, then it would be entirely impossible to cognize anything
about them synthetically a priori. Now it is nothing but appearances
whose complete cognition, to which in the end all a priori principles must
come down to, is only possible experience, and consequently those prin­
ciples can have as their goal nothing but the conditions of the unity of
empirical cognition in the synthesis of the appearances; but these condi­
tions are thought only in the schema of the pure concept of the under­
standing, and the category contains the function, unrestricted by any
sensible condition, of their unity, as of a synthesis in general. These prin­
ciples, therefore, justify us in compounding the appearances only in ac­
cord with an analogy with the logical and general unity of concepts, and
hence in the principle itself we make use of the category, but in its exe­
cution (its application to appearances) we set its schema in its place, as
the key to its use, or rather we set the latter alongside the former, as its
restricting condition, under the name of its formula.
a

GrojJenverbaltnisse

298

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

A.
First Analogy.
Principle of the persistence <of substance.>a,69

[In the first edition:]
All appearances contain that which persists (substance) as
the object itself, and that which can changeb as its mere de­
termination, i.e., a way in which the object exists.c
[In the second edition:]
<In all change of appearances substance persists, and its
quantum is neither increased nor diminished in nature.>
d<Proof
a tkr Substanz added in the second edition.
b

das T¥andelbare

, The following series of notes is entered at the beginning of the "First Analogy" in
Kant's copy of the first edition:
"Here it must be shown that this proposition does not pertain to any other substances
than those whose alteration is effected only through moving causes, and also consists
only in movement, consequently in alteration of relations [Relationen]." (E LXXVII, p.
3 1; 2 3:30)
"All arising and perishing is only the alteration of that which endures (the sub­
stance), and this does not arise and perish (thus the world also does not)." (E LXXVIII,
p. 3 2 ; 2 3 :30)
"Change can only be perceived through that which persists and its alteration. For
the difference of the times in which things are can only be perceived in them as parts of
one and the same time. All change is only the division of time. Hence there must be
something that exists throughout the entire time, since the whole is always the ground
of the division. Hence substance is the substratum, and that which is changing is only
the way in which this exists." (E LXXIX, P.32; 2 3 :30)
"Here the proof must be so conducted that it applies only to substances as phe­
nomena of outer sense, consequently from space, which exists at all time along with its
determination.
"In space all alteration is movement; for if there were something else in the relations
[Relationen], then in accordance with the concept of alteration the subject would persist.
Therefore everything in space would have to disappear at the same time." (E LXXX, p.
3 2 ; 2 3:30)
"If the substance persists, while the accidents change, but the substance, if all acciden­
tia are taken away, is the empty substantiale, then what is it that persists? Now everything
that can be distinguished from that which changes in experience is quantity !grosse], and
this can only be assessed through the magnitude of the merely relative effect in the case
of equal external relations [Relationen] and therefore applies only to bodies." (E LXXXI ,
p. 3 2 ; 2 3 :30-1)
"Here alterations must be discussed." (E LXXXII, p. 32; 2 3 :3 I)
d The heading "Proof' and the following first paragraph in the second edition replace the
heading "Proof of this first Analogy" and this opening paragraph in the first edition:
"All appearances are in time. This can determine the relation [Verhdltnis] in their ex­
istence in two ways, insofar as they exist either successively or simultaneously. In the
case of the fonner time is considered as temporal series, with regard to the latter as tem­

poral domain.

2 99

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 225

A 182

B 226
A 183

All appearances are in time, in which, as substratum (as persistent form
of inner intuition), both simultaneity as well as succession can alone
be represented. The time, therefore, in which all change of appearances
is to b e thought, lasts and does not change; since i t is that in which suc­
cession or simultaneity can be represented only as determinations of it.
Now time cannot be perceived by itself. a Consequently it is in the ob­
jects of perception, i.e., the appearances, that the substratum must be
encountered that represents time in general and in which all change or
simultaneity can be perceived in apprehension through the relation of
the appearances to it. However, the substratum 'bf everything real, i.e.,
everything that belongs to the existenceb of things, is substance, of
which everything that belongs to existence can be thought only as a de­
termination. Consequently that which persists, in relation to which
alone all temporal relations of appearances can be determined, is sub­
stance in the appearance, i.e., the real in the appearance, which as the
substratum of all change always remains the same. Since this, therefore,
cannot change in existence, its quantum in nature can also be neither
increased nor diminished.>
Our apprehension of the manifold of appearance is always successive, and is therefore always changing. We can therefore never deter­
mine from this alone whether this manifold, as object of experience, is
simultaneous or successive, if something does not ground it which al­
ways exists, i.e., something lasting and persisting, of which all change
and simultaneity are nothing but so many ways (modi of time) in which
that which persists exists. Only in that which persists, therefore, are
temporal relations possible (for simultaneity and succession are the only
relations in time), i.e., that which persists i s the substratum o f the em­
pirical representation of time itself, by which alone all time-determina­
tion is possible. Persistence gives general expression to time as the
constant correlate of all existence of appearances, all change and all ac­
companiment.' For change does not affect time itself, but only the ap­
pearances in time (just as simultaneity is not a modus for time itself, in
which no parts are simultaneous but rather all succeed one another). If
one were to ascribe such a succession to time itself, one would have to
think yet another time in which this succession would be possible. d

a for sich
b &iste7ZZ

, Begleitung, here connoting the accompaniment of one state of affairs by another, i.e.,
d

what Kant is here otherwise calling "simultaneity" or coexistence.
The following notes are added here in Kant's copy of the first edition:
"The perception of endurance is not possible through the perception of successive
determinations and of the relation of their series to time, thus also not through the rela­
tion to another sequence of determinations, which itself requires a temporal space, but

3 00

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

Only through that which persists does existence in different parts of
the temporal series acquire a magnitude, which one calls duration.
For in mere sequence alone existence is always disappearing and beginning, and never has the least magnitude. Without that which persists
there is therefore no temporal relation. Now time cannot be perceived
in itself; thus this persisting thing in the appearances is the substratum
of all time-determination, consequently also the condition of the possibility of all synthetic unity of perceptions, i.e., of experience, and in this
persisting thing all existence and all change in time can only be regarded as a modus of the existencea of that which lasts and persists.
Therefore in all appearances that which persists is the object itself, i.e.,
the substance (phaenomenon), but everything that changes or that can
change belongs only to the way in which this substance or substances
exists, thus to their determinations.
I find that at all times not merely the philosopher but even the com­
mon understanding has presupposed this persistence as a substratum of
all change in the appearances, and has also always accepted it as indu­
bitable, only the philosopher expresses himself somewhat more deter­
minately in saying that in all alterations in the world the substance
remains and only the accidents change. But I nowhere find even the at­
tempt at a proof of this so obviously synthetic proposition, indeed it
only rarely stands, as it deserves to, at the head of the pure and com­
pletely a priori laws of nature. In fact the proposition that substance per­
sists is tautological. For only this persistence is the ground for our
application of the category of substance to appearance, and one should
have proved that in all appearances there is something that persists, of
which that which changesb is nothing but the determination of its exis­
tence. But since such a proof can never be conducted dogmatically, i.e.,
from concepts, because it concerns a synthetic a priori proposition, and
i t was never considered that such propositions are valid only in relation'
to possible experience, hence that they can be proved only through a
through something whose existence is not a series of successions, but which includes
these in itself as its determinations, consequently per durabilitatem [through the dura­
bility] of substance.
"This proof, like all synthetic ones, is proved only from the possibility of perception.
It is valid where I cannot perceive substance outside of its alterations; but where I can­
not perceive it except through these alterations themselves, it is not valid, and I can es­
timate its endurance and in general the time of its alteration only through outer things,
as I, since I think, think my own existence; my persistence is therefore not proved." ( E
LXXX III, pp. 32-3; 2 3 : 3 r )
"No quantum o f substance is possible in the soul. Hence also nothing that one could
determine through any predicate and call persistent." (E Lxxxrv, P.3 2 ; 23;3 r)
a

Existenz

b das Wandelbare

, Beziehung
301

B 227

A 1 84

B228

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II
A 1 85

B 229
A I 86

B 2 30
A I8 7

deduction of the possibility of the latter, it is no wonder that it has, to
be sure, grounded all experience (for one feels the need for it in empir­
ical cognition), but has never been proved.
A philosopher was asked: How much does the smoke weigh? He
replied: If you take away from the weight of the wood that was burnt
the weight of the ashes that are left over, you will have the weight of the
smoke. He thus assumed as incontrovertible that even in fire the mat­
ter (substance) never disappears but rather only suffers an alteration in
its form.a Likewise the proposition "Nothing comes from nothing" is
only another consequence of the principle of persistence, or rather of
the everlasting existence of the proper subject in the appearances. For
if that in the appearance which one would call substance is to be the
proper substratum of all time-determination, then all existence in the
past as well as in future time must be able to be determined in it and it
alone. Hence we can grant an appearance the name of substance only if
we presuppose its existence at all time, which is not even perfectly ex­
pressed through the word "persistence" since this pertains more to future time. Nevertheless the inner necessity o f persisting is inseparably
connected with the necessity of always having existed, and the expression may therefore stand. Gigni de nihilo nihil, in nihilum nil posse reverti, b
are two propositions which the ancients connected inseparably, and
which are now sometimes separated only out of misunderstanding, be­
cause one imagines that they pertain to things in themselves, and that
the former would be opposed to the dependence of the world on a
supreme cause (even as far as its substance is concerned); but this worry
is unnecessary, for here the issue is only appearances in the field of ex­
perience, the unity of which would never be possible if we were to allow
new things (as far as their substance is concerned) to arise. For then
everything would disappear that alone can represent the unity of time,
namely the identity of the substratum in which alone all change has its
thoroughgoing unity. This persistence is therefore nothing more than
the way in which we represent the existence of things (in appearance).
The determinations of a substance that are nothing other than partic­
ular ways for it to exist are called accidents. They are always real, since
they concern the existence of the substance (negations are merely deter­
minations that express the non-being of something in the substance).
Now if one ascribes a particular existence to this real in substance (e.g.,
motion, as an accident of matter), then this existence is called "inher­
ence," in contrast to the existence of the substance, which is called "sub­
sistence." Yet many misinterpretations arise from this, and it i s more
a

b

Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "\iVhence does he know this? Not from ex­
perience." (E LXXXV; p. 3 4; 2 3:4 7)
Nothing comes out of nothing, and nothing can revert into nothing.

3 02

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

precise and correct if one characterizes the accident only through the
way in which the existence of a substance is positively determinedJo
Nevertheless, thanks to the conditions of the logical use of our under­
standing, it is still unavoidable for us to abstract out, as it were, that
which can change in the existence of a substance while the substance re­
mains, and to consider it in relation to what is really persistent and fun­
damental;a thus this category also stands under the title of relations, but
more as their condition than as itself containing a relation.
Now on this persistence there is also grounded a correction of the
concept of alteration. Arising and perishing are not alterations of that
which arises or perishes. Alteration is a way of existing that succeeds an­
other way of existing of the very same object. Hence everything that is
altered is lasting, and only its state changes.?' Thus since this change
concerns only the determinations that can cease or begin, we can say, in
an expression that seems somewhat paradoxical, that only what persists
(the substance) is altered, while that which is changeableb does not suffer any alteration but rather a change, since some determinations cease
and others begin.
Alteration can therefore be perceived only in substances, and arising
or perishing per se cannot be a possible perception unless it concerns
merely a determination of that which persists, for it is this very thing
that persists that makes possible the representation of the transition
from one state into another, and from non-being into being, which can
therefore be empirically cognized only as changing determinations of
that which lastsY If you assume that something simply began to be,
then you would have to have a point of time in which it did not exist.
But what would you attach this to, if not to that which already exists?
For an empty time that would precede is not an object of perception;
but if you connect this origination to things that existed antecedently
and which endure until that which arises, then the latter would be only
a determination of the former, as that which persists. It is just the same
with perishing: for this presupposes the empirical representation of a
time at which there is no longer an appearance.
Substances (in appearance) are the substrata of all time-determinations. The arising of some of them and the perishing of others would
itself remove the sole condition of the empirical unity of time, and the
appearances would then be related to two different times, in which existence flowed side by side, which is absurd. For there is only one time,
in which all different times must not be placed simultaneously but only
one after another.
Persistence is accordingly a necessary condition under which alone
a das eigentliche Beharrliche und Radikale
das Wandelbare

b

303

B231
A 188

B232
A 189

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

appearances, as things or objects, are determinable in a possible experi­
ence. As to the empirical criterion of this necessary persistence and with
it of the substantiality of appearances, however, what follows will give
us the opportunity to note what is necessary.73
B.

Second Analogy.
<Principle of temporal sequence according to the law
of causality.>a,74

[In the first edition:]

Everything that happens (begins to be) presupposes some­
thing which it follows in accordance with a rule.

[In the second edition:]

<All alterations occur in accordance with the law of the
connection of cause and effect.>

Proof

B 233

<b(That all appearances of the temporal sequence are collectively only
alterations, i.e., a successive being and not-being of the determinations
of the substance that persists there, consequently that the being of the
substance itself, which succeeds its not-being, or its not-being, which
succeeds its being, in other words, that the arising or perishing of the
substance does not occur, the previous principle has shown. This could
also have been expressed thus: All change (succession) of appear­
ances is only alteration; for the arising or perishing of substance are
not alterations of it, since the concept of alteration presupposes one and
the same subject as existing with two opposed determinations, and thus
as persisting. - After this preliminary reminder the proof follows.)
I perceive that appearances succeed one another, i.e., that a state of
things exists at one time the opposite of which existed in the previous
state. Thus I really connect two perceptions in time. Now connection
is not the work of mere sense and intuition, but is here rather the prod­
uct of a synthetic faculty of the imagination, which determines inner
sense with regard to temporal relations. This, however, can combine
the two states in question in two different ways, so that either one or
the other precedes in time; for time cannot be perceived in itself, nor
can what precedes and what follows in objectsC be as it were empirically
determined in relationd to it. I am therefore only conscious that my
a In the first edition: "Principle of Generation."
b

The following two paragraphs were added in the second edition.

, Objecte
d Beziehung
3 04

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

imagination places one state before and the other after, not that the one
state precedes the other in the object;a or, in other words, through the
mere perception the objective relation of the appearances that are suc­
ceeding one another remains undetermined. Now in order for this to be
cognized as determined, the relation between the two states must be
thought in such a way that it is thereby necessarily determined which of
them must be placed before and which after rather than vice versa. The
concept, however, that carries a necessity of synthetic unity with it can
only be a pure concept of understanding, which does not lie in the per­
ception, and that is here the concept of the relation of cause and
effect, the former of which determines the latter in time, as its conse­
quence,b and not as something that could merely precede in the imaginationc (or not even be perceived at all). Therefore it is only because we
subject the sequence of the appearances and thus all alteration to the
law of causality that experience itself, i.e., empirical cognition of them,
is possible; consequently they themselves, as objects of experience, are
possible only in accordance with this law.>
dThe apprehension of the manifold of appearance is always successive. The representations of the parts succeed one another. Whether
they also succeed in the object is a second point for reflection, which is
not contained in the first. Now one can, to be sure, call everything, and
even every representation, insofar as one is conscious of it, an object;'
only what this word is to mean in the case of appearances, not insofar
as they are (as representations) objects,! but rather only insofar as they
designate an objectl requires a deeper investigation. Insofar as they are,
merely as representations, at the same time objects of consciousness,
they do not differ from their apprehension, i.e., from their being taken
up into the synthesis of the imagination, and one must therefore say
that the manifold of appearances is always successively generated in the
mind. If appearances were things in themselves, then no human being
would be able to assess from the succession of representations how the
manifold is combined in the object.h For we have to do only with our
representations; how things in themselves may be (without regard to
Objecte
Folge
, in der Einbildung
a

b

d

Although the text common to the two editions resumes here, in his copy of the first edi­
tion Kant crossed out the next fourteen paragraphs, through A 2 o r / B 2 46, suggesting
that at one point he had contemplated an extensive revision of the second analogy that
he did not in the end undertake (E, p. 34).

, Object
f Objecte
g Object
h Object
305

B 234

A 189

B235
A 190

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 236
A I91

B 237
A 192

representations through which they affect us) is entirely beyond our
cognitive sphere. Now although the appearances are not things in
themselves, and nevertheless are the only thing that can be given to us
for cognition, I still have to show what sort of combination in time per­
tains to the manifold in the appearances itself even though the repre­
sentation of it in apprehension is always successive. Thus, e.g., the
apprehension of the manifold in the appearance of a house that stands
before me is successive. Now the question is whether the manifold of
this house itself is also successive, which certainly no one will concede.
Now, however, as soon as I raise my concept of an object to transcendental significance, the house is not a thing in itself at all but only an
appearance, i.e., a representation, the transcendental object of which is
unknown; therefore what do I understand by the question, how the
manifold may be combined in the appearance itself (which is yet noth­
ing in itself)? Here that which lies in the successive apprehension is
considered as representation, but the appearance that is given to me, in
spite of the fact that it is nothing more than a sum of these representa­
tions, is considered as their object, with which my concept, which I
draw from the representations of apprehension, is to agree. One quickly
sees that, since the agreement of cognition with the object" is truth,
only the formal conditions of empirical truth can be inquired after here,
and appearance, in contradistinction to the representations of appre­
hension, can thereby only be represented as the object' that is distinct
from them if it stands under a rule that distinguishes it from every other
apprehension, and makes one way of combining the manifold necessary.
That in the appearance which contains the condition of this necessary
rule of apprehension is the object."
Now let us proceed to our problem. That something happens, i.e.,
that something or a state comes to be that previously was not, cannot
be empirically perceived except where an appearance precedes that does
not contain this state in itself; for a reality that would follow on an
empty time, thus an arising not preceded by any state of things, can be
apprehended just as little as empty time itself. Every apprehension of an
occurrence is therefore a perception that follows another one. Since
this is the case in all synthesis of apprehension, however, as I have
shown above in the case of the appearance of a house, the apprehension
of an occurrence is not yet thereby distinguished from any other. Yet I
also note that, if in the case of an appearance that contains a happening
I call the preceding state of perception A and the following one B, then
B can only follow A in apprehension, but the perception A cannot fola Object

b Object
, Object

3 06

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

low but only precede B. E.g., I see a ship driven downstream. My per­
ception of its position downstream follows the perception of its position
upstream, and it is impossible that in the apprehension of this appear­
ance the ship should first be perceived downstream and afterwards up­
stream. The order in the sequence of the perceptions in apprehension
is therefore here determined, and the apprehension is bound to it. In
the previous example of a house my perceptions could have begun at its
rooftop and ended at the ground, but could also have begun below and
ended above; likewise I could have apprehended the manifold of empirical intuition from the right or from the left. I n the series o f these
perceptions there was therefore no determinate order that made it necessary when I had to begin i n the apprehension in order to combine the
manifold empirically. But this rule is always to be found in the perception of that which happens, and it makes the order of perceptions that
follow one another (in the apprehension of this appearance) necessary.
In our case I must therefore derive the subjective sequence of ap­
prehension from the objective sequence of appearances, for otherwise
the former would be entirely undetermined and no appearance would
be distinguished from any other. The former alone proves nothing
about the connection of the manifold in the object,a because it is en­
tirely arbitrary. This connection must therefore consist in the order of
the manifold of appearance in accordance with which the apprehension
of one thing (that which happens) follows that of the other (which pre­
cedes) in accordance with a rule. Only thereby can I be justified in say­
ing of the appearance itself, and not merely of my apprehension, that a
sequence is to be encountered in it, which is to say as much as that I can­
not arrange the apprehension otherwise than in exactly this sequence.
In accordance with such a rule there must therefore lie in that which
in general precedes an occurrence the condition for a rule, in accordance with which this occurrence always and necessarily follows; conversely, however, I cannot go back from the occurrence and determine
(through apprehension) what precedes. For no appearance goes back
from the following point of time to the preceding one, but it is related
merely to some preceding point or other; on the contrary, the
progress from a given time to the determinately following one is necessary. Hence, since there is still something that follows, I must necessarily relate it to something else in general that precedes, and on which it
follows in accordance with a rule, i.e., necessarily, so that the occurrence, as the conditioned, yields a secure indication of some condition,
but it is the latter that determines the occurrence.
If one were to suppose that nothing preceded an occurrence that it
must follow in accordance with a rule, then all sequence of perception
a

Object
307

B 238
A 193

B 239
A 1 94

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 240
A I 95

B 241
AI96

would be determined solely in apprehension, i.e., merely subjectively,
but it would not thereby be objectively determined which of the per­
ceptions must really be the preceding one and which the succeeding
one. In this way we would have only a play of representations that
would not be related to any objecta at all, i.e., by means of our percep­
tion no appearance would be distinguished from any other as far as the
temporal relation is concerned, since the succession in the apprehend­
ing is always the same, and there is therefore nothing in the appearance
that determines it so that a certain sequence is thereby made necessary
as objective. I would therefore not say that in appearance two states follow one another, but rather only that one apprehension follows the
other, which is something merely subjective, and determines no ob­
ject,b and thus cannot count as the cognition of any object (not even in
the appearance).
If, therefore, we experience that something happens, then we always
presuppose that something else precedes it, which it follows in accor­
dance with a rule. For without this I would not say of the object" that it
follows, since the mere sequence in my apprehension, if it is not, by
means of a rule, determined in relation to something preceding, does
not justify any sequence in the object.d Therefore I always make my
subjective synthesis (of apprehension) objective with respect to a rule in
accordance with which the appearances in their sequence, i.e., as they
occur, are determined through the preceding state, and only under this
presupposition alone is the experience of something that happens even
possible.
To be sure, it seems as if this contradicts everything that has always
been said about the course of the use of our understanding, according
to which it is only through the perception and comparison of sequences
of many occurrences on preceding appearances that we are led to discover a rule, in accordance with which certain occurrences always fol­
low certain appearances, and are thereby first prompted to form the
concept of cause. On such a footing this concept would be merely em­
pirical, and the rule that it supplies, that everything that happens has a
cause, would be just as contingent as the experience itself: its universal­
ity and necessity would then be merely feigned, and would have no true
universal validity, since they would not be grounded a priori but only on
induction. But the case is the same here as with other pure a priori rep­
resentations (e.g., space and time) that we can extract as clear concepts
from experience only because we have put them into experience, and
Object
Object
, Object
d Objecte
a

b

3 08

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

experience is hence first brought about through them. Of course the
logical clarity of this representation of a rule determining the series of
occurrences, as that of a concept of cause, is only possible if we have
made use of it in experience, but a consideration of it, as the condition
of the synthetic unity of the appearances in time, was nevertheless the
ground of experience itself, and therefore preceded it a priori.
It is therefore important to show by an example that even in experience we never ascribe sequence (of an occurrence, in which something happens that previously did not exist) to the object,a and
distinguish it from the subjective sequence of our apprehension, except when a rule is the ground that necessitates us to observe this
order of the perceptions rather than another, indeed that it is really
this necessitation that first makes possible the representation of a succession in the object.b
We have representations in us, of which we can also become con­
scious. But let this consciousness reach as far and be as exact and pre­
cise as one wants, still there always remain only representations, i.e.,
inner determinations of our mind in this or that temporal relation. Now
how do we come to posit an object C for these representations, or ascribe
to their subjective reality, as modifications, some sort of objective real­
ity? Objective significance cannot consist in the relation d to another
representation (of that which one would call the object), for that would
simply raise anew the question: How does this representation in turn go
beyond itself and acquire objective significmce in addition to the sub­
jective significance that is proper to it as a determination of the state of
mind? If we investigate what new characteristic is given to our repre­
sentations by the relatione to an object, and what is the dignity that
they thereby receive, we find that it does nothing beyond making the
combination of representations necessary in a certain way, and subjecting them to a rule; and conversely that objective significance is conferred on our representations only insofar as a certain order in their
temporal relation is necessary.
In the synthesis of the appearances the manifold representations
always follow one another. Now by this means no object! at all is rep­
resented; since through this sequence, which is common to all appre­
hensions, nothing is distinguished from anything else. But as soon as I
perceive or anticipate that there is in this sequence a relationg to the
Object
Object
, Object
d Beziehung
, Beziehung
f Object
g Beziehung
n

b

3 09

B 242
A 197

B 243
A 198

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 244
A 199

B 245

A 200

preceding state, from which the representation follows in accordance
with a rule, I represent something as an occurrence, or as something
that happens, i.e., I cognize an object that I must place in time in a de­
terminate position, which, after the preceding state, cannot be other­
wise assigned to it. Thus if I perceive that something happens, then the
first thing contained in this representation is that something precedes,
for it is just in relationa to this that the appearance acquires its tempo­
ral relation, that, namely, of existing after a preceding time in which it
did not. But it can only acquire its determinate temporal position in this
relation through something being presupposed in the preceding state
on which it always follows, i.e., follows in accordance with a rule: from
which it results, first, that I cannot reverse the series and place that
which happens prior to that which it follows; and, second, that if the
state that precedes is posited, than this determinate occurrence in­
evitably and necessarily follows. Thereby does it come about that there
is an order among our representations, in which the present one (insofar as it has come to be) points to some preceding state as a correlate,
to be sure still undetermined, of this event that is given, which is, how­
ever, determinately related to the latter, as its consequence, and neces­
sarily connected with it in the temporal series.
Now if it is a necessary law of our sensibility, thus a formal condi­
tion of all perceptions, that the preceding time necessarily determines
the following time (in that I cannot arrive at the following time except
by passing through the preceding one), then it is also an indispensable
law of the empirical representation of the temporal series that the
appearances of the past time determine every existence in the following
time, and that these, as occurrences, do not take place except insofar as
the former determine their existence in time, i.e., establish it in accor­
dance with a rule. For only in the appearances can we empirically
cognize this continuity in the connectionb of times.
Understanding belongs to all experience and its possibility, and the
first thing that it does for this is not to make the representation of the
objects distinct, but rather to make the representation of an object possible at all. Now this happens through its conferring temporal order on
the appearances and their existence by assigning to each of these, as a
consequence, a place in time determined a priori in regard to the pre­
ceding appearances, without which it would not agree with time itself,
which determines the position of all its parts a priori. Now this deter­
mination of position cannot be borrowed from the relation of the ap­
pearances to absolute time (for that is not an object of perception), but,
conversely, the appearances themselves must determine their positions
a Beziehung
Zusammenhange

b

3 10

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

in time for each other, and make this determination in the temporal
order necessary, i.e., that which follows or happens must succeed that
which was contained in the previous state in accordance with a general
rule, from which arises a series of appearances, in which by means of the
understanding the very same order and constant connectiona in the se­
ries of possible perceptions is produced and made necessary as would be
encountered a priori in the form of inner experience (time), in which all
perceptions would have to have their place.
That something happens, therefore, is a perception that belongs to a
possible experience, which becomes actual if! regard the position of the
appearance as determined in time, thus if I regard it as an objectb that
can always be found in the connectionc of perceptions in accordance
with a rule. This rule for determining something with respect to its
temporal sequence, however, is that in what precedes, the condition is
to be encountered under which the occurrence always (i.e., necessarily)
follows. Thus the principle of sufficient reasond is the ground of possible experience, namely the objective cognition of appearances with regard to their relation in the successive seriese of time.
The ground of proof of this proposition, however, rests solely on the
following moments. To all empirical cognition there belongs the syn­
thesis of the manifold through the imagination, which is always succes­
sive; i.e., the representations always follow each other in it. But the
order of the sequence (what must precede and what must follow) is not
determined in the imagination at all, and the series of successive! rep­
resentations can be taken backwards just as well as forwards. But if this
synthesis is a synthesis of apprehension (of the manifold of a given ap­
pearance), then the order in the objectg is determined, or, to speak more
precisely, there is therein an order of the successive synthesis that de­
termines an object,h in accordance with which something would neces­
sarily have to precede and, if this is posited, the other would necessarily
have to follow. If, therefore, my perception is to contain the cognition
of an occurrence, namely that something actually happens, then it must
be an empirical judgment in which one thinks that the sequence is de­
termined, i.e., that it presupposes another appearance in time which it
follows necessarily or in accordance with a rule. Contrariwise, if I were
to posit that which precedes and the occurrence did not follow it necZusammenhang
Object
, Zusammenhang
d der Satz vom zureichenden Grunde
, Reihenfolge
f Following Erdmann, reading der einanderfllgender instead of der einen derfllgenden.
g Object
h Object
a

b

311

B 246
AWl

B 247

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

A 202

B 248

A 203

B 249

essarily, then I would have to hold it to be only a subjective play of my
imaginings, and if I still represented something objective by it I would
have to call it a mere dream. Thus the relation of appearances (as pos­
sible perceptions) in accordance with which the existence of that which
succeeds (what happens) is determined in time necessarily and in ac­
cordance with a rule by something that precedes it, consequently the
relation of cause to effect, is the condition of the objective validity of
our empirical judgments with regard to the series of perceptions, thus
of their empirical truth, and therefore of experience. Hence the princi­
ple of the causal relation in the sequence of appearances is valid for all
objects of experience (under the conditions of succession), since it is it­
self the ground of the possibility of such an experience.
Here, however, there is a reservation that must be raised. The prin­
ciple of causal connection among appearances is, in our formula, lim­
ited to the successiona of them, although in the use of this principle it
turns out that it also applies to their accompaniment,b and cause and ef­
fect can be simultaneous. E.g., there is warmth in a room that is not to
be encountered in the outside air. I look around for the cause, and find
a heated stove. Now this, as the cause, is simultaneous with its effect,
the warmth of the chamber; thus here there is no succession' in time
between cause and effect, rather they are simultaneous, yet the law still
holds. The majority of efficient causesd in nature are simultaneous with
their effects, and the temporal sequence of the latter is occasioned only
by the fact that the cause cannot achieve its entire effect in one instant.
But in the instant in which the effect first arises, it is always simultane­
ous with the causality of its cause, since if the cause had ceased to be an
instant before then the effect would never have arisen. Here one must
note that it is the order of time and not its lapse that is taken account
of; the relation remains even if no time has elapsed. The time between
the causality of the cause and its immediate effect can be vanishing
(they can therefore be simultaneous), but the temporal relation of the
one to the other still remains determinable. If I consider a ball that lies
on a stuffed pillow and makes a dent in it as a cause, it is simultaneous
with its effect. Yet I still distinguish the two by means of the temporal
relation of the dynamical connection. For if I lay the ball on the pillow
the dent follows its previously smooth shape; but if (for whatever reason) the pillow has a dent, a leaden ball does not follow it.
The temporal sequence is accordingly the only empirical criterion of
the effect in relatione to the causality of the cause that precedes it. The
a Reihenfolge
b Begleitung, here meaning simultaneous occurrence, as earlier at A I83/B 2 26.
Reihenfolge
d Following the fourth edition, reading "Ursachen " instead of "Ursache. "
, Beziehung
,

312

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

glass is the cause of the rising of the water above its horizontal plane,
though both appearances are simultaneous. For as soon as I draw the
water into the glass from a larger vessel, something follows, namely the
alteration of the horizontal state which the water had there into a concave state that it assumes in the glass.
This causality leads to the concept of action, this to the concept of
force, and thereby to the concept of substance.75 Since I will not crowd
my critical project, which concerns solely the sources of synthetic a pri­
ori cognition, with analyses that address merely the elucidation (not the
amplification) of concepts, I leave the detailed discussion of these con­
cepts to a future system of pure reason - especially since one can already
find such an analysis in rich measure even in the familiar textbooks of
this sort. Yet I cannot leave untouched the empirical criterion of a sub­
stance, insofar as it seems to manifest itself better and more readily
through action than through the persistence of the appearance.
\Vhere there is action, consequently activity and force, there is also
substance, and in this alone must the seat of this fruitful source of ap­
pearances be sought. That is quite well said; but if one would explain
what one understands by substance, and in so doing avoid a vicious circle, then the question is not so easily answered. How will one infer directly from the action to the persistence of that which acts, which is yet
such an essential and singular characteristic of the substance (phaenomenon)? Yet given what we have already said, the solution of the question
is not subject to such a difficulty, though after the usual fashion (pro­
ceeding merely analytically with its concepts) it would be entirely insoluble. Action already signifes the relation of the subject of causality to the
effect. Now since all effect consists in that which happens, consequently
in the changeable, which indicates succession in time, the ultimate subject of the changeable is therefore that which persists, as the substratum of everything that changes, i.e., the substance. For according to the
principle of causality actions are always the primary ground of all
change of appearances, and therefore cannot lie in a subject that itself
changes, since otherwise further actions and another subject, which de­
termines this change, would be required. Now on this account action, as
a sufficient empirical criterion, proves substantiality without it being
necessary for me first to seek out its persistence through compared perceptions, a way in which the completeness that is requisite for the quantitya and strict universality of the concept could not be attained. For that
the primary subject of the causality of all arising and perishing cannot
itself arise and perish (in the field of appearances) is a certain inference,
which leads to empirical necessity and persistence in existence, consequently to the concept of a substance as appearance.
a Griifie
313

A 204

B 250

A 20S

B251

A 206

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 2S2

A207

B 2 S3

A208

A 207 / B 25 2

If something happens, the mere arising, without regard to that which
comes to be, is already in itself an object of investigation. It is already
necessary to investigate the transition from the non-being of a state to
this state, assuming that this state contained no quality in the appear­
ance. This arising concerns, as was shown in section A,a not the sub­
stance (for that does not arise), but its state. It is therefore merely
alteration, and not an origination out of nothing. If this origination is
regarded as the effect of a foreign cause, then it is called creation, which
cannot be admitted as an occurrence among the appearances, for its
possibility alone would already undermine the unity of experience,
though if I consider all things not as phenomena but rather as things in
themselves and as objects of mere understanding, then, though they are
substances, they can be regarded as dependent for their existence on a
foreign cause; which, however, would introduce entirely new meanings
for the words and would not apply to appearances as possible objects of
experience.
Now how in general anything can be altered, how it is possible that
upon a state in one point of time an opposite one could follow in the
next - of these we have a priori not the least concept. For this acquain­
tance with actual forces is required, which can only be given empiri­
cally, e.g., acquaintance with moving forces, or, what comes to the same
thing, with certain successive appearances (as motions) which indicate
such forces. But the form of such an alteration, the condition under
which alone it, as the arising of another state, can occur (whatever the
content, i.e., the state, that is altered might be), consequently the suc­
cession of the states itself (that which has happened), can still be con­
sidered a priori according to the law of causality and the conditions of
time.*
If a substance passes out of a state a into another state b, then the
point in time of the latter is different from the point in time of the first
state and follows it. Likewise the second state as a reality (in the ap­
pearance) is also distinguished from the first, in which it did not yet
exist, as b is distinguished from zero; i.e., if the state b differs from the
state a even only in magnitude, then the alteration would be an arising
of b-a, which did not exist in the prior state, and with regard to which
the latter = o.
* Note well that I am not talking about the alteration of certain relations b in
general, but rather of the alteration of the state. Hence if a body is moved uni­
formly, then it does not alter its state (of motion) at all, although it does if its
motion increases or diminishes.
a

That is, in the "First Analo gy."

b Relationen

3 14

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

The question therefore arises, how a thing passes from one state a
into another one = b. Between two instants there is always a time, and
between two states in those instances there is always a difference that
has a magnitude (for all parts of appearances are always in turn magni­
tudes). Thus every transition from one state into another happens in a
time that is contained between two instants, of which the former deter­
mines the state from which the thing proceeds and the second the state
at which it arrives. Both are therefore boundaries of the time of an al­
teration, consequently of the intermediate state between two states, and
as such they belong to the whole alteration. Now every alteration has a
cause, which manifests its causality in the entire time during which the
alteration proceeds. Thus this cause does not produce its alteration suddenly (all at once or in an instant), but rather in a time, so that as the
time increases from the initial instant a to its completion in b, the magnitude of the reality (b-a) is also generated through all the smaller degrees that are contained between the first and the last. All alteration is
therefore possible only through a continuous action of causality, which,
insofar as it is uniform, is called a moment. The alteration does not consist of these moments, but it is generated through them as their effect.
That is, now, the law of the continuity of all alteration, the ground of
which is this: That neither time nor appearance in time consists of small­
est parts, and that nevertheless in its alteration the state of thing passes
through all these parts, as elements, to its second state. No difference
of the real in appearance is the smallest, just as no difference in the
magnitude of times is, and thus the new state of reality grows out of the
first, in which it did not exist, through all the infinite degrees of reality,
the differences between which are all smaller than that between a and a.
What utility this proposition may have in research into nature does
not concern us here. But how such a proposition, which seems to am­
plify our cognition of nature so much, is possible completely a priori,
very much requires our scrutiny, even though it is obvious that it is real
and correct, and one might therefore believe oneself to be relieved of
the question how i t i s possible. For there are s o many unfounded pre­
sumptions of the amplification of our cognition through pure reason
that it must be adopted as a general principle to be distrustful of them
all and not to believe and accept even the clearest dogmatic proof of this
sort of proposition without documents that could provide a wellgrounded deduction.
All growth of empirical cognitions and every advance in perception is
nothing but an amplification of the determination of inner sense, i.e., a
progress in time, whatever the objects may be, either appearances or
pure intuitions. This progress in time determines everything, and is not
itself determined by anything further: i.e., its parts are only in time, and
given through the synthesis of it, but they are not given before it. For
=

3 15

B 254

A 209

B 255

A 2 IO

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 256

A2I I

this reason every transition in perception to something that follows in
time is a determination of time through the generation of this percep­
tion and, since that is always and in all its parts a magnitude, the gener­
ation of a perception as a magnitude through all degrees, of which none
is the smallest, from zero to its determinate degree. It is from this that
the possibility of cognizing a priori a law concerning the form of alterations becomes obvious. We anticipate only our own apprehension, the
formal condition of which, since it is present in us prior to all given ap­
pearance, must surely be able to be cognized a priori.
In the same way, then, that time is the a priori sensible condition of the
possibility of a continuous progress of that which exists to that which fol­
lows it, the understanding, by means of the unity of apperception, is the
a priori condition of the possibility of a continuous determination of all
positions for the appearances in this time, through the series of causes
and effects, the former of which inevitably draw the existence of the lat­
ter after them and thereby make the empirical cognition of temporal re­
lations (universally) valid for all time, thus objectively valid.
C.
Third Analogy.
<Principle of simultaneity, according to the law of
interaction, or community.>a

[In the first edition:]
All substances, insofar as they are simultaneous, stand in
thoroughgoing community (i.e., interaction with one another).

[In the second edition:]
<All substances, insofar as they can be perceived in space as
simultaneous, are in thoroughgoing interaction.>76
Proof

B 25 7

b<Things are simultaneous if in empirical intuition the perception of
one can follow the perception of the other reciprocally (which in the
temporal sequence of appearances, as has been shown in the case of the
second principle, cannot happen). Thus I can direct my perception first
to the moon and subsequently to the earth, or, conversely, first to the
earth and then subsequently to the moon, and on this account, since the
perceptions of these objects can follow each other reciprocally, I say that
they exist simultaneously. Now simultaneity is the existence of the man­
ifold at the same time. But one cannot perceive time itself and thereby
a In the first edition: "Principle of community."

b

This paragraph added in the second edition.

3 16

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

derive from the fact that things are positioned at the same time that
their perceptions can follow each other reciprocally. The synthesis of
the imagination in apprehension would therefore only present each of
these perceptions as one that is present in the subject when the other is
not, and conversely, but not that the objectsa are simultaneous, i.e., that
if the one is then the other also is in the same time, and that this is nec­
essary in order for the perceptions to be able to succeed each other re­
ciprocally. Consequently, a concept of the understanding of the
reciprocal sequence of the determinations of these things simultane­
ously existing externally to each other is required in order to say that the
reciprocal sequence of perceptions is grounded in the object,b and
thereby to represent the simultaneity as objective. Now, however, the
relation of substances in which the one contains determinations the
ground of which is contained in the other is the relation of influence,
and, if the latter reciprocally contains the ground of the determinations
of the former, it is the relation of community or interaction. Thus the
simultaneity of substances in space cannot be cognized in experience
otherwise than under the presupposition of an interaction among them;
this is therefore also the condition of the possibility of the things themselves as objects of experience.>
CThings are simultaneous insofar as they exist at one and the same
time. But how does one cognize that they exist at one and the same
time? If the order in the synthesis of the apprehension of this manifold
is indifferent, i.e., if it can proceed from A through B, C, and D to E,
but also conversely from E to A. For if they existedd in time one after
the other (in the order that begins with A and ends at E), then it would
be impossible to begin the apprehension at the perception of E and proceed backwards to A, since A would belong to past time, and thus can
no longer be an object of apprehension.'·77
Now if you assume that in a manifold of substances as appearances
n

b

Objecte
Objecte

, The text common to the two editions resumes here.
d Reading sie waren instead of sie ware, so that the antecedent can be plural; even so, it re­
mains unclear whether Kant intends the antecedent to be the "things" referred to at the
beginning of the paragraph, or the representations A through E constituting the manifold.
, In his copy of the first edition, Kant struck out the preceding paragraph and inserted the
following note: "Space makes community possible. Now since the thinking being with
all its faculties, whose effects belong merely to inner sense, is not a relation [Relation] of
space, the commercium of the soul with the body is therefore not comprehensible. The
community of things in themselves must either have a third substance, in which they
exist as accidentia and are in relation to one another - Spinozism - or, since this won't do,
it remains incomprehensible. Space is itself the phaenomenon of possible community. If I
consider bodies merely as phaenomena that are in me, the cognitive faculty of inner sense
may well stand in community with those of outer sense." ( E LXXXVI, p. 34; 2 3 : 3 1-2)

3 17

B 258

A2I I

A212

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 259

A2I3

B 2 60

each of them would be completely isolated, i.e., none would affect any
other nor receive a reciprocal influence from it, then I say that their si­
multaneity would not be the object of a possible perception, and that
the existence o f the one could not lead to the existence o f the other by
any path of empirical synthesis. For if you thought that they were sep­
arated by a completely empty space, then the perception that proceeds
from one to the other in time would certainly determine the existence
of the latter by means of a succeeding perception, but would not be able
to distinguish whether that appearance objectively follows the former
or is rather simultaneous with it.
In addition to the mere existence there must therefore be something
through which A determines the position of B in time, and conversely
also something by which B does the same for A, since only under this
condition can those substances be empirically represented as existing
simultaneously. Now only that determines the position of another in
time which is the cause of it or its determinations. Thus each substance
(since it can be a consequencea only with regard to its determinations)
must simultaneously contain the causality of certain determinations in
the other and the effects of the causality of the other, i.e., they must
stand in dynamical community (immediately or mediately) if their si­
multaneity is to be cognized in any possible experience. But now every­
thing in regard to objects of experience is necessary without which the
experience of these objects itself would be impossible. Thus it is neces­
sary for all substances in appearance, insofar as they are simultaneous,
to stand in thoroughgoing community of interaction with each other.
The word "community"b is ambiguous in our language, and can
mean either communio or commercium. c We use it here in the latter sense,
as a dynamical community, without which even the local community
(communio spatii)d could never be empirically cognized. From our expe­
riences it is easy to notice that only continuous influence in all places in
space can lead our sense from one object to another, that the light that
plays between our eyes and the heavenly bodies effects a mediate com­
munity between us and the latter and thereby proves the simultaneity
of the latter, and that we cannot empirically alter any place (perceive
this alteration) without matter everywhere making the perception of
our position possible; and only by means of its reciprocal influence can
it establish their simultaneity and thereby the coexistence of even the
most distant objects (though only mediately). Without community
Falge
b Gemeinschaft
a

, Le., "community" or "commerce," the former connoting membership in a common
whole but not necessarily interaction among the parts, the latter connoting interaction.
d "Community of spaces," that is, a single spatial order or relationship among multiple
objects.

318

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

every perception (of appearance in space) is broken off from the others,
and the chain of empirical representations, i.e., experience, would have
to start entirely over with every new objecta without the previous one
being in the least connected o r being able to stand in a temporal relation with it. I do not in the least hereby mean to refute empty space;
that may well exist where perceptions do not reach, and thus where no
empirical cognition of simultaneity takes place; but it is then hardly an
object b for our possible experience at all.
The following can serve as an elucidation. In our mind all appear­
ances, as contained in a possible experience, must stand in a community
(communio) of apperception, and insofar as the objects are to be repre­
sented as being connected by existing simultaneously, they must recip­
rocally determine their position in one time and thereby constitute a
whole. If this subjective community is to rest on an objective ground, or
is to be related to appearances as substances, then the perception of one,
as ground, must make possible the perception of the other, and con­
versely, so that the succession that always exists in the perceptions, as
apprehensions, will not be ascribed to the objects, c but these can instead
be represented as existing simultaneously. But this is a reciprocal influ­
ence, i.e., a real community (commercium) of substances, without which
the empirical relation of simultaneity could not obtain in experience.
Through this commerced the appearances, insofar as they stand outside
one another and yet in connection, constitute a composite (compositum
reale), and composites! of this sort are possible in many ways. Hence the
three dynamical relations, from which all others arise, are those of in­
herence, of consequence, and of composition.g
* * *

These, then, are the three analogies of experience. They are nothing
other than principles of the determination of the existence of appear­
ances in time, in accordance with all three of its modi: that of the rela­
tion to time itself, as a magnitude (the magnitude of existence, i.e.,
duration); that of the relation in time, as a series (one after another); and
finally that in time as a sum of all existence (simultaneous). This unity
of time-determination is through and through dynamical, i.e., time is
not regarded as that within which experience immediately determines
Object
Object
, Objecten
d Commercium, printed as a German rather than Latin word.
Zusammengesetztes
f Composita, printed as a German rather than Latin word.
g Composition
a

b

,

3 19

A 2 14
B 261

A2 15
B 262

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

A 2 16/B 263

B 264
A2 I7

the position of each existence, which is impossible, since absolute time
is not an object of perception by means of which appearances could be
held together; rather the rule of the understanding, through which
alone the existence of appearances can acquire synthetic unity in tem­
poral relations, determines the position of each of them in time, thus a
priori and validly for each and every time.
By nature (in the empirical sense) we understand the combination of
appearances as regards their existence, in accordance with necessary
rules, i.e., in accordance with laws. There are therefore certain laws,
and indeed a priori, which first make a nature possible; the empirical
laws can only obtain and be found by means of experience, and indeed
in accord with its original laws, in accordance with which experience it­
self first becomes possible. Our analogies therefore really exhibit the
unity of nature in the combination of all appearances under certain ex­
ponents, which express nothing other than the relation of time (insofar
as it comprehends all existence in itself) to the unity of apperception,
which can only obtain in synthesis in accordance with rules. Thus to­
gether they say: All appearances lie in one nature, and must lie therein,
since without this a priori unity no unity of experience, thus also no de­
termination of the objects in it, would be possible.
About the method of proof, however, which we have employed in the
case of these transcendental laws of nature, and about its singularity,
one remark is to be made, which must be very important as a precept
for every other attempt to prove intellectual and at the same time syn­
thetic a priori propositions. If we had wanted to prove these analogies
dogmatically, i.e., from concepts - namely, that everything that exists
will only be encountered in that which persists; that every occurrence
presupposes something in the previous state, which it follows in accor­
dance with a rule; finally, that in the manifold that is simultaneous the
states are simultaneous in relationa to each other in accordance with a
rule (stand in community) - then all effort would have been entirely in
vain. For one cannot get from one object and its existence to the exis­
tence of another or its way of existing through mere concepts of these
things, no matter how much one analyzes them. So what is left for us?
The possibility of experience, as a cognition in which in the end all ob­
jects must be able to be given to us if their representation is to have ob­
jective reality for us. In this third thing, now, the essential form of
which consists in the synthetic unity of the apperception of all appear­
ances, we found a priori conditions of the thoroughgoing and necessary
time-determination of all existence in appearance, without which even
empirical time-determination would be impossible, and we found rules
of synthetic a priori unity by means of which we could anticipate expea Beziehung

320

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

rience. In the absence of this method, and in the delusion of wanting to
prove dogmatically synthetic propositions that the empirical use of the
understanding recommends as its principles,a a proof of the principle of
sufficient reason was often sought, but always in vain. No one ever even
thought of the other two analogies, though one always tacitly employed
them, * since the clue of the categories was missing, which alone can uncover and make noticeable every gap of the understanding, in concepts
as well as in principles.

B 265
A2IS

4·

The postulates
of empirical thinking in general. 78
I . \Vhatever agrees with the formal conditions of experience (in ac­
cordance with intuition and concepts) is possible.
2 . That which is connectedb with the material conditions of experience (of sensation) is actual.
3 . That whose connection' with the actual is determined in accordance
with general conditions of experience is (exists) necessarily.d
* The unity of the world-whole, in which all appearances are to be connected, is
obviously a mere conclusion from the tacitly assumed principle of the community of all substances that are simultaneous: for, were they isolated, they would
not as parts constitute a whole, and were their connection (interaction of the
manifold) not already necessary on account of simultaneity, then one could not
infer from the latter, as a merely ideal relation, to the former, as a real one.
Nevertheless we have shown, in its proper place, that community is really the
ground of the possibility of an empirical cognition of coexistence, and that one
therefore really only infers from the latter back to the former, as its condition.
Principien
zusammenhiingt
, Zusammenha12g

n

b

d

The following notes are entered in Kant's copy of the first edition following A2 I 8:
"The contingency of the alterable is only inferred from the fact that in accordance
with the second analogy every state of its existence always requires a ground, and not
vice versa, that it always requires a ground because it is contingent. We call absolutely
contingent that which has no sufficient ground: never here, since it is never complete."
(E LXXXVII, p. 35: 2 3 : 3 2)
"On possibility: That the concept of which can be given in a corresponding intuition
is possible." (E LXXXVIII, p. 3 5 : 2 3 '32)
"What can be thought indeterminately in any time [is possible] ." ( E LXXXIX, p. 3 5 :
2 3 : 3 2)
"That which is determined in time [is actual] ." (E XC, p. 36: 2 3 :32)
"That which is determined through the concept of time itself [is (exists) necessar­
ily]." (E XCI, p. 36: 2 3 '32)

321

B 2 66

A 2 I S / B 265

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

A 2 19

B 267

A220

Elucidation
The categories of modality have this peculiarity: as a determination of
the objecta they do not augment the concept to which they are ascribed
in the least, but rather express only the relationb to the faculty of cog­
nition. If the concept of a thing is already entirely complete, I can still
ask about this object whether it is merely possible, or also actual, or, if
it is the latter, whether it is also necessary? No further determinations
in the objectC itself are hereby thought; rather, it is only asked: how is
the object itself (together with all its determinations) related to the un­
derstanding and its empirical use, to the empirical power of judgment,
and to reason (in its application to experience)?
For this very reason the principles of modality are also nothing fur­
ther than definitions of the concepts of possibility, actuality, and neces­
sity in their empirical use, and thus at the same time restrictions of all
categories to merely empirical use, without any permission and al­
lowance for their transcendental use. For if the categories are not to
have a merely logical significance and analytically express the form of
thinking, but are to concern things and their possibility, actuality, and
necessity, then they must pertain to possible experience and its syn­
thetic unity, in which alone objects of cognition are given.
The postulate of the possibility of things thus requires that their con-

"That which is determined in time and space is actual. Against idealism." (E XCII,
p. 36; 2 3 =32)
"Everything actual is necessary, either absolutely or hypothetically. That, however,
holds only of noumena; for absolute contingency of things in themselves cannot be.
thought." (E XCIII, p. 36; 2 n 2)
"That which exists, thus in other things outside our thoughts, is thoroughly deter­
mined. This proposition is the principle [Princip] of the concept of an ens realissimus
[most real being] as conceptus originarii [concept of the origin]. Whence the concept of
the absolute necessity of this?
"Therein also belongs the proposition that all negations are limitations. This is the
synthetic method of reason. " ( E XCrv; p. 36; 2 3 : 3 2-3)
"We do not attribute contingency to substances, but only to the alterable accidents.
Causes." (E XCv, p. 36; 2 3 = 33)
"The three criteria of hypotheses, always only in relation to experience. The possi­
bility of the hypothesis, the reality of that which is thought up in behalf of the hypoth­
esis. Its necessity must be certain." ( E XCVI, p. 36; 2 3: 3 3)
a

b

Objects
In this section, as in the preceding, Kant continues the frequent use of Verhalwis rather
than Beziehung, even here where he is speaking about a relation between the cognitive
faculty and its object rather than among objects, and thus by the usage of the
"Transcendental Aesthetic" the latter term might have been expected. Unless otherwise
noted, our "relation" translates Verhalwis.

, Objecte
322

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

cept agree with the formal conditions of an experience in general. This,
however, namely the objective form of experience in general, contains all
synthesis that is requisite for the cognition of objects.a A concept that in­
cludes a synthesis in it is to be held as empty, and does not relate to any
object, if this synthesis does not belong to experience, either as borrowed
from it, in which case it is an empirical concept, or as one on which, as
a priori condition, experience in general (its form) rests, and then it is a
pure concept, which nevertheless belongs to experience, since its objectb
can be encountered only in the latter. For whence will one derive the
character of the possibility of an object that is thought by means of a syn­
thetic a priori concept, if not from the synthesis that constitutes the form
of the empirical cognition of objects?' That in such a concept no contradiction must be contained is, to be sure, a necessary logical condition; but
it is far from sufficient for the objective reality of the concept, i.e., for the
possibility of such an object as is thought through the concept,79 Thus in
the concept of a figure that is enclosed between two straight lines there is
no contradiction, for the concepts of two straight lines and their intersection contain no negation of a figure; rather the impossibility rests not
on the concept in itself, but on its construction in space, i.e., on the conditions of space and its determinations; but these in turn have their objective reality, i.e., they pertain to possible things, because they contain in
themselves a priori the form of experience in general.
We shall now make obvious the extensive utility and influence of this
postulate of possibility. If I represent to myself a thing that persists, so
that everything that changes merely belongs to its states, I can never
cognize from such a concept alone that such a thing is possible. Or, if
I represent something to myself that is so constituted that if it is
posited something else always and inevitably succeeds it, this may well
be able to be so thought without contradiction; but whether such a
property (as causality) will be encountered in any possible thing cannot thereby be judged. Finally, I can represent various things (substances) to myself that are so constituted that the state of one is
followed by a consequence in the state of the other, and conversely; but
whether such a relation can pertain to any things cannot be derived
from these concepts, which contain a merely arbitrary synthesis. Thus
only from the fact that these concepts express a priori the relations of
the perceptions in every experience does one cognize their objective
reality, i.e., their transcendental truth, and, to be sure, independently
o f experience, but yet not independently o f all relationd to the form of
a

Objecte
Object
, Objecte
d Beziehung
b

323

B 268

A22I

B 269

A222

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 2 70

A223

B 27!

A224

an experience in general and the synthetic unity in which alone objects
can be empirically cognized.
But if one wanted to make entirely new concepts of substances, of
forces, and of interactions from the material that perception offers us,
without borrowing the example of their connection from experience it­
self, then one would end up with nothing but figments of the brain, for
the possibility of which there would be no indications at all, since in
their case one did not accept experience as instructress nor borrow
these concepts from it. Invented concepts of this sort cannot acquire the
character of their possibility a priori, like the categories, as conditions
on which all experience depends, but only a posteriori, as ones given
through experience itself, and their possibility must either be cognized
a posteriori and empirically or not cognized at all. A substance that was
persistently present in space yet without filling it (like that intermedi­
ate thing between matter and thinking beings, which some would in­
troduce),80 or a special fundamental power of our mind to intuit the
future (not merely, say, to deduce it), or, finally, a faculty of our mind to
stand in a community of thoughts with other men (no matter how distant they may be)81 - these are concepts the possibility o f which is en­
tirely groundless, because it cannot be grounded in experience and its
known laws, and without this it is an arbitrary combination of thoughts
that, although it contains no contradiction, still can make no claim to
objective reality, thus to the possibility of the sort of object that one
would here think. As far as reality is concerned, it is evidently intrinsi­
cally forbidden to think it in concreto without getting help from experi­
ence, because it can only pertain to sensation, as the matter of
experience, and does not concern the form of the relation that one can
always play with in fictions. a
But I leave aside everything the possibility of which can only be de­
rived from actuality in experience, and consider here only the possi­
bility of things through concepts a priori, about which I proceed to
assert that i t can never occur by itself solely from such concepts, but
always only as formal and objective conditions of an experience in
general.
It may look, to be sure, as if the possibility of a triangle could be cog­
nized from its concept in itself (it is certainly independent of experi­
ence); for in fact we can give it an object entirely a priori, i.e., construct
it. But since this is only the form of an object, it would still always remain only a product o f the imagination, the possibility o f whose object
would still remain doubtful, as requiring something more, namely that
such a figure be thought solely under those conditions on which all ob­
jects of experience rest. Now that space is a formal a priori condition of
a

Erdichtungen

3 24

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

outer experiences, that this very same formative a synthesis by means of
which we construct a figure in imagination is entirely identical with that
which we exercise in the apprehension of an appearance in order to
make a concept of experience of it - it is this alone that connects with
this concept the representation of the possibility of such a thing. And
thus the possibility of continuous magnitudes, indeed even of magni­
tudes in general, since the concepts of them are all synthetic, is never
clear from the concepts themselves, but only from them as formal conditions of the determination of objects in experience in general; and
where should one want to seek objects that correspond to the concepts,
if not in the experience through which alone objects are given to
us? - although without anticipating experience itself we can cognize
and characterize the possibility of things solely in relation to the formal
conditions under which something can be determined as an object in
experience at all, thus fully a priori but only in relationb to these conditions and within their boundaries.82
The postulate for cognizing the actuality of things requires perception, thus sensation of which one is conscious - not immediate perception of the object itself the existence of which is to be cognized, but still
its connection with some actual perception in accordance with the
analogies of experience, which exhibit all real connection in an experience in general.
In the mere concept of a thing no characteristic of its existence can
be encountered at all. For even if this concept is so complete that it lacks
nothing required for thinking of a thing with all of its inner detennina­
tions, still existence has nothing in the least to do with all of this, but
only with the question of whether such a thing is given to us in such a
way that the perception of it could in any case precede the concept. For
that the concept precede the perception signifies its mere possibility; but
perception, which yields the material for the concept, i s the sole characteristic of actuality. However, one can also cognize the existence of the
thing prior to the perception of it, and therefore cognize it comparatively a priori, if only it is connectedC with some perceptions in accordance with the principles of their empirical connection d (the analogies).
For in that case the existence of the thing is still connectede with our
perceptions in a possible experience, and with the guidance of the analogies we can get from our actual perceptions to the thing in the series of
possible perceptions. Thus we cognize the existence of a magnetic matbildende
b Beziehung
, zusammenhdngt
d Verkniipfung
hdngt . . . zusammen
a

e

325

B 2 72

A225

B 273

A 22 6

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 274

ter penetrating all bodies from the perception of attracted iron filings,
although an immediate perception of this matter is impossible for us
given the constitution of our organs. For in accordance with the laws of
sensibility and the context of our perceptions we could also happen upon
the immediate empirical intuition of it in an experience if our senses, the
crudeness of which does not affect the form of possible experience in
general, were finer. Thus wherever perception and whatever is appended
to it in accordance with empirical laws reaches, there too reaches our
cognition of the existence of things. If we do not begin with experience,
or proceed in accordance with laws of the empirical connectiona of ap­
pearances, then we are only making a vain display of wanting to discover
or research the existence of any thing. b<However, a powerful objection
against these rules for proving existence mediately is made by idealism,
the refutation of which belongs here.
* * *

Refutation of Idealism8 3

B 2 75

Idealism (I mean material idealism) is the theory that declares the exis­
tence of objects in space outside us to be either merely doubtful and in­
demonstrable, or else false and impossible; the former is the
problematic idealism of Descartes, who declares only one empirical as­
sertion (assertio), namely I am, to be indubitable; the latter is the dog­
matic idealism of Berkeley, who declares space, together with all the
things to which it is attached as an inseparable condition, to be some­
thing that is impossible in itself, and who therefore also declares things
in space to be merely imaginary.84 Dogmatic idealism is unavoidable if
one regards space as a property that is to pertain to the things in them­
selves; for then it, along with everything for which it serves as a condi­
tion, is a non-entity. The ground for this idealism, however, has been
undercut by us in the Transcendental Aesthetic. Problematic idealism,
which does not assert anything about this, but rather professes only our
incapacity for proving an existence outside us from our own by means of
immediate experience, is rational and appropriate for a thorough philo­
sophical manner of thought, allowing, namely, no decisive judgment
until a sufficient proof has been found. The proof that is demanded must
therefore establish that we have experience and not merely imagina­
tion of outer things, which cannot be accomplished unless one can prove
that even our inner experience, undoubted by Descartes, is possible
only under the presupposition of outer experience.
a Zusammenhanges
b

The following sentence, the ensuing "Refutation of Idealism," and its proof and the
subsequent remarks are all added in the second edition (B 2 74-9)'

326

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

Theorem

The mere, but empirically determined, consciousness of my own
existence proves the existence of objects in space outside me.
Proof
I am conscious of my existence as determined in time. All time-deter­
mination presupposes something persistent in perception. This persis­
tent thing, however, cannot be something in me, since my own
existence in time can first be determined only through this persistent
thing.a Thus the perception of this persistent thing is possible only
through a thing outside me and not through the mere representation
of a thing outside me. Consequently, the determination of my existence
in time is possible only by means of the existenceb of actual things that
I perceive outside myself. Now consciousness in time is necessarily
combined with the consciousness of the possibility of this time-deter­
mination: Therefore it is also necessarily combined with the existence
of the things outside me, as the condition of time-determination; i.e.,
the consciousness of my own existence is at the same time an immediate consciousness of the existence of other things outside me.
Note 1 . One will realize that in the preceding proof the game that
idealism plays has with greater justice been turned against it. Idealism
assumed that the only immediate experience is inner experience, and
that from that outer things could only be inferred, but, as in any case
in which one infers from given effects to determinate causes, only un­
reliably, since the cause of the representations that we perhaps falsely
ascribe to outer things can also lie in us. Yet here it is proved that outer
experience is really immediate, * that only by means of it is possible not,
* The immediate consciousness o f the existence o f outer things i s not presupposed but proved in the preceding theorem, whether we have insight into the
possibility of this consciousness or not. The question about the latter would
be whether we have only an inner sense but no outer one, rather merely outer
imagination. But it is clear that in order for us even to imagine something as
external, i.e., to exhibit it to sense in intuition, we must already have an outer
sense, and by this means immediately distinguish the mere receptivity of an
a According to the revised preface (Bxxxix) , this sentence is to be replaced by the follow­

b

ing: "This persistent thing, however, cannot be an intuition in me. For all grounds of de­
termination of my existence that can be encountered in me are representations, and as
such require something persistent that is distinct even from them, in relation to which
their change, thus my existence in the time in which they change, can be determined."

Existenz
, Existenz
327

B 2 76

B 277
B 2 76

B 2 77

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 2 78

B 2 79

to be sure, the consciousness of our own existence, but its determina­
tion in time, i.e., inner experience. Of course, the representation I am,
which expresses the consciousness that can accompany all thinking, is
that which immediately includes the existencea of a subject in itself, but
not yet any cognition of it, thus not empirical cognition, i.e., experi­
ence; for to that there belongs, besides the thought of something exist­
ing, intuition, and in this case inner intuition, i.e., time, in regard to
which the subject must be determined, for which outer objects are ab­
solutely requisite, so that inner experience itself is consequently only
mediate and possible only through outer experience.85
Note 2. All use of our faculty of cognition in experience for the de­
termination of time agrees with this completely. Not only can we per­
ceiveb all time-determination only through the change in outer relations
(motion) relative to that which persists in space (e.g., the motion of the
sun with regard to the objects on the earth);86 we do not even have any­
thing persistent on which we could base the concept of a substance, as
intuition, except merely matter, and even this persistence is not drawn
from outer experience, but rather presupposed a priori as the necessary
condition of all time-determination, thus also as the determination of
inner sense in regard to our own existence through the existenceC of
outer things. The consciousness of myself in the representation I is no
intuition at all, but a merely intellectual representation of the self­
activity of a thinking subject. And hence this I does not have the least
predicate of intuition that, as persistent, could serve as the correlate for
time-determination in inner sense, as, say, impenetrability in matter, as
empirical intuition, does.87
Note 3. From the fact that the existenced of outer objects is required
for the possibility of a determinate consciousness of our self it does not
follow that every intuitive representation of outer things includes at the
same time their existence, for that may well be the mere effect of the
imagination (in dreams as well as in delusions); but this is possible
merely through the reproduction of previous outer perceptions, which,
as has been shown, are possible only through the actuality of outer ob­
jects. Here it had to be proved only that inner experience in general is
possible only through outer experience in general. Whether this or that
outer intuition from the spontaneity that characterizes every imagining. For
even merely to imagine an outer sense would itself annihilate the faculty of
intuition, which is to be determined through the imagination.
a

Existenz

b Following Erdmann, reading "wahrnehmen" instead of "vornehmen. "

, Existenz
d Existenz here and in the remainder of this sentence.
328

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

putative experience is not mere imagination must be ascertained ac­
cording to its particular determinations and through its coherence with
the criteria of all actual experience.

aFinally, as far as the third postulate is concerned, it pertains to material
necessity in existence, not the merely formal and logical necessity in the
connection of concepts.88 Now since no existenceb of objects of the
senses can be cognized fully a priori, but always only comparatively a priori relative to another already given existence, but since nevertheless
even then we can only arrive at an existence that must b e contained
somewhere in the nexus of experience of which the given perception is
a part, the necessity of existenced can thus never be cognized from concepts but rather always only from the connection with that which is perceived, in accordance with general laws of experience. Now there is no
existence that could be cognized as necessary under the condition of
other given appearances except the existence of effects from given
causes in accordance with laws of causality. Thus it is not the existence
of things (substances) but of their state of which alone we can cognize
the necessity, and moreover only from other states, which are given in
perception, in accordance with empirical laws of causality. From this it
follows that the criterion of necessity lies solely in the law of possible ex­
perience that everything that happens is determined a priori through its
cause in appearance. Hence we cognize only the necessity of effects in
nature, the causes of which are given to us, and the mark of necessity in
existence does not reach beyond the field of possible experience, and
even in this it does not hold of the existence' of things, as substances,
since these can never be regarded as empirical effects, or as something
that happens and arises. Necessity therefore concerns only the relations
of appearances in accordance with the dynamical law of causality, and
the possibility grounded upon it o f inferring a priori from some given
existence (a cause) to another existence (the effect). Everything that happens is hypothetically necessary; that is a principle that subjects alteration in the world to a law, i.e., a rule of necessary existence, without
which not even nature itself would obtain. Hence the proposition
"Nothing happens through a mere accident" (in mundo non datur casus)!

a The text common to the two editions resumes here.

b

Existenz
, Existenz
d Existenz
, Existenz

f In the world there is no chance.

329

A 2 26

A227

B 280

A228

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 2 81

A 2 29

B 282

A 2 30

is an a priori law of nature; likewise the proposition "No necessity in na­
ture is blind, but is rather conditioned, consequently comprehensible
necessity" (non datur fatum).a Both are laws of the sort through which
the play of alterations is subjected to a nature of things (as appear­
ances), or, what is the same thing, to the unity of the understanding, in
which alone they can belong to an experience, as the synthetic unity of
appearances. Both of these belong to the dynamical principles. The first
is properly a consequence of the principle of causality (under the analo­
gies of experience). The second belongs to the principles of modality,
which adds to the causal determination the concept of necessity, which,
however, stands under a rule of understanding. The principle of conti­
nuity forbade any leap in the series of appearances (alterations) (in
mundo non datur saltus),b but also any gap or cleft between two appear­
ances in the sum of all empirical intuitions in space (non datur hiatus);C
for one can express the proposition thus: "Nothing can enter experience
that proves a vacuumd or even permits it as a part of empirical synthe­
sis." For as far as concerns the void that one might think of outside of
the field of possible experience (the world), this does not belong to the
jurisdiction of the mere understanding, which only decides about ques­
tions concerning the use of given appearances for empirical cognition,
and it is a problem for ideal reason, which goes beyond the sphere of a
possible experience and would judge about what surrounds and bounds
this, and must therefore be considered in the transcendental dialectic.
We could easily represent the order of these four propositions (in mundo
non datur hiatus, non datur saltus, non datur casus, non daturfatum)' in ac­
cordance with the order of the categories, just like all principles of tran­
scendental origin, and show each its position, but the already practiced
reader will do this for himself or easily discover the clue to it. However,
they are all united simply in this, that they do not permit anything in
empirical synthesis that could violate or infringe the understanding and
the continuous connectiOIv of all appearances, i.e., the unity of its concepts. For it is in this alone that the unity of experience, in which all
perceptions must have their place, is possible.
Whether the field of possibility is greater than the field that contains
everything actual, and whether the latter is in turn greater than the setg
of that which is necessary, are proper questions, and can, to be sure, be
There is no fate.
In the world there is no leap.
, There is no hiatus.
d Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "The vacuum physicum is different from the
vacuum metaphysicum, in which there is no effect at all." (E XCVII, p. 36; 2 3 :33)
, In the world there is no hiatus, there is no leap, there is no chance, there is no fate.

n

b

f Zusammenhange
g

Menge
3 30

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

solved synthetically, though they also fall under the jurisdiction of rea­
son alone; for they mean, roughly, to ask whether all things, as appear­
ances, belong together in the sum total and the context of a single
experience, of which each given perception is a part which therefore
could not be combined with any other appearances, or whether my perceptions could belong to more than one possible experience (in their
general connection).a The understanding gives a priori to experience in
general only the rule, in accordance with the subjective and formal conditions of sensibility as well as of apperception, which alone make it
possible. Even were they possible, we could still not conceive of and
make comprehensible other forms of intuition (than space and time) or
other forms of understanding (than the discursive form of thinking, or
that of cognition through concepts); and even if we could, they would
still not belong to experience, as the sole cognition in which objects are
given to us. Whether other perceptions than those which in general belong to our entire possible experience and therefore an entirely different field of matter can obtain cannot be decided by the understanding,
which has to do only with the synthesis of that which is given.
Otherwise the poverty of our usual inferences through which we bring
forth a great realm of possibility, of which everything actual (every object of experience) is only a small part, is very obvious. "Everything actual is possible" - from this there follows naturally, in accordance with
the logical rules of conversion, the merely particular proposition,
"Something possible is actual," which then seems to mean as much as
"Much is possible that is not actual." It certainly looks as if one could
increase the number of that which is possible beyond that of the actual,
since something must be added to the former to constitute the latter.
But I do not acknowledge this addition to the possible. For that which
would have to be added to the possible would be impossible. All that
can be added to my understanding is something beyond agreement with
the formal conditions of experience, namely connection with some perception or other; but whatever is connected with this in accordance
with empirical laws is actual, even if it is not immediately perceived.
However, that another series of appearances in thoroughgoing connection with that which is given to me in perception, thus more than a single all-encompassing experience, is possible, cannot be inferred from
that which is given, and even less without anything being given at all;
for without matterb nothing at all can be thought. That which is possible only under conditions that are themselves merely possible is not
possible in all respects. But this is the way the question is taken when
Zusammenhange
b Stoff, i.e., matter as contrasted to form, rather than matter in a specifically physical

a

sense.

331

B 283

A23 I

B 284

A 2 32

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 285

A2 33

B 286

A 2 34

one wants to know whether the possibility of things extends further
than experience can reach.89
I have only mentioned these questions in order not to leave a gap in
what according to common opinion belongs among the concepts of the
understanding. In fact, however, absolute possibility (which is valid in
every respect) is no mere concept of the understanding, and can in no
way be of empirical use, rather it belongs solely to reason, which goes
beyond all possible empirical use of the understanding. Hence we have
had to satisfy ourselves here with a merely critical remark, but other­
wise left the matter in obscurity pending further treatment later on.
Since I would now conclude this fourth section, and with it at the
same time the system of all principles of the pure understanding, I must
still provide the reasona why I have called the principles b of modality
"postulates." I will not here take this expression in the significance that,
contrary to the usage' of mathematics, to whom it nevertheless properly
belongs, some recent philosophical writers90 have used it, namely that
postulation means the same as putting a proposition forth as immedi­
ately certain without justification or proof; for if we were to allow that
synthetic propositions, no matter how evident they might be, could
claim unconditional acceptance without any deduction, merely on their
own claim, then all critique of the understanding would be lost, and,
since there is no lack of audacious pretensions that common belief does
not refuse (which is, however, no credential),d our understanding would
therefore be open to every delusion, without being able to deny its ap­
proval to those claims that, though unjustifable, demand to be admitted
as actual axioms in the very same confident tone. When, therefore, a
determination is added a priori to the concept of a thing, then for such
a proposition if not a proof then at least a deduction of the legitimacy
of its assertion must unfailingly be supplied.
The principles of modality are not, however, objective-synthetic, since
the predicates of possibility, actuality, and necessity do not in the least
augment the concept of which they are asserted in such a way as to add
something to the representation of the object. But since they are nevertheless always synthetic, they are so only subjectively, i.e., they add to the
concept of a thing (the real), about which they do not otherwise say any­
thing, the cognitive power whence it arises and has its seat, so that, if it
is merely connected in the understanding with the formal conditions of
experience, its object is called possible; if it is in connectione with perGrund
Principien
Sinn
d Kreditiv
, Beziehung
a

b

c'

332

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

ception (sensation, as the matter of the senses), and through this deter­
mined by means of the understanding, then the objecta is actual; and if
it is determined through the connectionb of perceptions in accordance
with concepts, then the object is called necessary. The principles of
modality therefore do not assert of a concept anything other than the ac­
tion of the cognitive faculty through which it is generated. Now in
mathematics a postulate is the practical proposition that contains noth­
ing except the synthesis through which we first give ourselves an object
and generate its concept, e.g., to describe a circle with a given line from
a given point on a plane; and a proposition of this sort cannot be proved,
since the procedure that it demands is precisely that through which we
first generate the concept of such a figure. Accordingly we can postulate
the principles of modality with the very same right, since they do not
augment* their concept of things in general, but rather only indicate the
way in which in general it is combined with the cognitive power.'
* * *
* Through

the actuality of a thing I certainly posit more than possibility, but
not in the thing; for that can never contain more in actuality than what was
contained in its complete possibility. But while possibility was merely a posit­
ingd of a thing in relatione to the understanding (to its empirical use), actual­
ity is at the same time its connection with perception.

e

Zusammenhange

a Object
b Zusammenhang

, The following series of notes is inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition at A 2 34-5,
presumably constituting notes made for the "General Remark" that he adds at this point
in the second edition:
"Now comes the proposition: how are synthetic a priori propositions possible." ( E
XCVIII, p . 37; 2 3 = 3 3)
"Finally: How are synthetic a priori propositions possible through concepts, how are
they possible through the construction of concepts?" (E XCIX, p. 37; 2 3 :33)
"On the possibility of an ars characteristica vel combinatoria." (E C, p. 37; 2 3 : 3 3)
"It is remarkable that for these postulates we must always have a mechanical
medium[:] either a model as a string that lies, or the motion of this string around a
point." (E CI, p. 3 7; 2 3 =3 3)
"That all principles and synthetic a priori propositions in general do not go further
than objects of experience, and that if we would still go beyond them then no intuition
can correspond to them." (E CII, p. 38; 2 3 : 3 3-4)
"That the pure laws of understanding also teach nothing further than the laws under
which alone experience in general is possible, not the particular laws of the objects of
experience. But that the laws of appearances (which are merely in us) thus have their
seat and origin in the understanding, therefore also in us, is not to be marveled at.
Indeed it is not possible to cognize a law with its necessity in such a way that we could
have cognized it otherwise than in our own understanding. The chemical laws are not
laws so much as rules of nature." (E CIII, p. 38; 2 3 : 3 4)
d
e

Position
Beziehung
333

A235

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 288

B 2 89

a<General Note on the System of Principles
It is very remarkable that we cannot have insight into the possibility of
any thing in accordance with the mere categories, but we must always
have available an intuition in order for it to display the objective reality
of the pure concept of the understanding. Take, e.g., the categories of
relation.b How I) something can exist only as subject, not as mere de­
termination of other things, i.e., can be substance; or how 2) because
something is, something else must be, thus how something can be a
cause at all; or 3) how, if several things exist, from the existence of one
of them something about the others follows and vice versa, and in this
way a community of substances can obtain - insight into these cannot
be had from mere concepts at all. The same thing also holds of the
other categories, e.g., how a thing can be one with a number of others
taken together, i.e., be a magnitude, etc. Thus as long as intuition is
lacking, one does not know whether one thinks an object:" through the
categories, and whether there can ever be any object that even fits
them; and so it is confirmed that the categories are not by themselves
cognitions, but mere fonns of thought for making cognitions out of
given intuitions. - In the same way it follows that no synthetic proposi­
tion can be made out of mere categories - e.g., in all existence there is
substance, i.e., something that can exist only as subject and never as
mere predicate; or, everything is a quantum, etc. - if there is nothing
that we can use in order to go beyond a given concept and thereby con­
nect it with another. Hence also no one has ever succeeded in proving
a synthetic proposition merely from pure concepts of the understand­
ing, e.g., the proposition "Every contingently existing thing has a
cause." One could never get further than to prove that without this re­
latione we could not comprehend the existence! of the contingent at
all, i.e., cognize the existence of such a thing a priori through the un­
derstanding; from which, however, it does not follow that this is also the
condition of the possibility of things themselves. Hence if one will look
back on our proof of the principle of causality, one will become aware
that we could prove it only of objectsg of possible experience:
"Everything that happens (every occurrence) presupposes a cause"; and
indeed we could prove it only as a principleh of the possibility of expea This note was added in its entirety in the second edition.
b Relation
, Object
d Object
, Beziehung
f Existenz, here and in the next clause.
g Objecten
h Princip
3 34

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

rience, hence of the cognition of an objecta given in empirical intuition, and not from mere concepts. That the proposition "Everything
contingent must have a cause" may be evident to everyone from mere
concepts is not to be denied; but then the concept of the contingent is
already taken in such a way that it contains, not the category of modality (as something, the non-existence of which can be thought), but that
of relationb (as something that can only exist as the consequence of
something else), and then it is, of course, an identical proposition:
"V\1hat can only exist as a consequence has its cause." In fact, when we
are to give examples of contingent existence, we always appeal to alterations and not merely to the possibility of the thought of the oppo­
site.*,91 Alteration, however, is an occurrence that is possible as such
only through a cause, the non-being o f which i s thus possible in itself;
and thus one cognizes contingency from the fact that something can
exist only as the effect of a cause; thus if a thing is assumed to be con­
tingent, it's an analytic proposition to say that it has a cause.
It is even more remarkable, however, that in order to understand the
possibility of things in accordance with the categories, and thus to es­
tablish the objective reality of the latter, we do not merely need intu­
itions, but always outer intuitions. If we take, e.g., the pure concept of
relation,c we find that I) in order to give something that persists in in­
tuition, corresponding to the concept of substance (and thereby to es­
tablish the objective reality of this concept), we need an intuition in
space (of matter), since space alone persistently determines, while time,
however, and thus everything that is in inner sense, constantly flows. 2)
In order to exhibit alteration as the intuition corresponding to the con­
cept of causality, we must take motion, as alteration in space, as our ex­
ample, indeed only by that means can we make alterations, the
possibility of which cannot be comprehended by any pure understand-

* One can easily think of the not-being of matter, but the ancients did not infer
its contingency from that. And even the change from the being to the nonbeing of a given state of a thing, in which all alteration consists, does not prove
the contingency of this state at all, as it were, from the actuality of its opposite; e.g., the rest of the body that follows its motion still does not prove the
contingency of its motion just because the former is the opposite of the latter.
For this opposite is here opposed to the other only logically, not realiter. In
order to prove the contingency of the motion of the body, one would have to
prove that instead of the motion in the preceding point of time, the body
could have been at rest then, not that it rests later; for in the later case the
two opposites are perfectly consistent.
" Objects
b Relation
Relation
C

335

B 290

B 29 I

B 290

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 292

B 293

ing, intuitable. Alteration is the combination of contradictorily opposed
determinations in the existence of one and the same thing. Now how it
is possible that from a given state an opposed state of the same thing
should follow not only cannot be made comprehensible by reason with­
out an example, but cannot even be made understandable without intu­
ition, and this intuition is the motion of a point in space, the existence
of which in different places (as a sequence of opposed determinations)
first makes alteration intuitable to us; for in order subsequently to make
even inner alterations thinkable, we must be able to grasp time, as the
form of inner sense, figuratively through a line, and grasp the inner al­
teration through the drawing of this line (motion), and thus grasp the
successive existencea of ourself in different states through outer intu­
ition; the real ground of which is that all alteration presupposes some­
thing that persists in intuition, even in order merely to be perceived as
alteration, but there is no persistent intuition to be found in inner
sense. - Finally, the possibility of the category of community is not to
be comprehended at all through mere reason, and thus it is not possi­
ble to have insight into the objective reality of this concept without
intuition, and indeed outer intuition in space. For how would one con­
ceiveb the possibility that if several substances exist, the existence' of the
one can follow reciprocally from the existence of the other (as an ef­
fect), and thus that because there is something in the former, there must
on that account also be something in the other that cannot be under­
stood from the existence of the latter alone? For this is requisite for
community, but is not even comprehensible among things each of
which is entirely isolated from the others through its subsistence.
Hence Leibniz, who ascribed a community to the substances of the
world only as conceived by the understanding alone, needed a divinity
for mediation; for from their existence alone this community rightly
seemed to him incomprehensible.92 But we can readily grasp the possi­
bility of community (of substances as appearances) if we represent them
in space, thus in outer intuition. For this already contains in itself a pri­
ori formal outer relations as conditions of the possibility of the real (in
effect and countereffect, thus in community). - It can just as easily be
established that the possibility of things as magnitudes, and thus the
objective reality of the category of magnitude, can also be exhibited
only in outer intuition, and that by means of that alone can it subse­
quently also be applied to inner sense. But in order to avoid being long­
winded I must leave the examples of this to the reader's further thought.
This entire remark is of great importance, not only in order to conExistenz
denken
, Existenz, used throughout this sentence.
a

b

336

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

firm our preceding refutation of idealism, but, even more, when we
come to talk of self-cognition from mere inner consciousness and
the determination of our nature without the assistance of outer empirical intuitions, to indicate to us the limits of the possibility of such
a cognition.93
The final conclusion of this entire section is thus: All principles of the
pure understanding are nothing further than a priori principles a of the
possibility of experience, and all synthetic a priori propositions are re­
lated to the latter alone, indeed their possibility itself rests entirely on
this relation.>b
n

b

Principien
Beziehung

337

B 2 94

The Transcendental Doctrine
of the Power ofJudgment
(Analytic of Principles)
Third Chapter
On the ground of the distinction ofall objects
in general into phenomena and noumenaa,b

We have now not only traveled through the land of pure understand­
ing, and carefully inspected each part of it, but we have also surveyed it,

a As in the first edition. For the second edition, Kant made extensive additions and some

b

deletions in the body of this chapter prior to the appendix on the "Amphiboly of the
Concepts of Reflection." We will present each version of the chapter up to the appen­
dix in its entirety, repeating those passages that were not changed. The marginal pagi­
nation and notes will mark where the changes were made.
The following notes appear at the start of this chapter in Kant's copy of the first edition:
"Here is the question: How far does the possibility of synthetic cognition a priori
extend? If there is talk of a thing through categories that is determined merely through
reason, hence also through categories, then such propositions are analytic, and yield no
cognition." (E CN, p. 38; 2 3 = 34)
" I . On appearance and illusion.

" 2 . How can one say that bodies are appearances. They consist of pure relations

[lauter Relationen]; soul consists of pure [lauter] synthesis and analysis of these repre­
sentations. The I is noumenon; I as intelligence." (E CV; p. 3 8; 2 3: 34)
"Being of sense - being of understanding; sensibilia - intelligibilia." (E CVI, p. 38; 2 3:34)
"We can only think noumena, not cognize them." (E CVIl, p. 38; 2 3:34)
"One must think things in themselves through the concept of a most-real being,
since this excludes all experience." (E CVIII, p. 39; 2 3 : 34)
"Mundus phaenomenon or a whole of substances in space may readily be thought, but
not as noumenon, since they are isolated." (E CIX, p. 39; 2 3 :3 5)
"The same things as beings of sense or understanding. I myself am the only thing
that does not intuit itself." (E CX, p. 39; 2 3 :35)
"Categories do not serve to cognize things for themselves, but only to order intu­
itions in space and time, i.e., appearances." (E CX!, p. 39; 2 3 : 35)
"Until now one believed that through categories one actually already cognized
something; now we see that they are only forms of thought for bringing the manifold
of intuitions to synthetic unity of apperception." (E CXII, p. 39; 2 3 :3 5)

338

Chapter III. On the Ground of the Distinction <A>

and determined the place for each thing in it.94 This land, however, is
an island, and enclosed in unalterable boundaries by nature itself. It is
the land of truth (a charming name), surrounded by a broad and stormy
ocean, the true seat of illusion, where many a fog bank and rapidly melting iceberg pretend to be new lands and, ceaselessly deceiving with
empty hopes the voyager looking around for new discoveries, entwine
him in adventures from which he can never escape and yet also never
bring to an end. But before we venture out on this sea, to search
through all its breadth and become certain of whether there is anything
to hope for in it, it will be useful first to cast yet another glance at the
map of the land that we would now leave, and to ask, first, whether we
could not be satisfied with what it contains, or even must be satisfied
with it out of necessity, if there is no other ground on which we could
build; and, second, by what title we occupy even this land, and can hold
it securely against all hostile claims. Although we have already adequately answered these questions in the course of the Analytic, a summary overview of their solutions can still strengthen conviction by
unifying their various moments in one point.
We have seen, namely, that everything that the understanding draws
out of itself, without borrowing it from experience, it nevertheless has
solely for the sake of use in experience. The principles of pure understanding, whether they are a priori constitutive (like the mathematical
principles) or merely regulative (like the dynamical principles), contain
nothing but only the pure schema, as it were, for possible experience; for
this has its unity only from the synthetic unity that the understanding
originally and from itself imparts to the synthesis of the imagination in
relation to apperception, and in relationa to and agreement with which
the appearances, as data for possible cognition, must already stand a priori. b But now even if these rules of the understanding are not only true
a priori but are rather even the source of all truth, i.e., of the agreement
of our cognition with objects,' in virtue of containing the ground of the
possibility of experience, as the sum total of all cognition in which ob-

a

b

"Noumena: beings that themselves have understanding, also causality with regard to
the objects [ObjectenJ of their understanding through the understanding itself, i.e., will
and then all other categories, i.e., pure intelligences. But since we take all sensible con­
ditions from them, we cannot think them determinately. The possibility of something
like that is not clear." (E CXIII, p. 39; 2 3 = 3 5)
Beziehung. The term Verbiiltnis does not occur again until the appendix to this chapter,
so further occurrences of Beziehung will not be noted.
Added in Kant's copy of the first edition: "We cannot have insight into the possibility
of a cause without an example from experience, thus it is not a concept that one can use
outside of experience. It is to be regarded as possible in experience alone and only in it
can it be assumed." (E Cxv, p. 40; 2 3 : 3 5)

, Objecten
3 39

B 2 95
A 2 36

B 296
A237

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. <A>

B 297

A238

B 2 98
A 2 39

jectsa may be given to us, still it does not seem enough to us merely to
have expounded what is true, but also that which one has desired to
know.b If, therefore, through this critical investigation we learn nothing
more than what we should in any case have practiced in the merely em­
pirical use of the understanding, even without such subtle inquiry, then
it would seem the advantage that one will draw from it would hardly be
worth the expense and preparation. Now to this, to be sure, one can
reply that no curiosity is more disadvantageous to the expansion of our
knowledge than that which would always know its utility in advance,
before one has entered into the investigations, and before one could
have the least concept of this utility even if it were placed before one's
eyes. But there is one advantage, which can be made both comprehensible and interesting to even the dullest and most reluctant student of
such transcendental investigation, namely this: That the understanding
occupied merely with its empirical use, which does not reflect on the
sources of its own cognition, may get along very well, but cannot ac­
complish one thing, namely, determining for itself the boundaries of its
use and knowing what may lie within and what without its whole sphere;
for to this end the deep inquiries that we have undertaken are requisite.
But if the understanding cannot distinguish whether certain questions
lie within its horizon or not, then it is never sure of its claims and its
possession, but must always reckon on many embarrassing corrections
when it continually oversteps the boundaries of its territory (as is un­
avoidable) and loses itself in delusion and deceptions.
That the understanding can therefore make only empirical use of all
its a priori principles, indeed of all its concepts, but never transcenden­
tal use, is a proposition that, if it can be recognizedd with conviction,
points to important consequences.' The transcendental use of a concept
in any sort of principle consists in its being related to things in general
and in themselves/ its empirical use, however, in its being related
merely to appearances, i.e., objects of a possible experience. But that
it is only the latter that can ever take place is evident from the follow­
ing. For every concept there is requisite, first, the logical form of a con­
cept (of thinking) in general, and then, second, the possibility of giving
it an object to which it is to be related. Without tllis latter it has no
a

b

Objecte
Emended in Kant's copy of the first edition to: "what is true, as little as it may be, but
also to expand his cognition" (E CXVI, p. 40; 2 3 :47).

, Erkenntnis
d erkannt

, Added in Kant's copy of the first edition: "against enthusiasm" (E CXVII, p. 40; 2 3:47).
t-o "objects, which are not given to us in an intuition, thus are not sensible objects" (E CXVII,
p. 40; 2 3 :47)·

f Kant's copy of the first edition changes "things in general and in themselves"

340

Chapter III. On the Ground of the Distinction <A>

sense, and is entirely empty of content, even though it may still contain
the logical function for making a concept out of whatever sort of data
there are. Now the object cannot be given to a concept otherwise than
in intuition, and, even if a pure intuitiona is possible a priori prior to the
object, then even this can acquire its object, thus its objective validity,
only through empirical intuition, of which it is the mere form. Thus all

concepts and with them all principles, however a priori they may be, are
nevertheless related to empirical intuitions, i.e., to data for possible ex­
perience. Without this they have no objective validity at all, but are
rather a mere play, whether it be with representations of the imagination or of the understanding. One need only take as an example the
concepts of mathematics, and first, indeed, in their pure intuitions.
Space has three dimensions, between two points there can be only one
straight line, etc. Although all these principles, and the representation
of the object with which this science occupies itself, are generated in the
mind completely a priori, they would still not signify anything at all if
we could not always exhibit their significance in appearances (empirical
objects). Hence it is also requisite for one to make an abstract concept
sensible, i.e., display the object b that corresponds to it in intuition,
since without this the concept would remain (as one says) without
sense, i.e., without significance. Mathematics fulfills this requirement
by means of the construction of the figure,c which is an appearance
present to the senses (even though brought about a priori). In the same
science, the concept of magnitude seeks its standing and sense in number, but seeks this in turn in the fingers, in the beads of an abacus, or in

B 299
A 240

strokes and points that are placed before the ey es. The concept is always

generated a priori, together with the synthetic principles or formulas
from such concepts; but their use and relation to supposed objects can
in the end be sought nowhere but in experience, the possibility of which
(as far as its form is concerned) is contained in them a priori.
That this is also the case with all categories, however, and the principIes spun out from them,d is also obvious from this: That we cannot
even define a single one of them without immediately descending to
conditions of sensibility, thus to the form of the appearances, to which,
as their sole objects, they must consequently be limited, since, if one removes this condition, all significance, i.e., relation to the object" disappears, and one cannot grasp through an example what sort of thing is
a Altered in Kant's copy of the first edition to: "even if a pure sensible intuition" (E

CXVIII, p. 4 1 ; 2 3 '47).

b Object

, Gestalt

d

In his copy of the first edition, Kant adds the remark: "We cannot explain their possi­
bility" (E CXIX, p. 4 1 ; 2 3 :47).

, Object
341

B 300

A 241

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. <A>

A 242

B 300

A 241

really intended by concepts of that sort.a Above, in the presentation of
the table of the categories, we spared ourselves the definitions of each
of them, on the ground that our aim, which pertains solely to their syn­
thetic use, does not make that necessary, and one must not make one­
self responsible for unnecessary undertakings that one can spare
oneself. This was no excuse, but a not inconsiderable rule of prudence,
not immediately to venture a definition and seek or pretend to com­
pleteness or precision in the determination of the concept if one can
make do with one or another of its marks, without requiring a complete
derivation of everything that constitutes the entire concept. But now it
turns out that the ground of this precaution lies even deeper, namely,
that we could not define them even if we wanted to, *, b but rather, if one
does away with all conditions of sensibility that distinguish them as con­
cepts of a possible empirical use, and takes them for concepts of things
in general (thus of transcendental use), then that is to do nothing more
than to regard the logical functions of judgments as the condition of the
possibility of things themselves, without in the least being able to show
whence they could have their application and their object,c thus how in
pure understanding without sensibility they could have any significance
and objective validity. dNo one can define the concept of magnitude in
general except by something like this: That it is the determination of a
thing through which it can be thought how many units are posited in it.
Only this how-many-times is grounded on successive repetition, thus
on time and the synthesis (of the homogeneous) in it. Reality, in con­
trast to negation, can be defined only if one thinks of a time (as the sum
total of all being) that is either filled by it or empty. If I leave out per-

*

A 242

a

I mean here the real definition,' which does not merely supply other and more
intelligible words for the name of a thing, but rather contains in itself a clear
mark by means of which the object (definitum) can always be securely cognized, and that makes the concept that is to be explained usable in application.
A real definition! would therefore be that which does not merely make dis­
tinct a concept but at the same time its objective reality. Mathematical defi­
nitions, which exhibit the object in accordance with the concept in intuition,
are of the latter sort.
The next three sentences, as well as Kant's footnote, are omitted in the second edition.

b Before he dropped this note from the second edition, Kant had drafted an additional

sentence for it in his copy of the first: "Instead of define [erklarenJone could also use the
expression to substantiate through an example" (E CXX, p. 41; 2 3 :47).

, Object
d

The text common to the two editions resumes here, although in the second edition
Kant here begins a new paragraph.

Realdefiniti(}1Z
f Realerkldrung
e

342

Chapter III. On the Ground of the Distinction <A>

sistence (which is existence at all times), then nothing is left in my con­
cept of substance except the logical representation of the subject, which
I try to realize by representing to myself something that can occur
solely as subject (without being a predicate of anything). But then it is
not only the case that I do not even know of any conditions under which
this logical preeminence can be attributed to any sort of thing;O it is also
the case that absolutely nothing further is to be made of it, and not even
the least consequence is to be drawn from it, because by its means no
objectb whatever of the use of this concept is determined, and one
therefore does not even know whether the latter means anything at all.
From the concept of a cause as a pure category (if I leave out the time
in which something follows something else in accordance with a rule),
I will not find out anything more than that it is something that allows
an inference to the existence of something else; and in that case not only
would there be nothing through which cause and effect could be dis­
tinguished, but further, since the possibility of drawing this inference
also requires conditions about which I would know nothing, the concept would not even have any determination through which to apply to
any object.c The supposed principle "Everything contingent has a
cause" steps forth rather gravely, as if it had its own dignity in itself. Yet
if I ask what you mean by "contingent," and you answer, "that the notbeing of which is possible," then I would gladly know by what means
you intend to cognize the possibility of this not-being, if you do not
represent a succession in the series of appearances and in this succession
an existence, which follows on the not-being (or conversely), and thus
a change; for that the not-being of a thing does not contradict itself is
a lame appeal to a logical condition, which is certainly necessary for the
concept but far from sufficient for real possibility; for I can suspend any
existing substance in thought without contradicting myself, but I cannot at all infer from that to the objective contingency of its existence,
i.e., the possibility of itsd not-being in itself. As far as the concept of
community is concerned, it is easy to appreciate that since the pure categories of substance as well as causality do not admit of any definition
determining the object,e reciprocal causality in the relation of substances to each other (commercium) will be just as little susceptible of it.
No one has ever been able to define possibility, existence, and necessity
except through obvious tautologies if he wanted to draw their definition
solely from the pure understanding. For the deception of substituting
n Here Kant adds in his copy of the first edition: "See general remark" (E CXX; 2 3 =4 7)'

b

Object
, Object
d

,

Following Erdmann, reading ihres for seines.

Object
343

A 2 43
B 301

A 244
B 302

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. 1. Bk. II. <A>

A 245

A 246

the logical possibility of the concept (since it does not contradict itself)
for the transcendentala possibility of things (where an object corre­
sponds to the concept) can deceive and satisfy only the inexperienced.b
eThere is something strange and even nonsensical in there being a
concept that must have some significance but is not capable of defini­
tion. Only in the case of the categories is there this special circumstance, that they can have a determinate significance and relation to
any object only by means of the general sensible condition, but that
this condition is omitted from the pure category, since this can contain
nothing but the logical function for bringing the manifold under a
concept. From this function, i.e., the form of the concept alone, how­
ever, nothing can be cognized and distinguished about which object d
belongs under it, since abstraction has been made from just the sensi­
ble condition under which objects can belong under it at all. Hence the
categories require, beyond the pure concept of the understanding, de­
terminations of their application to sensibility in general (schema), and
without these are not concepts through which an object can be cog­
nized and distinguished from others, but only so many ways of think­
ing of an object for possible intuitions and of giving it its significance
in accordance with some function of the understanding (under the req­
uisite conditions), i.e., of defining it: they themselves cannot there­
fore be defined. The logical functions of judgment in general - unity
and multiplicity, affirmation and negation, subject and predicate - can­
not be defined without falling into a circle, since the definition would
itself have to be a judgment and therefore already contain these func­
tions of judgment and therefore already contain these functions. The
pure categories, however, are nothing other than the representations
of things in general insofar as the manifold of their intuition must be
thought through one or another of these logical functions: Magnitude
is the determination that must be thought only through a judgment
that has quantity (judicium commune e); reality, that which can be
thought only through an affirmative judgment; substance, that which,
in relation to the intuition, must be the ultimate subject of all other
determinations. But now what sorts of things those are in regard to
which one must use one function rather than another remains hereby
entirely undetermined: thus without the condition of sensible intu­
ition, the synthesis of which they contain, the categories have no rela­
tion at all to any determinate object,! thus they cannot define one, and
a Altered in Kant's copy of the first edition to "real" (rea/en) (E CXXI, p. 4 1 ; 2 3:48).
b At this point the second edition adds a footnote; see B 302-3n.
,. This paragraph is omitted in the second edition.
d

Object

, general judgment

f Object

344

Chapter III. On the Ground of the Distinction <A>

consequently they do not have in themselves any validity of objective
concepts.
aNow from this it follows irrefutably that the pure concepts of the
understanding can never be of transcendental, but always only of empirical use,b and that the principles of pure understanding can be related to objects of the senses only in relation to the general conditions
of a possible experience, but never to things in generale (without taking
regard of the way in which we might intuit them).d
The Transcendental Analytic accordingly has this important result:
That the understanding can never accomplish a priori anything more
than to anticipate the form of a possible experience in general, and,
since that which is not appearance cannot be an object of experience, it
can never overstep the limits of sensibility, within which alone objects
are given to us. Its principles are merely principles e of the exposition of
appearances, and the proud name of an ontology, which presumes to
offer synthetic a priori cognitions of things in general in a systematic
doctrine (e.g., the principle of causality), must give way to the modest
one of a mere analytic of the pure understanding.
Thinking is the action of relating given intuitions to an object. If the
manner of this intuition is not given in any way, then the object is
merely transcendental, and the concept of the understanding has none
other than a transcendental use, namely the unity of thought of a manifold! in general. Now through a pure category, in which abstraction is
made from any condition of sensible intuition as the only one that is
possible for us, no objectg is determined/' rather only the thought of an
objecti in general is expressed in accordance with different modi. Now
to the use of a concept there also belongs a function of the power of
judgment, whereby an object is subsumed under it, thus at least the formal condition under which something can be given in intuition. If this
condition of the power of judgment (schema) is missing, then all sub­
sumption disappears; for nothing would be given that could be subsumed under the concept. The merely transcendental use of the catea The text common to the two editions resumes here.
b Added in Kant's copy of the first edition: "i.e., no principles from mere categories" (E
C

d

CXXII, p. 4 1 ; 2 3 :48).
Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "synthetically" (E CXXIII, p. 41; 2 3 :48).
Kant's copy of the first edition adds here: "if they are to produce cognition" (E Cxxrv;
p. 41; 2 3:48).

, Principien
f In his copy of the first edition Kant adds here: "of a possible intuition" (E CXXV; p. 4 1 ;
g

h

2 3 :48).

Object
Added in Kant's copy of the first edition: "hence nothing is cognized" (E CXXVI, p. 4 1 ;
2 3 =48).

; Objects

345

B 303

A 247

B 304

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. <A>

A 248

B 305

gories is thus in fact no use at alV and has no determinate or even, as
far as its form is concerned, determinable object. From this it also fol­
lows that the pure category does not suffice for any synthetic a priori
principle, and that the principles of the pure understanding are only of
empirical but never of transcendental use; but nowhere beyond the field
of possible experience can there be any synthetic a priori principles.
It may therefore be advisable to express ourselves thus: The pure cat­
egories, without formal conditions of sensibility, have merely transcen­
dental significance, but are not of any transcendental use, since this is
impossible in itself, for they are lacking all conditions of any use (in
judgments), namely the formal condition of the subsumption of any
sort of supposed object under these concepts. Thus since (as merely
pure categories) they are not supposed to have empirical use, and can­
not have transcendental use, they do not have any use at all if they are
separated from all sensibility, i.e., they cannot be applied to any sup­
posed object at all; rather they are merely the pure form of the use of
the understanding in regard to objects in general and of thinking, yet
without any sort of objectb being able to be thought or determined
through them alone.c

a Kant's copy of the first edition inserts here: "for the cognition of anything" (E CXXVII,

p. 4 1 ; 2 3 '48).

b Object
C

The following notes are inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition at A 248, presumably
drafts of the changes that were to be made at this point in the second edition:
"One can give the possibility of a thing only through intuition, either empirical or
a priori intuition. lhe former is empirical, the latter at least sensible. Both therefore
pertain to phaenomena. No theoretical cognition of noumenon at all, but practical rela­
tion to a subject, insofar as it is not phaenomenon. " (E CXXVIII, p. 42; 2 3 : 3 5-6)
"If something is found, not to be sure in the sensible world, but yet in our pure
consciousness of reason, which is absolutely contrary to laws of the former, e.g., that
of causality, then we belong to the noumenon, but can have to that extent no knowl­
edge of ourselves, but yet can at least concede the possibility of it." (E CXXIX, p. 42;
2 3 '3 6)
"Beings of understanding are properly those to which nothing but intellectual intu­
ition corresponds. Now since our understanding is not able to intuit, this intellectual in­
tuition is nothing for us. Thus nothing is left for us but concepts of the understanding.
But these are merely forms of thought, so that if one would apply them alone to an ob­
ject [Object], without an example for sensible intuition that something can correspond
to them, they cannot be comprehended at all." (E CXXX, p. 42; 2 3 :36)
"Objects of a non-sensible intuition are either given in a sensible intuition or not. If
the first, then they are certainly appearances, but one cannot know whether they could
be cognized in some other way, and whether intellectual intuition is possible. Since I
have no intellectual intuition, I cannot even cognize the possibility of objects that can­
not be given in any sensible intuition at all, and objects of an intuition of the under­
standing would be mere problematical beings, and all noumena or beings of the
understanding are to be regarded as such. N.B." (E CXXXI, pp. 42-3; 2 3:36)

346

Chapter III. On the Ground of the Distinction <A>

aAppearances, to the extent that as objects they are thought in ac­
cordance with the unity of the categories, are called phaenomena. If,
however, I suppose there to be things that are merely objects of the un­
derstanding and that, nevertheless, can be given to an intuition, although not to sensible intuition (as coram intuiti intellectuali),b then
such things would be called noumena (intelligibilia).
Now one might have thought that the concept of appearances, lim­
ited by the Transcendental Aesthetic, already yields by itself the objec­
tive reality of the noumenaC and justifies the division of objects into
phenomena and noumena, thus also the division of the world into a world
of the senses and of the understanding (mundus sensibilis & intelligibilis),
indeed in such a way that the difference here would not concern merely
the logical form of the indistinct or distinct cognition of one and the
same thing, but rather the difference between how they can originally
be given to our cognition, in accordance with which they are in them­
selves different species. For if the senses merely represent something to
us as it appears, then this something must also be in itself a thing, and
an object of a non-sensible intuition, i.e., of the understanding, i.e., a
cognition must be possible in which no sensibility is encountered, and
which alone has absolutely objective reality, through which, namely,
objects are represented to us as they are, in contrast to the empirical
use of our understanding, in which things are only cognized as they
appear. Thus there would be, in addition to the empirical use of the
categories (which is limited to sensible conditions), a pU_'e and yet ob­
jectively valid one, and we could not assert, what we have previously
maintained, that our pure cognitions of the understanding are in general nothing more than principlesd of the expositione of appearances
that do not go a priori beyond the formal possibility of experience, for
here an entirely different field would stand open before us, as it were a
world thought in spirit (perhaps also even intuited), which could not
less but even more nobly occupy our understanding.
All our representations are in fact related to some object! through
the understanding, and, since appearances are nothing but representa"We have seen at the end of the Principles that the concept of causality serves to de­
termine the relation [Verhaltnis] of the temporal sequence in the course of its appear­
ances a priori; if we take time away, then it is for nothing." (E CXXXII, p. 43; 2 3 :36)
a The next seven paragraphs (A 249-53) are replaced with four paragraphs in the second
edition (B 306-9)'
b by means of intellectual intuition
, Kant uses the Latin plural genitive noumenorum.
d

Principien

, Kant altered this to "synthesis of the manifold" in his copy of the first edition (E
CXXXIII, p. 43; 2 3 :48).

f Object

347

A 249

A 2 50

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. <A>

A251

A 2 52

tions, the understanding thus relates them to a something, as the ob­
ject of sensible intuition: but this something a is to that extent only the
transcendental object. b This signifies, however a something = X, of
which we know nothing at all nor can know anything in general (in ac­
cordance with the current constitution of our understanding), but is
rather something that can serve only as a correlate of the unity of ap­
perception for the unity of the manifold in sensible intuition, by means
of which the understanding unifies that in the concept of an object.
This transcendental objectC cannot even be separated from the sensible
data, for then nothing would remain through which it would be
thought. It is therefore no object of cognition in itself, but only the rep­
resentation of appearances under the concept of an object in general,
which is determinable through the manifold of those appearances.d,95
Just for this reason, then, the categories do not represent any special
objecte given to the understanding alone, but rather serve only to de­
termine the transcendental object! (the concept of something in gen­
eral) through that which is given in sensibility, in order thereby to
cognize appearances empirically under concepts of objects.
But the cause on account of which, not yet satisfied through the sub­
stratum of sensibility, one must add noumena that only the pure under­
standing can think to the phaenomena, rests solely on this. Sensibility
and its field, namely that of appearances, are themselves limited by the
understanding, in that they do not pertain to things in themselves, but
only to the way in which, on account of our subjective constitution,
things appear to us. This was the result of the entire Transcendental
Aesthetic, and it also follows naturally from the concept of an appear­
ance in general that something must correspond to it which is not in it­
self appearance, for appearance can be nothing for itself and outside of
our kind of representation; thus, if there is not to be a constant circle,
the word "appearance" must already indicate a relation to something
the immediate representation of which is, to be sure, sensible, but
which in itself, without this constitution of our sensibility (on which the
form of our intuition is grounded), must be something, i.e., an object
independent of sensibility.
Now from this arisesg the concept of a noumenon, which, however, is
a Altered in Kant's copy of the first edition to "this something as object of an intuition in
b

general" (E CXXXIV, p. 43; 2 3 :48).

Object
, Object
d

Kant's copy of the first edition adds: "only forms of thought, but not cognition" (E
Cxxxv, p. 43 ; 2 3 :48).

,

Object

g

Kant's copy of the first edition inserts

f Object

"to

be sure" here (E CXXXVI, p. 43; 2 3:48).

348

Chapter III. On the Ground of the Distinction <A>

not at all positive and does not signify a determinate cognition of any
sort of thing, but rather only the thinking of something in general, in
which I abstract from all form of sensible intuition. But in order for a
noumenona to signify a true object, to be distinguished from all phe­
nomena,b it is not enough that I liberate my thoughts from all condi­
tions of sensible intuition, but I must in addition have ground to
assume another kind of intuition than this sensible one, under which
such an object could be given; for otherwise my thought is empty, even
though free of contradiction. To be sure, above we were able to prove
not that sensible intuition is the only possible intuition, but rather that
it is the only one possible for us; but we also could not prove that yet
another kind of intuition is possible, and, although our thinking can ab­
stract from that sensibility, the question still remains whether it is not
then a mere form of a concept and whether any object' at all is left over
after this separation.d
The objecte to which I relate appearance in general is the transcen­
dental object, i.e., the entirely undetermined thought of something in
general. This cannot be called the noumenon;f for I do not know any­
thing about what it is in itself, and have no concept of it except merely
that of the object of a sensible intuition in general, which is therefore
the same for all appearances. I cannot think it through any categories;
for these hold of empirical intuition, in order to bring it under a con­
cept of the object in general. To be sure, a pure use of the category is
possible/ i.e., without contradiction, but it has no objective validity,
since it pertains to no intuition that would thereby acquire unity of the
object;h for the category is a mere function of thinking, through which
no object is given to me, but rather only that through which what may
be given in intuition is thought.
iIf I take all thinking (through categories) away from an empirical
a Not printed in roman type.
b Not printed in roman type.
C

d

Object
For the last part of this sentence, beginning with "whether it is not . . . , Kant's copy
of the first edition substitutes: "whether it is not then a mere form of a concept or
whether after this separation a possible intuition is still left over, for nobody can es­
tablish the possibility of an intellectual intuition, and it could therefore easily be that no
such manner of cognition obtained with respect to which we would consider something
as an object. Thus the positive concept of a noumenon asserts something the possibility
of which it cannot prove." (E CXXXVII, pp. 43-4; 2 3 :49)
"

, Object
f Here Kant uses emphasis but not roman type.
g
h
i

Emended in Kant's copy of the first edition to "logically possible" (E CXXXVIII, p. 44;
2 3 :49)·

Objects

From here to the end of the chapter, the text of the first edition is preserved in the sec­
ond with only one further change on B 3 I I and one added footnote on B 3 1 2 .

349

A253

B 309

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. 1. Bk. II. <A>

A 2 54

Bo3 10

A 2 55

B3II

cognition, then no cognition of any object at all remains; for through
mere intuition nothing at all is thought, and that this affection of sen­
sibility is in me does not constitute any relation of such representation
to any objecta at all. But if, on the contrary, I leave out all intuition,
then there still remains the form of thinking, i.e., the way of determin­
ing an object for the manifold of a possible intuition. Hence to this ex­
tent the categories extend further than sensible intuition, since they
think objectsb in general without seeing to the particular manner (of
sensibility) in which they might be given. But they do not thereby de­
termine a greater sphere of objects, since one cannot assume that such
objects can be given without presupposing that another kind of intu­
ition than the sensible kind is possible, which, however, we are by no
means justified in doing.
I call a concept problematic that contains no contradiction but that is
also, as a boundary for given concepts, connected with other cognitions,
the objective reality of which can in no way be cognized. The concept
of a noumenon,c i.e., of a thing that is not to be thought of as an ob­
ject of the senses but rather as a thing in itself (solely through a pure un­
derstanding), is not at all contradictory; for one cannot assert of
sensibility that it is the only possible kind of intuition. Further, this con­
cept is necessary in order not to extend sensible intuition to things in
themselves, and thus to limit the objective validity of sensible cognition
(for the other things, to which sensibility does not reach, are called
noumenad just in order to indicate that those cognitions cannot extend
their domain to everything that the understanding thinks). In the end,
however, we have no insight into the possibility of such noumena, e and
the domain outside of the sphere of appearances is empty (for us), i.e.,
we have an understanding that extends farther than sensibility prob­
lematically, but no intuition, indeed not even the concept of a possible
intuition, through which objects outside of the field of sensibility could
be given, and about which the understanding could be employed as­
sertorically. The concept of a noumenonfis therefore merely a boundary concept, in order to limit the pretension of sensibility, and
therefore only of negative use. But it is nevertheless not invented arbi­
trarily, but is rather connected with the limitation of sensibility, yet
without being able to posit anything positive outside of the domain of
the latter.
The division of objects into phaenomena and nOllmena, and of the
a

b

Object
Objecte

, Here Kant uses emphasis (boldface) rather than roman type.

d Not in roman type.

, Here Kant prints the Latin genitive nou1ftenoru1ft.

f Not in roman type.

350

Chapter III. On the Ground of the Distinction <A>

world into a world of sense and a world of understanding, can therefore
not be permitted at all, although concepts certainly permit of division
into sensible and intellectual ones; for one cannot determine any object
for the latter, and therefore also cannot pass them off as objectively
valid. If one abandons the senses, how will one make comprehensible
that our categories (which would be the only remaining concepts for
noumena)a still signify anything at all, since for their relation to any object something more than merely the unity of thinking must be given,
namely a possible intuition, to which they can be applied? Nevertheless
the concept of a noumenon,b taken merely problematically, remains not
only admissible, but even unavoidable, as a concept setting limits to
sensibility. But in that case it is not a special intelligible object for our
understanding; rather an understanding to which it would belong is itself a problem, namely, that of cognizing its object not discursively
through categories but intuitively in a non-sensible intuition, the possibility o f which we cannot in the least represent. Now in this way our
understanding acquires a negative expansion, i.e., it is not limited by
sensibility, but rather limits it by calling things in themselves (not considered as appearances) noumena. But it also immediately sets boundaries for itself, not cognizing these things through categories, hence
merely thinking them under the name of an unknown something.
Yet I find in the writings of the moderns an entirely different use of
the expressions of a mundi sensibilis and intelligibilis,< which entirely diverges from the sense of the ancients, which is not itself a problem, but
which is also nothing but an empty trafficking with words. In accordance
with this usage some have been pleased to call the sum total of appearances, so far as it is intuited, the world of sense, but the connectiond of
them insofar as it is thought in accordance with general laws of the un­
derstanding, the world of understanding. Theoretical astronomy, which
expounds the mere observation of the starry heavens, would be the former, contemplative astronomy on the contrary (explained, say, according
to the Copernican world-system or even according to Newton's laws of
gravitation) would be the latter, making an intelligible world repre­
sentable. But such a perversion of words is a merely sophistical evasion
for escaping from a difficult question by reducing its sense to a com­
monplace. WIth regard to appearances, to be sure, both understanding
and reason can be used; but it must be asked whether they would still
have any use if the object were not appearance (noumenon), and one takes
it in this sense if one thinks of it as merely intelligible, i.e., as given to
a Not in roman type.
b Here Kant uses the Latin singular genitive Noumeni.

, "sensible and intelligible worlds." At this point the second edition adds a note; see B 3 1 2 .

d Zusammenhang
351

A 2 56

B 312

A 257

B313

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. <A>

A 2 58

B 3 14

A 259

B 3I5

the understanding alone and not to the senses at all. The question is
thus: whether beyond the empirical use of the understanding (even in
the Newtonian representation of the cosmos) a transcendental one is
also possible, pertaining to the noumenono as an object - which question
we have answered negatively.
If, therefore, we say: The senses represent objects to us as they appear, but the understanding, as they are, then the latter is not to be
taken in a transcendental but in a merely empirical way, signifying,
namely, how they must be represented as objects of experience, in the
thoroughgoing connectionb of appearances, and not how they might
be outside of the relation to possible experience and consequently to
sense in general, thus as objects of pure understanding. For this will al­
ways remain unknown to us, so that it even remains unknown to us, so
that it even remains unknown whether such a transcendental (extraor­
dinary) cognition is possible at all, at least as one that stands under our
customary categories. With us understanding and sensibility can de­
termine an object only in combination. If we separate them, then we
have intuitions without concepts, or concepts without intuitions, but in
either case representations that we cannot relate to any determinate
object.
If after all this discussion anyone still has reservations about denying
the categories a merely transcendental use, then he should test them in
any synthetic assertion. For an analytic one takes the understanding no
further, and since it is occupied only with that which is already thought
in the concept, it leaves it undecided whether the concept even has any
relation to objects, or only signifies the unity of thinking in general
(which entirely abstracts from the way in which an object might be
given); it is enough for him to know what lies in its concept; what the
concept might pertain to is indifferent to him. He should accordingly
test it with some synthetic and allegedly transcendental principle, such
as: "Everything that is, exists as substance, or a determination depen­
dent on it," "Everything contingent exists as the effect of another thing,
namely its cause," etc. Now I ask: Whence will he derive these synthetic
propositions, since the concepts are not to hold of possible experience
but rather of things in themselves (noumena)? Where is the third thingC
that is always requisite for a synthetic proposition in order to connect
with each other concepts that have no logical (analytical) affinity? He
will never prove his proposition, indeed, what is more, he will not even
be able to justify the possibility of such a pure assertion, without taking
account of the empirical use of the understanding, and thereby entirely
a Not in roman type.
Zusammenhang

b

, Kant's copy of the first edition inserts "of intuition" (E CXXXIX, p. 44; 2 3=49).

3 52

Chapter III. On the Ground of the Distinction <A>

renouncing the pure and sense-free judgment. Thus the concept a of
pure, merely intelligible objects is entirely devoid of all principles of its
application, since one cannot think uph any way in which they could be
given, and the problematic thought, which leaves a place open for them,
only serves, like an empty space, to limit the empirical principles, without containing and displaying any other object C of cognition beyond the
sphere of the latter.
a In his copy of the first edition Kant expands this to "the positive concept, the possible
cognition" (E CXLX, p. 44; 2 3 :49).
b ersinnen, a neat pun on the fact that objects must be given by sense and not mere
thought.

, Object

353

A 260

The Transcendental Doctrine
of the Power ofJudgment
(Analytic of Principles)
Third Chapter
On the ground of the distinaion ofall objeas
in general into phenomena and nournena a

B 2 95
A 2 36

We have now not only traveled through the land of pure understand­
ing, and carefully inspected each part of it, but we have also surveyed it,
and determined the place for each thing in it. But this land is an island,
and enclosed in unalterable boundaries by nature itself. It is the land of
truth (a charming name), surrounded by a broad and stormy ocean, the
true seat of illusion, where many a fog bank and rapidly melting iceberg
pretend to be new lands and, ceaselessly deceiving with empty hopes
the voyager looking around for new discoveries, entwine him in adven­
tures from which he can never escape and yet also never bring to an
end. But before we venture out on this sea, to search through all its
breadth and become certain of whether there is anything to hope for in
it, it will be useful first to cast yet another glance at the map of the land
that we would now leave, and to ask, first, whether we could not be sat­
isfied with what it contains, or even must be satisfied with it out of ne­
cessity, if there is no other ground on which we could build; and,
second, by what title we occupy even this land, and can hold it securely
against all hostile claims. Although we have already adequately an­
swered these questions in the course of the Analytic, a summary
overview of their solutions can still strengthen conviction by unifying
their various moments in one point.
We have seen, namely, that everything that the understanding draws
a

\Ve here present the extensively though not entirely revised version of this chapter as it
appeared in the second edition. The divergences from the first will be marked with
notes and brackets. The emendations that Kant made in his own copy of the first edi­
tion but did not incorporate into the new text in the second will not be reproduced here,
having been presented above, nor will the editorial notes to the first edition be repeated.

3 54

Phenomena and Noumena <B>

out of itself, without borrowing it from experience, it nevertheless has
solely for the sake of use in experience. The principles of pure understanding, whether they are a priori constitutive (like the mathematical
principles) or merely regulative (like the dynamical principles), contain
nothing but only the pure schema, as it were, for possible experience;
for this has its unity only from the synthetic unity that the under­
standing originally and from itself imparts to the synthesis of the imagination in relation to apperception, and in relation to and agreement
with which the appearances, as data for possible cognition, must already stand a priori. But now even if these rules of the understanding
are not only true a priori but are rather even the source of all truth, i.e.,
of the agreement of our cognition with objects,a in virtue of containing
the ground of the possibility of experience, as the sum total of all cognition in which objects b may be given to us, still it does not seem
enough to us merely to have expounded what is true, but also that
which one has desired to know. If, therefore, through this critical in­
vestigation we learn nothing more than what we should in any case
have practiced in the merely empirical use of the understanding, even
without such subtle inquiry, then it would seem that the advantage that
one will draw from it would hardly be worth the expense and preparation. Now to this, to be sure, one can reply that no curiosity is more
disadvantageous to the expansion of our knowledgeC than that which
would always know its utility in advance, before one has entered into
the investigations, and before one could have the least concept of this
utility even if it were placed before one's eyes. But there is one advantage, which can be made both comprehensible and interesting to even
the dullest and most reluctant student of such transcendental investigation, namely this: That the understanding occupied merely with its
empirical use, which does not reflect on the sources of its own cognition, may get along very well, but cannot accomplish one thing,
namely, determining for itself the boundaries of its use and knowing
what may lie within and what without its whole sphere; for to this end
the deep inquiries that we have undertaken are requisite. But if the un­
derstanding cannot distinguish whether certain questions lie within its
horizon or not, then it is never sure of its claims and its possession, but
must always reckon on many embarrassing corrections when it continually oversteps the boundaries of its territory (as is unavoidable) and
loses itself in delusion and deceptions.
That the understanding can therefore make only empirical use of all
its a priori principles, indeed of all its concepts, but never transcendenObjecten
Objecte
, Erkenntnis

n

b

355

B 296
A 237

B 29 7
A 238

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. III <B>

A239

B 299

B 300

tal use, is a proposition that, if it �n be recognizeda with conviction,
points to important consequences.p'he transcendental use of a concept
in any sort of principle consists in its being related to things in general
and in themselves; its empirical use, however, in its being related
merely to appearances, i.e., objects of a possible experienc�But that
it is only the latter that can ever take place is evident from the follow­
ing. For every concept there is requisite, first, the logical form of a con­
cept (of thinking) in general, and then, second, the possibility of giving
it an object to which it is to be related. Without this latter it has no
sense, and is entirely empty of content, even though it may still contain
the logical function for making a concept out of whatever sort of data
there are. Now the object cannot be given to a concept othenvise than
in intuition, and, even if a pure intuition is possible a priori prior to the
object, then even this can acquire its object, thus its objective validity,
only through empirical intuition, of which it is the mere form. Thus all
concepts and with them all principles, however a priori they may be, are
nevertheless related to empirical intuitions, i.e., to data for possible ex­
perience. Without this they have no objective validity at all, but are
rather a mere play, whether it be with representations of the imagina­
tion or of the understanding. One need only take as an example the
concepts of mathematics, and first, indeed, in their pure intuitions.
Space has three dimensions, between two points there can be only one
straight line, etc. Although all these principles, and the representation
of the object with which this science occupies itself, are generated in the
mind completely a priori, they would still not signify anything at all if
we could not always exhibit their significance in appearances (empirical
objects). Hence it is also requisite for one to make an abstract concept
sensible, i.e., to display the object b that corresponds to it in intuition,
since without this the concept would remain (as one says) without sense,
i.e., without significance. Mathematics fulfills this requirement by means
of the construction of the figure,' which is an appearance present to the
senses (even though brought about a priori). In the same science the
concept of magnitude seeks its standing and sense in number, but seeks
this in turn in the fingers, in the beads of an abacus, or in strokes and
points that are placed before the eyes. The concept is always generated
a priori, together with the synthetic principles or formulas from such
concepts; but their use and relation to supposed objects can in the end
be sought nowhere but in experience, the possibility of which (as far as
its form is concerned) is contained in them a priori.
That this is also the case with all categories, however, and the princia

b
C

erkannt
Object
Gestalt
3 56

Phenomena and /l.lournena <B>

pIes spun out from them, is also obvious from this: That we cannot even
give a real definition of a single one of them, i.e., make intelligible the
possibility of their object,a without immediately descending to condi­
tions of sensibility, thus to the form of the appearances, to which, as
their sole objects, they must consequently be limited, since, if one removes this condition, all significance, i.e., relation to the object,b disappears, and one cannot grasp through an example what sort of thing is
really intended by concepts of that sort. C
liNo one can define the concept of magnitude in general except by
something like this: That it is the determination of a thing through
which it can be thought how many units are posited in it. Only this
how-many-times is grounded on successive repetition, thus on time and
the synthesis (of the homogeneous) in it. Reality, in contrast to negation, can only be defined if one thinks of a time (as the sum total of all
being) that is either filled by it or empty. If I leave out persistence
(which is existence at all times), then nothing is left in my concept of
substance except the logical representation of the subject, which I try to
realize by representing to myself something that can occur solely as
subject (without being a predicate of anything). But then it is not only
the case that I do not even know of any conditions under which this logical preeminence can be attributed to any sort of thing; it is also the case
that absolutely nothing further is to be made of it, and not even the least
consequence is to be drawn from it, because by its means no object e
whatever of the use of this concept is determined, and one therefore
does not even know whether the latter means anything at all. From the
concept of a cause as a pure category (if I leave out the time in which
something follows something else in accordance with a rule), I will not
find out anything more than that it is something that allows an inference to the existence of something else; and in that case not only would
there be nothing through which cause and effect could be distin­
guished, but further, since the possibility of drawing this inference also
requires conditions about which I would know nothing, the concept
would not even have any determination through which to apply to any
object! The supposed principle "Everything contingent has a cause"
steps forth rather gravely, as if it had its own dignity in itself. Yet if I ask
what you mean by "contingent," and you answer, "that the not-being of
which is possible," then I would gladly know by what means you intend
to cognize the possibility of this not-being, if you do not represent a
Objects
b Object
a

, At this point material from the first edition is deleted; see
d The text common to the two editions resumes here.

, Object

f Object

357

A

241-2.

A 241

A 242

A 243
B 30r

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. III <B>

A 2 44
B 3 02

A 246/B 3 0 3

A 247

B 3 02

succession in the series of appearances and in this succession an exis­
tence, which follows on the not-being (or conversely), and thus a
change; for that the not-being of a thing does not contradict itself is a
lame appeal to a logical condition, which is certainly necessary for the
concept but far from sufficient for real possibility; for I can suspend any
existing substance in thought without contradicting myself, but I can­
not at all infer from that to the objective contingency of its existence,
i.e., the possibility of itsa not-being in itself. As far as the concept of
community is concerned, it is easy to appreciate that since the pure cat­
egories of substance as well as causality do not admit of any definition
determining the object,b reciprocal causality in the relation of sub­
stances to each other (commercium) will be just as little susceptible of it.
No one has ever been able to define possibility, existence, and necessity
except through obvious tautologies ifhe wanted to draw their definition
solely from the pure understanding. For the deception of substituting
the logical possibility of the concept (since it does not contradict itself)
for the transcendental possibility of things (where an object corre­
sponds to the concept) can deceive and satisfy only the inexperienced.*' c
Now from this it follows irrefutably that the pure concepts of the understanding can never be of transcendental, but always only of em­
pirical use, and that the principles of pure understanding can be related
to objects of the senses only in relation to the general conditions of a
possible experience, but never to things in general (without taking re­
gard of the way in which we might intuit them).
The Transcendental Analytic accordingly has this important result:
That the understanding can never accomplish a priori anything more
than to anticipate the form of a possible experience in general, and,
since that which is not appearance cannot be an object of experience, it
can never overstep the limits of sensibility, within which alone objects
are given to us. Its principles are merely principlesd of the exposition of
appearances, and the proud name of an ontology, which presumes to
offer synthetic a priori cognitions of things in general in a systematic

* <In a word, all of these concepts could not be vouched for and their real pos­
sibility thereby established, if all sensible intuition (the only one we have)
were taken away, and there then remained only logical possibility, i.e., that the
concept (thought) is possible is not the issue; the issue is rather whether it re­
lates to an object' and therefore signifies anything.>

B 303

a

b

Following Erdmann, reading "ihres" for "seines."

Object

,. Footnote added in the second edition; following this point, a paragraph present in the
first edition (A 244-6) is omitted in the second.

d Principien
, Object
358

Phenomena and Noumena <B>

doctrine (e.g., the principle of causality), must give way to the modest
one of a mere analytic of the pure understanding.
Thinking is the action of relating given intuitions to an object. If the
manner of this intuition is not given in any way, then the object is
merely transcendental, and the concept of the understanding has none
other than a transcendental use, namely the unity of thought of a manifold in general. Now through a pure category, in which abstraction is
made from any condition of sensible intuition as the only one that is
possible for us, no object a is determined, rather only the thought of an
objectb in general is expressed in accordance with different modi. Now
to the use of a concept there also belongs a function of the power of
judgment, whereby an object is subsumed under it, thus at least the formal condition under which something can be given in intuition. If this
condition of the power of judgment (schema) is missing, then all sub­
sumption disappears; for nothing would be given that could be subsumed under the concept. The merely transcendental use of the categories is thus in fact no use at all, and has no determinate or even, as far
as its form is concerned, determinable object. From this it also follows
that the pure category does not suffice for any synthetic a priori principle, and that the principles of the pure understanding are only of empirical but never of transcendental use; but nowhere beyond the field of
possible experience can there be any synthetic a priori principles.
It may therefore be advisable to express ourselves thus: The pure cat­
egories, without formal conditions of sensibility, have merely transcen­
dental significance, but are not of any transcendental use, since this is
impossible in itself, for they are lacking all conditions of any use (in
judgments), namely the formal conditions of the subsumption of any
sort of supposed object under these concepts. Thus since (as merely
pure categories) they are not supposed to have empirical use, and can­
not have transcendental use, they do not have any use at all if they are
separated from all sensibility, i.e., they cannot be applied to any sup­
posed object at all; rather they are merely the pure form of the em­
ployment of the understanding in regard to objects in general and of
thinking, yet without any sort of objectC being able to be thought or de­
termined through them alone.
d<Nevertheless, this is grounded on a deception that is difficult to
avoid. As far as their origin is concerned,
e categories are not
grounded on sensibility, as are the forms of intuition, space and time;

Jili

a Object
b

Objects
, Object
d The next four paragraphs were substituted in the second edition for seven paragraphs
from A249 to A 2 5 3 .
3 59

B 304

A 248

B 305

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. III <B>

B 306

they therefore seem to allow an application extended beyond all objects
of the senses. But for their part they are in turn nothing other than
forms of thought, which contain merely the logical capacity a for unifying the manifold given in intuition in a consciousness a priori; thus if
one takes away from them the only sensible intuition possible for us,
they have even less significance than those pure sensible forms, through
which at least an objectb is given, whereas a kind of combination of the
manifold that is proper to our understanding signifies nothing at all if
that intuition in which alone the manifold can be given is not added to
i - Nevertheless, if we call certain objects, as appearances, beings of
sense (pbaenomena), because we distinguish the way in which we intuit
them from their constitution in itself, then it already follows from our
concept that to these we as it were oppose, as objects thought merely
through the understanding, either other objects conceived in accor­
dance with the latter constitution, even though we do not intuit it in
them, or else other possible things, which are not objects c of our senses
at all, and call these beings of understanding (noumena). Now the ques­
tion arises: Whether our pure concepts of understanding do not have
significance in regard to the latter, and whether they could be a kind of
cognition of them?
But right at the outset here there is an ambiguity, which can occasion
great misunderstanding: Since the understanding, when it calls an ob­
ject in a relation mere phenomenon, d simultaneously makes for itself,
beyond this relation, another representation of an object in itself and
hence also represents itself as being able to make concepts of such an
object, and since the understanding offers nothing other than the cate­
gories through which the object in this lattt::£ sense must at least be able
to be thought, it is thereby misled into taking the entirely .undeter­
mined concept of a being of understanding, as a somethiug.j,n general
outside of our sensibility, for a determinate concept of a being that we
could cognize through the understanding in some way.
If by a noumenon e we understand a thing insofar as it is not an ob­
ject! of our sensible intuition, because we abstract from the manner
of our intuition of it, then this is a noumenon in the negative sense.g
But if we understand by that an objecth of a non-sensible intuition,

g

B 307

a Vermogen
b Object
, Objecte
d Not in roman type.
, The word "noumenon" is not set in roman type here or in the remainder of this and the
following paragraph.

f Object
g
h

Verstande
Object
3 60

Phenomena and Noumena <B>

then we assume a special kind of intuition, namely intellectual intuition,
which, however, is not our own, and the possibility of which we cannot
understand, and this would be the noumenon in a positive sense.a
Now the doctrine of sensibility is at the same time the doctrine of the
noumenon in the negative sense, i.e., of things that the understanding
must think without this relation to our kind of intuition, thus not
merely as appearances but as things in themselves, but about which,
however, it also understands that in this abstractionb it cannot consider
making any use of its categories, since they have significance only in relation to the unity of intuitions in space and time, and can even determine this unity a priori through general concepts of combination only
on account of the mere ideality of space and time. Where this temporal unity cannot be encountered, thus in the case of the noumenon,
there the entire use, indeed even all significance of the categories completely ceases; for then we could not have insight even into the possibility of the things that would correspond to the categories; on this
score I need only appeal to that which I adduced right at the beginning
of the general remark to the previous chapter.96 Now, however, the possibility of a thing can never be proved merely through the non-contra­
dictoriness of a concept of it, but only by vouching for it with an
intuition corresponding to this concept. If, therefore, we wanted to
apply the categories to objects that are not considered as appearances,
then we would have to ground them on an intuition other than the sensible one, and then the object would be a noumenon in a positive
sense. c Now since such an intuition, namely intellectual intuition, lies
absolutely outside our faculty of cognition, the use of the categories can
by no means reach beyond the boundaries of the objects of experience;
and although beings of understanding certainly correspond to the beings of sense, and there may even be beings of understanding to which
our sensible faculty of intuition has no relation at all, our concepts of
understanding, as mere forms of thought for our sensible intuition, do
not reach these in the least; thus that which we call noumenon must be
understood to be such only in a negative sense .d>
eIf I take all thinking (through categories) away from an empirical
cognition, then no cognition o f any object at all remains; for through
mere intuition nothing at all is thought, and that this affection of sensibility is in me does not constitute any relation of such representation

Bedeutung
Absonderung
, Bedeutung
d Bedeutung

n

b

, From this point on the text of the first edition is preserved in the second with only one
change on B p I and one added footnote on B 3 I2.

361

B 308

B 3 09

A253

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. III <B>

A 2 54

B

3 10

to any objecta at all. But if, on the contrary, I leave out all intuition, then
there still remains the form of thinking, i.e., the way of determining an
object for the manifold of a possible intuition. Hence to this extent the
categories extend further than sensible intuition, since they think ob­
jectsb in general without seeing to the particular manner (of sensibility)
in which they might be given. But they do not thereby determine a
greater sphere of objects, since one cannot assume that such objects can
be given without presupposing that another kind of intuition than the
sensible kind is possible, which, however, we are by no means justified
in doing.
I call a concept problematic that contains no contradiction but that is
also, as a boundary for given concepts, connected with oths;:r cognitions,
the objective reality of which can in no way be cognized.[rhe concept
of a noumenon, C i.e., of a thing that is not to be thought of as an ob­
ject of the senses but rather as a thing in itsel (solely through a pure un­
derstanding), is not at all contradictory; for one cannot assert of
sensibility that it is the only possible kind of intuition. Further, this con­
cept is necessary in order not to extend sensible intuition to things in
themselves, and thus to limit the objective validity of sensible cognition
(for the other things, to which sensibility does not reach, are called
noumenad just in order to indicate that those cognitions cannot extend
their domain to everything that the understanding thinks). In the end,
however, we have no insight into the possibility of such noumena, e and
the domain outside of the sphere of appearances is empty (for us), i.e.,
we have an understanding that extends farther than sensibility prob­
lematically, but no intuition, indeed not even the concept of a possible
intuition, through which objects outside of the field of sensibility could
be given, and about which the understanding could be employed as­
sertorically. The concept of a noumenonf is therefore merely a
boundary concept, in order to limit the pretension of sensibility, and
therefore only of negative use. But it is nevertheless not invented arbi­
trarily, but is rather connected with the limitation of sensibility, yet
without being able to posit anything positive outside of the domain of
the latter.
The division of objects into phaenomena and noumena, and of the
world into a world of sense and a world of understanding, can therefore
not be permitted at all <in a positive sense>,g although concepts cer-

�

A 2 55

B3II

a Object
b Objecte
, Not in roman type.
d Not in roman type.
, Here Kant prints the Latin genitive Noumenorum.
f Not in roman type.
g The words "in a positive sense" added in the second edition.

3 62

Phenomena and Noumena <B>

tainly permit of division into sensible and intellectual ones; for one can­
not determine any object for the latter, and therefore also cannot pass
them off as objectively valid. If one abandons the senses, how will one
make comprehensible that our categories (which would be the only remaining concepts for noumena)a still signify anything at all, since for
their relation to any object something more than merely the unity of
thinking must be given, namely a possible intuition, to which they can
be applied? Nevertheless the concept of a noumenon,b taken merely
problematically, remains not only admissible, but even unavoidable, as
a concept setting limits to sensibility. But in that case it is not a special
intelligible object for our understanding; rather an understanding to
which it would belong is itself a problem, that, namely, of cognizing its
object not discursively through categories but intuitively in a nonsensible intuition, the possibility of which we cannot in the least represent. Now in this way our understanding acquires a negative expansion,
i.e., it is not limited by sensibility, but rather limits it by calling things
in themselves (not considered as appearances) noumena. But it also im­
mediately sets boundaries for itself, not cognizing these things through
categories, hence merely thinking them under the name of an unknown
something.
Yet I find in the writings of the moderns an entirely different use of
the expressions of a mundi sensibilis and intelligibilis, *,c which entirely diverges from the sense of the ancients, which is not itself a problem, but
which i s also nothing but empty trafficking with words. In accordance
with this usage some have been pleased to call the sum total of appearances, so far as it is intuited, the world of sense, but the connectiond of
them insofar as it is thought in accordance with general laws of the un­
derstanding, the world of understanding. Theoretical astronomy, which
expounds the mere observation of the starry heavens, would be the former, contemplative astronomy on the contrary (explained, say, according to the Copernican world-system or even according to Newton's
laws of gravitation) would be the latter, making an intelligible world
* <In place of this expression one must not use that of an intellectual world, as
is customary in German; for only cognitions are intellectual or sensitive. But
that which can only be an object of the one mode of intuition or the other,
the objectse therefore, must be called intelligible or sensible (regardless of how
harsh it sounds).>
Not in roman type.
Here Kant uses the Latin singular genitive Noumeni.
, "sensible and intelligible worlds." The footnote attached here is an additi�n in the sec­
ond edition.
a

/>

d

e

Zusammenhang
Objecte
363

A 2 S6

B 3 I2

A2S7

B 3I3

B 312

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. III <B>

A 2 58

B 3 14

A 2 59

B3I5

representable. But such a perversion of words is a merely sophistical
evasion for escaping from a difficult question by reducing its sense to a
commonplace. With regard to appearances, to be sure, both under­
standing and reason can be used; but it must be asked whether they
would still have any use if the object were not appearance (noumenon),
and one takes it in this sense if one thinks of it as merely intelligible, i.e.,
as given to the understanding alone and not to the senses at all. The
question is thus: whether beyond the empirical use of the under­
standing (even in the Newtonian representation of the cosmos) a tran­
scendental one is also possible, pertaining to the noumenon as an
object - which question we have answered negatively.
If, therefore, we say: The senses represent objects to us as they appear, but the understanding, as they are, then the latter is not to be
taken in a transcendental but in a merely empirical way, signifying,
namely, how they must be represented as objects of experience, in the
thoroughgoing connectiona of appearances, and not how they might be
outside of the relation to possible experience and consequently to sense
in general, thus as objects of pure understanding. For this will always
remain unknown to us, so that it even remains unknown whether such
a transcendental (extraordinary) cognition is possible at all, at least as
one that stands under our customary categories. With us understand­
ing and sensibility can determine an object only in combination. If
we separate them, then we have intuitions without concepts, or con­
cepts without intuitions, but in either case representations that we can­
not relate to any determinate object.
If after all this discussion anyone still has reservations about denying
the categories a merely transcendental use, then he should test them in
any synthetic assertion. For an analytic one takes the understanding no
further, and since it is occupied only with that which is already thought
in the concept, it leaves it undecided whether the concept even has any
relation to objects, or only signifies the unity of thinking in general
(which entirely abstracts from the way in which an object might be
given); it is enough for him to know what lies in its concept; what the
concept might pertain to is indifferent to him. He should accordingly
test it with some synthetic and allegedly transcendental principle, such
as: "Everything that is, exists as substance, or a determination depen­
dent on it," "Everything contingent exists as the effect of another thing,
namely its cause," etc. Now I ask: Whence will he derive these synthetic
propositions, since the concepts are not to hold of possible experience
but rather of things in themselves (noumena)? Where is the third thing
that is always requisite for a synthetic proposition in order to connect
with each other concepts that have no logical (analytical) affinity? He
a Zusammenhang

3 64

Phenomena and Noumena <B>

will never prove his proposition, indeed, what is more, he will not even
be able to justify the possibility of such a pure assertion, without taking
account of the empirical use of the understanding, and thereby fully re­
nouncing the pure and sense-free judgment. Thus the concept of pure,
merely intelligible objects is entirely devoid of all principles of its ap­
plication, since one cannot think upa any way in which they could be
given, and the problematic thought, which leaves a place open for them,
only serves, like an empty space, to limit the empirical principles, without containing and displaying any other objectb of cognition beyond
the sphere of the latter.
a

ersinnen

b Object

365

A 260

-

Appendix
On the amphiboly of the concepts
of rejlection b through the confusion of the
empirical use of the understanding with
the transcendental.
a

A 260/B 3 16

A261
B 317

Reflectionc (rejlexio) does not have to do with objects themselves, in
order to acquire concepts directly from them, but is rather the state of
mind in which we first prepare ourselves to find out the subjective con­
ditions under which we can arrive at concepts.97 It is the consciousness
of the relation d of given representations to our various sources of cog­
nition, through which alone their relation among themselves can be
correctly determined. The first question prior to all further treatment
of our representation is this: In which cognitive faculty do they belong
together? Is it the understanding or is it the senses before which they
are connected or compared? Many a judgment is accepted out of habit,
or connected through inclination: but since no reflection preceded or at
least critically succeeded it, i t counts as one that has received its origin
in the understanding. Not all judgments require an investigation, i.e.,
attention to the grounds of truth; for if they are immediately certain,
e.g., between two points there can b e only one straight line, then no
further mark of truth can be given for them than what they themselves
express. But all judgments, indeed all comparisons, require a reflec­
tion, i.e., a distinction of the cognitive power to which the given con-

a There are only minor differences between the versions of this section in the two edi­

b

tions, mostly changes in orthography that do not affect the translation. Thus only one
version of the section will be presented here.

Reflexion
, Uberlegung; since the following parenthesis shows that Kant treats this Germanic term
as synonymous with the Latinate Reflexion, we will not mark any distinction between
occurrences of Uberlegung and Reflexion.
d Verbaltnisses. Since Beziebung occurs only three times in this section, we will note only
when "relation" is used to translate that term rather than the far more frequent occur­
rences of Verbaltnis.

3 66

On the amphiboly of concepts of reflection

cepts belong.a The action through which I make the comparison of rep­
resentations in general with the cognitive power in which they are sit­
uated, and through which I distinguish whether they are to be
compared to one another as belonging to the pure understanding or to
pure intuition, I call transcendental reflection. The relation, however,
in which the concepts in a state of mind can belong to each other are
those of identity and difference, of agreement and opposition, of the
inner and the outer, and finally of the determinable and the deter­
mination (matter and form). The correct determination of this relation
depends on the cognitive power in which they subjectively belong to
each other, whether in sensibility or in understanding. For the differ­
ence in the latter makes a great difference in the way in which one
ought to think of the former.
Prior to all objective judgments we compare the concepts, with regard to identityb (of many representations under one concept) for the
sake of universal judgments, or their difference, for the generation of
particular ones, with regard to agreement, for affirmative judgments,
or opposition,' for negative ones, etc. On this ground it would seem
that we ought to call these concepts concepts of comparison (conceptus
comparationis). But since, if it is not the logical form but the content of
concepts that is concerned, i.e., whether the things themselves are identical or different, in agreement or in opposition, etc., the things can
have a twofold relation to our power of cognition, namely to sensibility
and to understanding, yet it is this place in which they belong that concerns how they ought to belong to each other, then it is transcendental
reflection, i.e., the relation of given representations to one or the other
kind of cognition, that can alone determine their relation among themselves, and whether the things are identical or different, in agreement
or in opposition, etc., cannot immediately be made out from the concepts themselves through mere comparison (comparatio), but rather only
through the distinction of the kind of cognition to which they belong,
by means of a transcendental reflection (reflexio). To be sure, one could
a Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "The judgment in accordance with concepts
of reflection is, with regard to things in themselves, analytic, only the consciousness to
determine, in appearances, is synthetic." (E CXLI, p. 44; 2 3 : 3 7)
b Einerleybeit. The following note is inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "VV"hether
identical concepts of things prove one and the same thing, and therefore no multiplicity,
or whether in spite of complete identity of concepts there can yet be many things, on ac­
count of the difference in places - this belongs to logical quantity." (E CXLII, p. 44;
2 3 '37)
, Widerstreit. Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "Mutually non-contradictory
concepts of realities are in agreement. Can I therefore say that the things are in agree­
ment, which consist in those very things together? Conversely, can two opposed deter­
minations in an alteration be in opposition to each other in the thing in itself, but in
agreement in the phaenomenon?" (E CXLIII, pp. 44-5; 23:37)

3 67

A 262

B 3 18

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Appendix

A 26 3
B 3 19

A 2 64
B 3 20

therefore say that logical reflection is a mere comparison, for in its
case there is complete abstraction from the cognitive power to which
the given representations belong, and they are thus to be treated the
same as far as their seat in the mind is concerned; transcendental re­
flection, however, (which goes to the objects themselves) contains the
ground of the possibility of the objective comparison of the representa­
tions to each other, and is therefore very different from the other, since
the cognitive power to which the representations belong is not precisely
the same. This transcendental reflection is a duty from which no one
can escape ifhe would judge anything about things a priori. We will now
take it in hand, and will draw from it not a little illumination of the de­
termination of the proper business of the understanding.a
1 . Identity and difference.98 If an object is presented to us several
times, but always with the same inner determinations (qualitas et quan­
titas), then it is always exactly the same if it counts as an object of pure
understanding, not many but only oneb thing (numerica identitas)/ but if
it is appearance, then the issue is not the comparison of concepts, but
rather, however identical everything may be in regard to that, the dif­
ference of the places of these appearances at the same time is still an ad­
equate ground for the numerical difference of the object (of the
senses) itself. Thus, in the case of two drops of water one can completely abstract from all inner difference (of quality and quantity), and
it is enough that they be intuited in different places at the same time in
order for them to be held to be numerically different. Leibniz99 took
the appearances for things in themselves, thus for intelligibilia, i.e., ob­
jects of the pure understanding (although on account of the confusion
of their representations he labeled them with the name ofphenomena),d
and there his principle of non-discernibility (principium identitatis in­
discernibilium), could surely not be disputed,IOO but since they are ob­
jects of sensibility, and the understanding with regard to them is not of
pure but of empirical use, multiplicity and numerical difference are al­
ready given by space itself as the condition of outer appearances. For a
part of space, even though it might be completely similar and equal to
anotller, is nevertheless outside of it, and is on that account a different
part from that which is added to it in order to constitute a larger space;
and this must therefore hold of everything that exists simultaneously in
Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "These propositions obviously teach that
space and time hold only of things, and among them also of ourselves, as appearances;
for otherwise they would not yield entirely opposed propositions, like those we assert
of things in themselves." (E CXLIV; p. 45; 2 3 : 3 7)
b In the first edition, "many" (viel) and "only one" (nur Ein) were emphasized.
, numerical identity
d Not in roman type.
, principle of the identity of indiscernibles
a

3 68

On the amphiboly of concepts of reflection

the various positions in space, no matter how similar and equal they
might otherwise be.
2. Agreement and opposition. If reality is represented only through
the pure understanding (realitas noumenon), then no opposition be­
tween realities can be thought, i.e., a relation such that when they are
bound together in one subject they cancel out their consequences, as in
3 - 3 = a.a,IOI Realitiesb in appearance (realitas phaenomenon), on the
contrary, can certainly be in opposition with each other and, united in
the same subject, one can partly or wholly destroy the consequence of
the other, like two moving forces in the same straight line that either
push or pull a point in opposed directions, or also like an enjoyment
that balances the scale against a pain. c
3 .d The inner and the outer. In an object of the pure understanding
only that is internal that has no relation e (as far as the existence is concerned) to anything that is different from it. The inner determinations
of a substantia phaenomenonf in space, on the contrary, are nothing but
relations, and it is itself entirely a sum total of mere relations.g,b We
know substance in space only through forces that are efficacious in it,
whether in drawing others to it (attraction) or in preventing penetration
of it (repulsion and impenetrability); we are not acquainted with other
properties constituting the concept of the substance that appears in
space and which we call matter. As object i of the pure understanding,
on the contrary, every substance must have inner determinations and
forces that pertain to its inner reality. Yet what can I think of as inner
accidents except for those which my inner sense offers me? - namely
that which is either itself thinking or which is analogous to one. Thus
because he represented them as noumena, taking away in thought everything that might signify outer relation! thus even composition, Leibniz made out of all substances, even the constituents of matter, simple
subjects gifted with powers of representation, in a word, monads. I02
4. Matter and form. These are two concepts that ground all other rea

b

Kant's copy of the first edition adds: "for reality is opposed to mere negation = 0. "
( E CXLV; p . 45; 2 3 =49)

Das Reale

d

Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "This misunderstanding causes one to place
all ill and evil in the world, all vice and pain, in mere negations, and to value reality so
highly." (E CXLVI, p. 45; 2 3 = 3 7)
Added in Kant's copy of the first edition: "Idealism and dualism." (E CXLVII, p. 45)

,

Beziehung

g

Relationen

i

Object
Relation

C

f phenomenal substance
h

J

Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "In space there are solely outer relations, in
time purely inner ones; the absolute is absent." (E CXLVIII, p. 45; 2 3 : 3 7)

3 69

A 2 6S
B 321

A 266
B 32 2

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Appendix

flection, so inseparably are they bound up with every use of the under­
standing. The former signifies the determinable in general, the latter its
determination a (both in the transcendental sense,h since one abstracts
from all differences in what is given and from the way in which that is
determined). The logicians formerly called the universal the matter, but
the specific difference the form. In every judgment one can call the given
concepts logical matter (for judgment), their relation (by means of the
copula) the form of the judgment. In every being its components (essen­
tialia) are the matter; the way in which they are connected in a thing, the
essential form. Also, in respect to things in general, unbounded reality is
regarded as the matter of all possibility, but its limitation (negation) as
A 2 67 that form through which One thing is distinguished from another in ac­
cordance with transcendental concepts. The understanding, namely, deB 3 2 3 mands first that something be given (at least in the concept) in order to
be able to determine it in a certain way. Hence in the concept of pure
understanding matter precedes form, and on this account Leibniz first
assumed things (monads) and an internal power of representation in
them, in order subsequently to ground On that their outer relation and
the community of their states (namely of the representations) on that.
Hence space and time were possible, the former only through the rela­
tion of substances, the latter through the connection of their determina­
tions as grounds and consequences.!03 And so would it in fact have to be
if the pure understanding could be related to objects immediately, and if
space and time were determinations of the things in themselves. But if it
is only sensible intuitions in which we determine all objects merely as
appearances, then the form of intuition (as a subjective constitution of
sensibility) precedes all matter (the sensations), thus space and time pre­
cede all appearances and all data of appearances, and instead first make
the latter possible. The intellectualist philosopher could not bear it that
form should precede the things and determine their possibility; a quite
appropriate criticism, if he assumed that we intuit things as they are
A 268 (though with confused representation). But since sensible intuition is an
B 324 entirely peculiar subjective condition, which grounds all perception a
priori, and the form of which is original, thus the form is given for itself
alone, and so far is it from being the case that the matter (or the things
themselves, which appear) ought to be the ground (as one would have to
judge according to mere concepts), that rather their possibility presup­
poses a formal intuition (of space and time) as given.
a Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "The thoroughgoing determination as prin­

h

ciple [Princip] is grounded on the unity of consciousness: existence determined in space
and time. Hence in noumena the highest reality contains the matter and the form con­
tains the perfection. Theformale is the best." (E CXLIX, p. 45; 2 3 :37)

Verstande
3 70

On the amphiboly of concepts of reflection

Remark
to the amphiboly of the concepts of reflection.
Allow me to call the position that we assign to a concept either in sen­
sibility or in pure understanding its transcendental place. In the same
way, the estimation of this position that pertains to every concept in ac­
cordance with the difference in its use, and guidance for determining
this place for all concepts in accordance with rules, would be the tran­
scendental topic, a doctrine that would thoroughly protect against
false pretenses of the pure understanding and illusions arising there­
from by always distinguishing to which cognitive power the concepts
properly belong. One can call every concept, every title under which
many cognitions belong, a logical place. On this is grounded the log­
ical topics of Aristotle, which schoolteachers and orators could use in
order to hunt up certain titles of thinking to find that which best fits A 2 6 9
their current matter and rationalize or garrulously chatter about it with B 3 2 5
an appearance of thoroughness. 104
The transcendental topic, on the contrary, contains nothing more
than the four titles for all comparison and distinction introduced above,
which are distinguished from categories by the fact that what is exhib­
ited through them is not the object in accordance with what constitutes
its concept (magnitude, reality), but rather only the comparison of rep­
resentations, in all their manifoldness, which precedes the concepts of
things. This comparison, however, first requires a reflection, i.e., a de­
termination of the place where the representations of the things that are
compared belong, thus of whether they are thought by the pure under­
standing or given in appearance by sensibility.
The concepts can be compared logically without worrying about
where their objectsa belong, whether as noumenab to the understanding
or as phenomena" to sensibility. But if we would get to the objects with
these concepts, then transcendental reflection about which cognitive
power they are objects for, whether for the pure understanding or for
sensibility, is necessary first of all. Without this reflection I can make
only a very insecure use of these concepts, and there arise allegedly syn- .
thetic principles, which critical reason cannot acknowledge and that are A 2 70/ B 3 26
grounded solely on a transcendental amphiboly, i.e., a confusion of the
pure object of the understandingd with the appearance.
Lacking such a transcendental topic, and thus deceived by the am­
phiboly of the concepts of reflection, the famous Leibniz constructed
Objecte
b Not in roman type.
a

, Not in roman type.

d Verstandesobjects
371

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Appendix

an intellectual system of the world, or rather believed himself able to
cognize the inner constitution of things by comparing all objects only
with the understanding and the abstract formal concepts of its thinking.
Our table of the concepts of reflection gives us the unexpected advan­
tage of laying before our eyes that which is distinctive in his theory in
all its parts and the leading ground of this peculiar way of thinking,
which rests on nothing but a misunderstanding. He compared all things
with each other solely through concepts, and found, naturally, no other
differences than those through which the understanding distinguishes
its pure concepts from each other. The conditions of sensible intuition,
which bring with them their own distinctions, he did not regard as orig­
inal; for sensibility was only a confused kind of representation for him,
and not a special source of representations; for him appearance was the
representation of the thing in itself, although distinguished from cog­
nition through the understanding in its logical form, since with its cus­
tomary lack of analysis the former draws a certain mixture of subsidiary
representations into the concept of the thing, from which the under­
standing knows how to abstract. In a word, Leibniz intellectualized
the appearances, just as Locke totally sensitivized the concepts of un­
derstanding in accordance with his system of noogony (if ! am permit­
ted this expression), i.e., interpreted them as nothing but empirical or
abstracted concepts of reflection. 105 Instead of seeking two entirely dif­
ferent sources of representation in the understanding and the sensibil­
ity, which could judge about things with objective validity only in
conjunction,a each of these great men holds on only to one of them,
which in his opinion is immediately related to things in themselves,
while the other does nothing but confuse or order the representations
of the first.
Leibniz accordingly compared the objects of the senses with each
other as things in general, merely in the understanding, b first, so far as
they are to be judged by the understanding as identical or different.
Since he therefore had before his eyes solely their concepts, and not
their position in the intuition in which alone the objects can be given,
and left entirely out of consideration the transcendental place of these
concepts (whether the object C is to be counted among appearances or
among things in themselves), it could not have turned out otherwise but
that he extended his principle of indiscernibles,d which holds merely of
concepts of things in general, to the objects of the senses (mundus
phaenomenon),e and thereby believed himself to have made no little ada

b
,

Verkniipfong
Using a comma as in the first edition rather than a period as in the second.

Object

That is, the principle of the identity of indiscernibles.
, phenomenal world

d

3 72

On the amphiboly of concepts of reflection

vance in the cognition of nature. Of course, if ! know a drop of water as
a thing in itself according to all of its inner determinations, I cannot let
any one drop count as different from another if the entire concept of
the former is identical with that of the latter. But if it is an appearance
in space, then it has its place not merely in the understanding (under
concepts), but also in the sensible outer intuition (in space), and since
the physical places are entirely indifferent with regard to the inner de­
terminations of the things, a place = b can just as readily accept a thing
that is fully similar and equal to another in a place = a as it could if the
former were ever so internally different from the latter. Without fur­
ther conditions, the difference in place already makes the multiplicity
and distinction of objects as appearances not only possible in itself but
also necessary. Thus that putative law is no law of nature. It is simply an
analytical rule or comparison of things through mere concepts.
Second, the principle that realities (as mere affirmations) never logically oppose each other is an entirely true proposition about the relations o f concepts, but signifies nothing a t all either in regard to nature
nor overall in regard to anything in itself (of this we have no concept).
For real opposition always obtains where A B = 0, i.e., where one reality, if combined in one subject with another, cancels out the effect of
the latter, which is unceasingly placed before our eyes by all hindrances
and countereffects in nature, which, since they rest on forces, must be
called realitates phaenomena.a General mechanics can even provide the
empirical condition of this opposition in aD a priori rule by looking to
the opposition of directions - a condition about which the transcendental concept of reality knows nothing at all. 1 06 Although Herr von
Leibniz did not exactly announce this proposition with the pomp of a
new principle, he nevertheless used it for new assertions, and his successors expressly incorporated it into their Leibnizian-Wolffian doctrine. According to this principle, e.g., all ills are nothing but conse­
quences of the limits of created beings, i.e., negations, since these are
the only opposing things in reality (this is really so in the concept of a
thing in general, but not in things as appearances).107 Similarly, its adherents find it not merely possible but also natural to unite all reality in
one being without any worry about opposition, since they do not recognize any opposition except that of contradiction (through which the
concept of a thing would itself be canceled out), lOS and do not recognize
the opposition of reciprocal destruction, where one real ground cancels
out the effect of another, the conditions for the representation of which
we find only in sensibility.
Third, the Leibnizian monadology has no ground at all other than
the fact that this philosopher represented the distinction of the inner

A 273
B 329

-

n phenomenal realities

373

B 330
A 2 74

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Appendix

and outer merely in relation to the understanding. Substances in gen­
eral must have something inner, which is therefore free of all outer re­
lations, consequently also of composition. The simple is therefore the
foundation of the inner in things in themselves. But that which is inner
in their state cannot consist in place, shape, contact, or motion (which
determinations are all outer relations), and we can therefore attribute to
the substances no other inner state than that through which we inter­
nally determine our sense itself, namely the state of representations.
This completes the monads, which are to constitute the fundamental
matter of the entire universe, the active power of which, however, con­
sists merely in representations, through which they are properly effica­
cious merely within themselves.
For this very reason, however, his principlea of the possible commu­
nity of substances among themselves also had to be predetermined
harmony and could not be a physical influence. 1 09 For since everything
is only internal, i.e., occupied with its own representations, the state of
the representations of one substance could not stand in any efficacious
connection at all with that of another, but some third cause influencing
all of them had to make their states correspond to one another, not, to
be sure, through occasional assistance specially brought about in each
case (systema assistentiae),b but rather through the unity of the idea of one
cause valid for all, from which, in accordance with general laws, they
must all together acquire their existence and persistence, thus also their
reciprocal correspondence with each other.
Fourth, Leibniz's famous doctrine of space and time, in which he
intellectualized these forms of sensibility, arose solely from this very
same deception of transcendental reflection. If I would represent outer
relations of things through the mere understanding, this can be done
only by means of a concept of their reciprocal effect, and should I con­
nect one state of the one and the same thing with another state, then
this can only be done in the order of grounds and consequences. Thus
Leibniz thought of space as a certain order in the community of sub­
stances, and thought of time as the dynamic sequence of their states.IIO
The uniqueness and independence from things, however, which both of
these seem to have in themselves, he ascribed to the confusion of these
concepts, which made that which is a mere form of dynamical relations
be taken for an intuition subsisting by itself and preceding the things
themselves. Thus space and time became the intelligible form of the
connection of the things (substances and their states) in themselves.
The things, however, were intelligible substances (substantiae noumena).
Nevertheless he wanted to make these concepts valid for appearances,
" Principium
b "System of assistance," i.e., the occasionalism of Nicolas Malebranche.
3 74

On the amphiboly of concepts of reflection

since he conceded to sensibility no kind of intuition of its own, but
rather sought everything in the understanding, even the empirical rep­
resentation of objects, and left nothing for the senses but the con­
temptible occupation of confusing and upsetting the representations of
the former.
But even if we could say anything synthetically about things in
themselves through the pure understanding (which is nevertheless im­
possible), this still could not be related to appearances at all, which do
not represent things in themselves. In this latter case, therefore, I will
always have to compare my concepts in transcendental reflection only
under the conditions of sensibility, and thus space and time will not be
determinations of things in themselves, but of appearances; what the
things may be in themselves I do not know, and also do not need to
know, since a thing can never come before me except in appearance.
I proceed in the same way with the other concepts of reflection.
Matter is substantia phaenomenon.a What pertains to it internally I seek
in all parts of space that it occupies and in all effects that it carries out,
and which can certainly always be only appearances of outer sense. I
therefore have nothing absolutely but only comparatively internal,
which itself in turn consists of outer relations. Yet the absolutely inter­
nal in matter, according to pure understanding, is a mere fancy, for it is
nowhere an object for the pure understanding; the transcendental ob­
ject,b however, which might be the ground of this appearance that we
call matter, is a mere something, about which we would not understand
what it is even if someone could tell us. For we cannot understand any­
thing except that which has something corresponding to our words in
intuition. If the complaints "That we have no insight into the inner
in things"!I I are to mean that we do not understand through pure rea­
son what the things that appear to us might be in themselves, then they
are entirely improper and irrational; for they would have us be able to
cognize things, thus intuit them, even without senses, consequently
they would have it that we have a faculty of cognition entirely distinct
from the human not merely in degree but even in intuition and kind,
and thus that we ought to be not humans but beings that we cannot
even say are possible, let alone how they are constituted. Observation
and analysis of the appearances penetrate into what is inner in nature,
and one cannot know how far this will go in time. Those transcenden­
tal questions, however, that go beyond nature, we will never be able to
answer, even if all of nature is revealed to us, sinceC it is never given to
a

phenomenal substance

b Object

, Following the second edition, reading da instead of undo In his copy of the first edition,
Kant substituted weil for und (E, p. 45)·

375

A277
B 333

A278
B 3 34

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk.

II.

Appendix

us to observe our own mind with any other intuition that that of our
inner sense. For in that lies the mystery of the origin of our sensibility.
Its relationa to an object, b and what might be the transcendental ground
of this unity, undoubtedly lie too deeply hidden for us, who know even
ourselves only through inner sense, thus as appearance, to be able to use
such an unsuitable tool of investigation to find out anything except al­
ways more appearances, even though we would gladly investigate their
non-sensible cause.
What makes this critique of the inferences from the mere actions of
reflection useful above all is that it clearly establishes the nullity of all in­
ferences about objects that one simply compares with each other in the
understanding, and at the same time confirms what we have chiefly em­
phasized: that although appearances cannot be comprehended among
the objectsC of pure understanding as things in themselves, they are nev­
ertheless the only things by means of which our cognition can have ob­
jective reality, namely, where intuition corresponds to the concepts.
If we reflect merely logically, then we simply compare our concepts
with each other in the understanding, seeing whether two of them con­
tain the very same thing, whether they contradict each other or not,
whether something is contained in the concept internally or is added to
it, and which of them should count as given and which as a manner of
thinking of that which is given. But if I apply these concepts to an ob­
ject in general (in the transcendental sense),d without further determin­
ing whether this is an object of sensible or intellectual intuition, then
limitations (which do not flow from this concept) immediately show up,
which pervert all empirical use of them, and by that very means prove
that the representation of an object as a thing in general is not merely
insufficient but rather, without sensible determinations of it and inde­
pendent of an empirical condition, contradictory in itself, thus that
one must either abstract from any object (in logic), or else, if one as­
sumes an object, then one must think it under conditions of sensible in­
tuition; thus the intelligible would require an entirely special intuition,
which we do not have, and in the absence of this would be nothing for
us, though on the contrary appearances also cannot be objects in them­
selves. For, if I think of mere things in general, then the difference in
the outer relations certainly does not constitute a difference in the
thingse themselves, but rather presupposes this, and, if the concept of
the one is not internally distinct from that of the other, then I merely
a Beziehung
b Object
, Objecten
d Verstande
, Sacben
376

On the amphiboly of concepts of reflection

posit one and the same thing in different relations. Further, through the
addition of one mere affirmation (reality) to another the positive is in­
creased, and nothing is taken away from it or canceled out; hence the
real in things in general cannot contradict each other, etc.
* * *

As we have shown, through a certain misinterpretation the concepts
of reflection have had such an influence on the use of the understand­
ing that they have even been able to seduce one of the most acute of all
philosophers into a supposed system of intellectual cognition, which
undertakes to determine its object without supplementation by the
senses. For just this reason the exposition of the deceptive cause of the
amphiboly of these concepts, as the occasion of false principles, is of
great utility in reliably determining and securing the boundaries of the
understanding.
One must say, to be sure, that whatever pertains to or contradicts a
concept in general also pertains to or contradicts everything particular
that is contained under that concept (dictum de Omni et Nullo);a," 2 but it
would be absurd to alter this logical principle so that it would read:
"\Vhatever is not contained in a general concept is also not contained
in the particular ones that stand under it"; for the latter are particular
concepts precisely because they contain more than is thought in the
general concept. Yet Leibniz's entire intellectual system is really built
on the latter principle: it therefore falls together with it, along with all
of the ambiguity in the use of the understanding that arises from it.
The principle of indiscernibles is really based on the presupposition
that if a certain distinction is not to be found in the concept of a thing
in general, then it is also not to be found in the things themselves; con­
sequently all things are completely identical (numero eadem)b that are
not already distinguished from each other in their concepts (as to quality or quantity). But since in the mere concept of anything abstraction
is made from many necessary conditions of an intuition, it is with peculiar haste that that from which abstraction has been made is taken as
something that is not to be encountered at all, and nothing conceded to
the thing except what is contained in its concept.
The concept of a cubic foot of space, wherever and however often I
think it, i s i n itself always completely the same. Yet two cubic feet are
nevertheless distinguished in space merely through their locations (numero diversa);' these are conditions of the intuition in which the objectd
a principle of All or Nothing

b "the same in number," i.e., even numerically identical.
, numerically diverse

d

Object
3 77

B 337
A28I

B 3 38
A282

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. 1. Bk. II. Appendix

of this concept is given, which do not belong to the concept but to the
entire sensibility. In the same way, there is no contradiction at all in the
concept of a thing if nothing negative is connected with something af­
firmative, and merely affirmative concepts cannot, in combination, ef­
fect any cancellation. Yet in the sensible intuition in which reality (e.g.,
motion) is given, there are conditions (opposed directions), from which
one had abstracted in the concept of motion in general, that make pos­
sible a conflict, which is certainly not a logical one, that produces a zero
= 0 out of that which is entirely positive; and one could not say that all
reality is in agreement just because no conflict a is to be found among its
concepts.* According to mere concepts the inner is the substratum of all
relation or outer determinations. If, therefore, I abstract from all con­
ditions of intuition, and restrict myself solely to the concept of a thing
in general, then I can abstract from every outer relation, and yet there
must remain a concept of it, that signifies no relation but merely inner
determinations. Now it seems as if it follows from this that in every
thing (substance) there is something that is absolutely internal and pre­
cedes all outer determinations, first making them possible, thus that this
substratum is something that contains no more outer relations in itself,
consequently that it is simple (for corporeal things are still always only
relations, at least of the parts outside one another); and since we are not
acquainted with any absolutely inner determinations except through
our inner sense, this substratum would be not only simple, but also (ac­
cording to the analogy with our inner sense) determined through rep­
resentations, i.e., all things would really be monads, or simple beings
endowed with representations. " 3 And this would all be correct, were it
not that something more than the concept of a thing in general belongs
to the conditions under which alone objects of outer intuition can be
given to us, and from which the pure concept abstracts. For these show
that a persistent appearance in space (impenetrable extension) contains
mere relations and nothing absolutely internal, and nevertheless can be
the primary substratum of all outer perception. Through mere con­
cepts, of course, I cannot think of something external without anything

B 339

* If one wanted to make use of the usual escape here, that at least realitates
noumena cannot act in opposition to each other, one would still have to intro­
duce an example of such pure and non-sensible reality in order to understand
whether such a reality represents something or nothing at all. But no example
can be derived from anywhere except experience, which never offers more
than phaenomena, and thus this proposition signifies nothing more than that a
concept that contains only affirmations does not contain anything negative: a
proposition that we have never doubted.
a

Widerstreit
3 78

On the amphiboly of concepts of reflection

inner, for the very reason that relational concepts absolutely presuppose
given things and are not possible without these. But since something is
contained in the intuition that does not lie at all in the mere concept of
a thing in general, and this yields the substratum that cannot be cog­
nized through mere concepts, namely a space that, along with every­
thing that it contains, consists of purely formal or also real relations, I
cannot say that since without something absolutely inner no thing can
be represented through mere concepts, there is also nothing outer
that does not have something absolutely internal as its ground in the
things themselves that are contained under these concepts and in their
intuition. For if we have abstracted from all conditions of intuition,
then of course there remains nothing in the mere concept except the
inner in general, and its relation in that, through which alone the outer
is possible. But this necessity, which is grounded only on abstraction,
does not obtain in the case of things insofar as they are given in intuition with determinations that express mere relations without having
anything inner at their ground, since these are not things in themselves
but simply appearances. And whatever we can cognize only in matter is
pure relations (that which we call their inner determinations is only
comparatively internal); but there are among these some self-sufficient
and persistent ones, through which a determinate object is given to us.
The fact that if I abstract from these relations I have nothing further to
think at all does not cancel out the concept of a thing as appearance, nor
the concept of an object in abstracto, but does cancel all possibility of
such an object determinable in accordance with mere concepts, i.e., a
concept of a noumenon.a It is certainly startling to hear that a thing
should consist entirely of relations, but such a thing is also mere ap­
pearance, and cannot be thought at all through pure categories; it itself
consists in the mere relation of something in general to the senses. In
the same way, if one begins with mere concepts one cannot very well
think of the relations of things in abstracto except by thinking that one
is the cause of the determinations in the other; for that is our concept
of the understanding of relations itself. Yet since in this case we abstract
from all intuition, an entire way in which the manifold can determine
its place, namely the form of sensibility (space) disappears, which yet
precedes all empirical causality.
If by merely intelligible objects we understand those things that are
thoughtb through pure categories, without any schema of sensibility,
then things of this sort are impossible. For the condition of the objec­
tive use of all our concepts of understanding is merely the manner of
our sensible intuition, through which objects are given to us, and, if we
a

Not in roman type.

b Altered in Kant's copy of the first edition to "are cognized by us" (E eL, p. 46; 2 3 '49).
3 79

B 341

A 28 S

B 342

A 2 86

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Appendix

B 34 3

A z 87

B 3 44

A z88

abstract from the latter, then the former have no relation a at all to any
sort of object.b Indeed, even if one would assume another sort of intu­
ition than this our sensible one, our functions for thinking would still
be without any significance in regard to it. If we understand thereby
only objects of a non-sensible intuition, of which our categories are cer­
tainly not valid, and of which we can therefore never have any cogni­
tion at all (neither intuition nor concept), then noumena in this merely
negative sense must of course be allowed: for they would then not say
anything but that our manner of intuition does not pertain to all things,
but only to objects of our senses, consequently that their objective va­
lidity is bounded, and room thus remains for some other sort of intu­
ition and therefore also for things as its objects.c But in that case the
concept of a noumenon is problematic, i.e., the representation of a thing
of which we can say neither that it is possible nor that it is impossible,
since we are acquainted with no sort of intuition other than our own
sensible one and no other sort of concepts than the categories, neither
of which, however, is suited to an extrasensible object. Hence we can­
not thereby positively expand the field of the objects of our thinking be­
yond the conditions of our sensibility, and assume beyond appearances
objects of pure thinking, i.e., noumena, since those do not have any
positive significance that can be given. For one must concede that the
categories alone are not sufficient for the cognition of things in them­
selves, and without the data of sensibility they would be merely subjec­
tive forms of the unity of the understanding, but without any object.
Thinking in itself, to be sure, is not a product of the senses, and to this
extent is also not limited by them, but it is not on that account imme­
diately of any independent and pure use, without assistance from sensi­
bility, for it is in that case without an object.d And one cannot call the
noumenon e such an object! for this signifies precisely the problematic
concept of an object for an entirely different intuition and an entirely
different understanding than our own, which is thus a problem itself.
The concept of the noumenong is therefore not the concept of an ob­
ject,h but rather the problem, unavoidably connected with the limitation
of our sensibility, of whether there may not be objects entirely exempt
from the intuition of our sensibility, a question that can only be given
a Beziehung
b Object
, Objecte
d Object

, Not in roman type.

f Object
g
h

Not in roman type.

Object

3 80

On the amphiboly of concepts of reflection

the indeterminate answer that since sensible intuition does not pertain
to all things without distinction room remains for more and other ob­
jects; they cannot therefore be absolutely denied, but in the absence of
a determinate concept (for which no category is serviceable) they also
cannot be asserted as objects for our understanding.
The understanding accordingly bounds sensibility without thereby
expanding its own field, and in warning sensibility not to presume to
reach for things in themselves but solely for appearances it thinks of an
object in itself, but only as a transcendental object,a which is the caus�
of appearance (thus not itself appearance), and that cannot be thought
of either as magnitude or as reality or as substance, etc. (since these con­
cepts always require sensible forms in which they determine an object);
it therefore remains completely unknown whether such an object is to
be encountered within or without us, whether it would be canceled out
along with sensibility or whether it would remain even if we took sensibility away. If we want to call this object b a noumenonC because the B 345
representation of it is nothing sensible, we are free to do so. But since
we caimot apply any of our concepts of the understanding to it, this rep­
resentation still remains empty for us, and serves for nothing but to designate the boundaries of our sensible cognition and leave open a space A 2 8 9
that we can fill up neither through possible experience nor through the
pure understanding.
The critique of this pure understanding thus does not allow us to create a new field of objects beyond those that can come before it as ap­
pearances, and to indulge in intelligible worlds, or even in the concept
of them. I The mistake that most obviously leads to this, and can certainly be excused though not justified, lies in this: that the use of the un­
derstanding, contrary to its vocation, d is made transcendental, and the
objects, i.e., possible intuitions, are made to conform themselves to
concepts, but concepts are not made to conform themselves to possible
intuitions (on which alone rests their objective validity). The cause of
this, however, is in turn that apperception and, with it, thinking precede
all possible determination of the arrangement of representations. We
therefore think something in general, and on the one side determine it
sensibly, only we also distinguish the object represented in general and B 346
in abstracto from this way of intuiting it; thus there remains to us a way
of determining it merely through thinking that is, to be sure, a merely
logical form without content, but that nevertheless seems to us to be a
a Object
b

Object

, Not in roman type.

d Bestimmung

381

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. 1. Bk. II. Appendix

way in which the objecta exists in itself (noumenon), without regard to
the intuition to which our sensibility is limited.
* * *

A 290

B 347

Before we leave the Transcendental Analytic behind, we must add
something that, although not in itself especially indispensable, never­
theless may seem requisite for the completeness of the system. The
highest concept with which one is accustomed to begin a transcenden­
tal philosophy is usually the division between the possible and the im­
possible. "4 But since every division presupposes a concept that is to be
divided, a still higher one must be given, and this is the concept of an
object in general (taken problematically, leaving undecided whether it is
something or nothing). Since the categories are the only concepts that
relate to objects in general, the distinction of whether an object is some­
thing or nothing must proceed in accordance with the order and guid­
ance of the categories.b, l l s
I) To the concepts of all, many, and one there is opposed the con­
cept of that which cancels everything out, i.e., none, and thus the
object of a concept to which no intuition that can be given corre­
sponds is nothing, i e., a concept without an object, like the
noumena, which cannot be counted among the possibilities al­
though they must not on that ground be asserted to be impossible
(ens rationis),c or like something such as certain new fundamental
forces, which one thinks, without contradiction, to b e sure, but
also without any example from experience even being thought, and
which must therefore not be counted among the possibilities.
2) Reality is something, negation is nothing, namely, a concept of
the absence of an object, such as a shadow or cold (nihilprivativum). d
3) The mere form of intuition, without substance, is in itself not
an object, but the merely formal condition of one (as appearance),
like pure space and pure time, which are to be sure something, as
the forms for intuiting, but are not in themselves objects that are
intuited (ens imaginarium).e
4) The object of a concept that contradicts itself is nothing be­
cause the concept is nothing, the impossible, like a rectilinear fig­
ure with two sides (nihil negativum)/
==

A 29 1

B 348

a Object
b In�erted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "the highest concept is that of the object in

general" (E CLI, p. 46; 2 3 : 3 8).
being of mere reason
d A privative nothing, i.e., a condition consisting solely in the absence of something else.
, An imaginary being; in the first edition, this expression is inserted after "pure time."
f a negative nothing
,

382

On the amphiboly of concepts of reflection

The table of this division of the concept of nothing (for the similar
division of "something" follows of itself) must therefore be laid out
thus:
Nothing,
as
I.

Empty concept without object,
ens rationis.
2.

3·
Empty intuition
without an object,
ens imaginarium.

Empty object
of a concept,
nihil privativum.
4·

Empty object without concept,
nihil negativum.

One sees that the thought-entity (No. I) is distinguished from the nonentity (No. 4) by the fact that the former may not be ccunted among
the possibilities because it is a mere invention (although not self-con­
tradictory), whereas the latter is opposed to possibility because even its
concept cancels itself out. Both, however, are empty concepts. The nihil
privativum (NO. 2) and the ens imaginarium (No. 3), on the contrary, are
empty data for concepts. If light were not given to the senses, then one
would also not be able to represent darkness, and if extended beings
were not perceived, one would not b e able to represent space. Negation
as well as the mere form of intuition are, without something real, not
objects.o
a Objecte

333

B 349

Transcendental Logic
Second Part
Transcendental DialecticI

Introductiona
I
Transcendental illusion.

B 350

A 2 94

Above we have called dialectic in general a logic of illusion.b That does
not mean that it is a doctrine of probability;c for that is truth, but cog­
nized through insufficient grounds, so that the cognition of it is defec­
tive, but not therefore deceptive, and so it need not be separated from
the analytical part of logic. 2 Still less may we take appearanced and illusion for one and the same. For truth and illusion are not in the ob­
ject, insofar as it is intuited, but in the judgment about it insofar as it is
thought. Thus it is correctly said that the senses do not err; yet not be­
cause they always judge correctly, but because they do not judge at all.
Hence truth, as much as error, and thus also illusion as leading to the
latter, are to be found only in judgments, i.e., only in the relatione of the
object to our understanding. In a cognition that thoroughly agrees with
the laws of the understanding there is also no error. In a representation
of sense (because it contains no judgment at all) there is no error. No
force of nature can of itself depart from its own laws. Hence neither the
understanding by itself (without the influence of another cause), nor the
senses by themselves, can err; the first cannot, because while it acts
merely according to its own laws, its effect (the judgment) must neces­
sarily agree with these laws.3 But the formal aspect of all truth consists
in agreement with the laws of the understanding. In the senses there is
no judgment at all, neither a true nor a false one. Now because we have
a

b

"We have previously proved that we can think only through categories and the concepts
derived from them, but that our cognition (a p"iori) with them can reach no farther than
to objects of possible experience. Now sciences come forward - psychology, cosmology,
theology - that promise this." (E CLII, p. 46; 2 3 : 38)

Schein
, TVahrscheinlichkeit
d Erscheinung
, Verhdltnis
3 84

Introduction

no other sources of cognition besides these two, it follows that error is
effected only through the unnoticed influence of sensibility on under­
standing, through which it happens that the subjective grounds a of the
judgment join with the objective ones, and make the latter deviate from
their destination*,b just as a moved body would o f itself always stay in a
straight line in the same direction, but starts off on a curved line if at
the same time another force influences it in another direction. In order
to distinguish the proper action of the understanding from the force
that meddles in, it will thus be necessary to regard the erroneous judgment of the understanding as a diagonal between two forces that determine the judgment in two different directions, enclosing an angle, so to
speak, and to resolve the composite effect into the simple effects of the
understanding and of sensibility; in pure judgments a priori this must
happen through transcendental reflection, through which (as already
shown) every representation is assigned its place in the faculty of cognition proper to it, and hence also the influence of the latter is distin­
guished from it.
Our concern here is not to treat of empirical (e.g. optical) illusion,
which occurs in the empirical use of otherwise correct rules of the understanding, and through which the faculty of judgment is misled
through the influence of the imagination; rather, we have to do only with
transcendental illusion, which influences principles whose use is not
ever meant for experience, since in that case we would at least have a
touchstone for their correctness, but which instead, contrary to all the
warnings of criticism, carries us away beyond the empirical use of the
categories, and holds out to us the semblance of extending the pure un­
derstanding. We will call the principles whose application stays wholly
and completely within the limits of possible experience immanent, but
those that would fly beyond these boundaries transcendent principles.
But by the latter I do not understand the transcendental use or misuse
of categories, which is a mere mistake of the faculty of judgment when
it is not properly checked by criticism, and thus does not attend enough
to the boundaries of the territory in which alone the pure understanding
is allowed its play; rather, I mean principles that actually incite us to tear
down all those boundary posts and to lay claim to a wholly new territory
* Sensibility, subordinated to understanding, as the object' to which the latter
applies its function, is the source of real cognitions. But this same sensibility,
insofar as it influences the action of the understanding and determines it to
judgments, is the ground of error.
a In the first edition: "that subjective grounds."

b

Bestimmung
, Object
3 85

B 351

A 295

B 352

A 2 96

A 2 94/B 3 5 I

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Transcendental Dialectic

B 353

A 29 7

B 3 54

A 298

that recognizes no demarcations anywhere. Hence transcendental and
transcendent are not the same. The principles of pure understanding
we presented above should be only of empirical and not of transcendental use, i.e., of a use that reaches out beyond the boundaries of experi­
ence. But a principle that takes away these limits, which indeed bids us
to overstep them, is called transcendent. If our critique can succeed in
discovering the illusion in these supposed principles, then those princi­
ples that are of merely empirical use can be called, in opposition to them,
immanent principles of pure understanding.
Logical illusion, which consists in the mere imitation of the form of
reason (the illusion of fallacious inferences) arises solely from a failure
of attentiveness to the logical rule. Hence as soon as this attentiveness
is focused on the case before us, logical illusion entirely disappears.
Transcendental illusion, on the other hand, does not cease even though
it is uncovered and its nullity is clearly seen into by transcendental crit­
icism (e.g. the illusion in the proposition: "The world must have a be­
ginning in time"). The cause of this is that in our reason (considered
subjectively as a human faculty of cognition) there lie fundamental rules
and maxims for its use, which look entirely like objective principles, and
through them it comes about that the subjective necessity of a certain
connection of our concepts on behalf of the understanding is taken for
an objective necessity, the determination of things in themselves. [This
is] an illusion that cannot be avoided at all, just as little as we can avoid
it that the sea appears higher in the middle than at the shores, since we
see the former through higher rays of light than the latter, or even bet­
ter, just as little as the astronomer can prevent the rising moon from ap­
pearing larger to him, even when he is not deceived by this illusion.4
The transcendental dialectic will therefore content itself with uncov­
ering the illusion in transcendental judgments, while at the same time
protecting us from being deceived by it; but it can never bring it about
that transcendental illusion (like logical illusion) should even disappear
and cease to be an illusion. For what we have to do with here is a nat­
ural and unavoidable illusion a which itself rests on subjective princi­
ples and passes them off as objective, whereas logical dialectic in its
dissolution of fallacious inferences has to do only with an error in fol­
lowing principles or with an artificial illusion that imitates them.s
Hence there is a natural and unavoidable dialectic of pure reason, not
one in which a bungler might be entangled through lack of acquain­
tance, or one that some sophist has artfully invented in order to confuse
rational people, but one that irremediably attaches to human reason, so
that even after we have exposed the mirageb it will still not cease to lead
a Illusion
b Blendwerk
386

Introduction

our reason on with false hopes, continually propelling it into momentary aberrations that always need to be removed.

B 355

II
On pure reason as the seat of transcendental illusion
A.
On reason in general.
All our cognition starts from the senses, goes from there to the under­
standing, and ends with reason, beyond which there is nothing higher
to be found in us to work on the matter of intuition and bring it under
the highest unity of thinking. Since I am now to give a definitiona of
this supreme faculty of cognition, I find myself in some embarrassment.
As in the case of the understanding, there is in the case of reason a
merely formal, i.e., logical use, where reason abstracts from all content
of cognition, but there is also a real use, since reason itself contains the
origin of certain concepts and principles, which it derives neither from
the senses nor from the understanding. The first faculty has obviously
long since been defined by the logicians as that of drawing inferences
mediately (as distinct from immediate inferences, consequentis immediatis); but from this we get no insight into the second faculty, which itself generates concepts.6 Now since a division of reason into a logical
and a transcendental faculty occurs here, a higher concept of this source
of cognition must be sought that comprehends both concepts under itself, while from the analogy with concepts of the understanding, we can
expect both that the logical concept will put in our hands the key to the
transcendental one and that the table of functions of the former will
give us the family tree of the concepts of reason.
In the first part of our transcendental logic we defined the under­
standing as the faculty of rules; here we will distinguish reason from un­
derstanding by calling reason the faculty of principles.b
The term "a principle" is ambiguous, and commonly signifies only a
cognition that can be used as a principle even if in itself and as to its own
origin it is not a principle.c Every universal proposition, even if it is
a Erkliirung
b

C

Principien; in section II of this introduction, "principle" always translates Princip unless
otherwise noted. In addition to the German term Grundsatz, Kant employs not only
the Latin derivative Princip, but also occasionally the even more Latinate Principium,
whose occurrence will be noted; the plural of both terms, however, is Principien, which
will therefore be translated as "principles" with no note. Outside the present section,
"principle" (without a note) always translates Grundsatz, and the Latin terms are always
noted.
Principium
387

A 2 99

B 356

A 300

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Transcendental Dialectic

B 357

A 301

B 358

A 3 02

taken from experience (by induction) can serve as the major premise in
a syllogism;a but it is not therefore itself a principle. b The mathemati­
cal axioms (e.g., that there can be only one straight line between any
two points) are even universal cognitions a priori, and thus they are cor­
rectly called principles relative to the cases that can be subsumed under
them. But I cannot therefore say that in general and in itself I cognize
this proposition about straight lines from principles, but only that I
cognize it in pure intuition.
I would therefore call a "cognition from principles" that cognition in
which I cognize the particular in the universal through concepts. Thus
every syllogism is a form of derivation of a cognition from a principle.
For the major premise always gives a concept such that everything sub­
sumed under its condition can be cognized from it according to a prin­
ciple. Now since every universal cognition can serve as the major
premise in a syllogism, and since the understanding yields such univer­
sal propositions a priori, these propositions can, in respect of their pos­
sible use, be called principles.
But if we consider these principlesc of pure understanding in themselves as to their origin, then they are anything but cognitions from
concepts. For they would not even be possible a priori if we did not
bring in pure intuition (in mathematics) or the conditions of a possible
experience in general. That everything that happens has a cause cannot
at all be inferred from the concept of what happens in general; rather,
it is this principled that shows how one can first get a determinate ex­
periential concept of what happens.
Thus the understanding cannot yield synthetic cognitions from con­
cepts at all, and i t is properly these that I call principles absolutely; nev­
ertheless, all universal propositions in general can be called principles
comparatively.
It is an ancient wish - who knows how long it will take until perhaps
it is fulfilled - that in place of the endless manifold of civil laws, their
principles may be sought out; for in this alone can consist the secret, as
one says, of simplifying legislation. But here the laws are only limita­
tions of our freedom to conditions under which it agrees thoroughly
with itself; hence they apply to something that is wholly our own work,
and of which we can be the cause through that concept. But that objects in themselves, as well as the nature of things, should stand under
principles and be determined according to mere concepts is something
a Vernunftschlufl might equally be translated "inference of reason"; and occasionally it will
be so translated below.

b Principium
, Grundsdtze
d Grundsatz
3 88

Introduction

that, if not impossible, is at least very paradoxicala in what it demands.
But however that may be (for the investigation of this still lies before
us), this much at least is clear; cognition from principles (in themselves)
is something entirely different from mere cognition of the understand­
ing, which can of course precede other cognitions in the form of a prin­
ciple, but in itself (insofar at it is synthetic) still neither rests on mere
thought nor contains in itself a universal according to concepts.
If the understanding may be a faculty of unity of appearances by
means of rules, then reason is the faculty of the unity of the rules of un­
derstanding under principles.7 Thus itb never applies directly to experience or to any object, but instead applies to the understanding, in
order to give unity a priori through concepts to the understanding's
manifold cognitions, which may be called "the unity of reason," and is
of an altogether different kind than any unity that can be achieved by
the understanding.
This is the universal concept of the faculty of reason, as far as that
concept can be made comprehensible wholly in the absence of examples
(such as those that are to be given only in what follows).
B.
On the logical use of reason.

A 303

We draw a distinction between what is cognized immediately and what
is only inferred. That there are three angles in a figure enclosed by
three straight lines is immediately cognized, but that these angles to­
gether equal two right angles is only inferred. Because we constantly
need inferences and so in the end become wholly accustomed to them,
it happens at last that we no longer even take notice of this distinction,
and often, as in so-called deceptions of sense, we take as immediate
what we have only inferred. In every inference there is a proposition
that serves as a ground, and' another, namely the conclusion, that is
drawn from the former, andd finally the inference (consequence) ac­
cording to which the truth of the conclusion is connected unfailingly
with the truth of the first proposition. If the inferred judgment already
lies in the first one, so that it can be derived from it without the mediation of a third representation, then this is called an "immediate inference" (consequentia immediata); I would rather call it an inference of the
understanding.8 But if, in addition to the cognition that serves as a
ground, yet another judgment is necessary to effect the conclusion,
a Widersinniges
b

I.e., reason. In the first edition: "It"; in the second edition: "Thus it . . .
The word "and" added in the second edition.
d The word "and" added in the second edition.
C

3 89

B 3 59

."

B 3 60

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Transcendental Dialectic

A 304

B36r

A 305

then the inference is called a "syllogism. " a In the proposition All hu­
mans are mortal there lie already the propositions "Some humans are
mortal," "Someb mortal beings are human beings," "Nothing C immor­
tal is a human being," and these propositions are thus immediate con­
clusions from the first one. On the other hand, the proposition "All
scholars are mortal" does not lie in the underlying judgment (for the
concept "scholar" does not occur in it at all), and can be concluded
from it only by means of an intermediate judgment.
In every syllogism I think first a rule (the major) through the under­
standing. Second, I subsume a cognition under the condition of the rule
(the minor) by means of the power ofjudgment. Finally, I determine my
cognition through the predicate of the rule (the conclusio),d hence a priori
through reason. Thus the relatione between a cognition and its condi­
tion, which the major premise represents as the rule, constitutes the dif­
ferent kinds of syllogisms. They are therefore threefold - just as are all
judgments in general - insofar as they are distinguished by the way they
express the relationf of cognition to the understanding: namely, cate­
gorical or hypothetical or disjunctive syllogisms.9
If, as happens for the most part, the conclusion is a judgment given
as the problem,g in order to see whether it flows from already given
judgments, through which, namely, a wholly different object is thought,
then I seek whether the assertion of this conclusion is not to be found
in the understanding under certain conditions according to a universal
rule. Now if ! find such a condition and if the object h of the conclusion
can be subsumed under the given condition, then this conclusion is de­
rived from the rule that is also valid for other objects of cognition.
From this we see that reason, in inferring, seeks to bring the greatest
manifold of cognition of the understanding to the smallest number of
principles (universal conditions), and thereby to effect the highest unity
of that manifold.

B 362

C.
On the pure use of reason.
Can we isolate reason, and is it then a genuinei source of concepts and
judgments that arise solely from it and thereby refer it to objects; or is
Vernunftscblufl (literally, an "inference of reason")
b In the first edition: "or some."
a

, In the first edition: "or nothing."
d conclusion

, Verbaltnis

f Verbaltnis
g

aufgegeben
Object
, eigener

h

390

Introduction

reason only a merely subordinatea faculty that gives to given cognitions
a certain form, called "logical" form, through which cognitions of the
understanding are subordinated to one another, and lower rules are
subordinated to higher ones (whose condition includes the condition of
the lower rules in its sphere), as far as this can be effected through com­
paring them? This is the question with which we will now concern our­
selves, though only provisionally. In fact the manifold of rules and the
unity of principles is a demand of reason, in order to bring the under­
standing into thoroughgoing connection with itself, just as the under­
standing brings the manifold of intuition under concepts and through
them into connection.1O Yet such a principleb does not prescribe any law
to objects/ and does not contain the ground of the possibility of cognizing and determining them as such in general, but rather is merely a
subjective law of economy for the provision of our understanding, so
that through comparison of its concepts it may bring their universal use
to the smallest number, without justifYing us in demanding of objects
themselves any such unanimity as might make things easier for our understanding or help it extend itself, and so give objective validity to its
maxims as well. In a word, the question is: Does reason in itself, i.e.,
pure reason, contain a priori synthetic principlesd and rules, and in what
might such principles consist?
The formal and logical procedure of reason in syllogisms already
gives us sufficient guidance as to where the ground of its transcenden­
tal principle' will rest in synthetic cognition through pure reason.
First, the syllogism does not deal with intuitions, in order to bring
them under rules (as does the understanding with its categories), but
rather deals with concepts and judgments. If, therefore, pure reason
also deals with objects, yet it has no immediate reference to them and
their intuition, but deals only with the understanding and its judgments,
which apply directly to the senses and their intuition, in order to determine their object. The unity of reason is therefore not the unity of a
possible experience, but is essentially different from that, which is the
unity of understanding. That everything which happens must have a
cause is not a principle! cognized and prescribed through reason at all.
It makes the unity of experience possible and borrows nothing from
reason, which could not have imposed any such synthetic unity from
mere concepts without this reference to possible experience.
Second, reason in its logical use seeks the universal condition of its
a subalternes
b

,
d
,
f

Grundsatz
Objecte
Grundsiitze
Principium
Grundsatz
391

A 306

B 36 3

A 307

B 3 64

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Transcendental Dialectic

.A 308

B 365

A 309

B 366

judgment (its conclusion), and the syllogism is nothing but a judgment
mediated by the subsumption of its condition under a universal rule
(the major premise). Now since this rule is once again exposed to this
same attempt of reason, and the condition of its condition thereby has
to be sought (by means of a prosyllogism) as far as we may, we see very
well that the proper principle of reason in general (in its logical use) is
to find the unconditioned for conditioned cognitions of the under­
standing, with which its unity will be completed.
But this logical maxim cannot become a principleb of pure reason un­
less we assume that when the conditioned is given, then so is the whole
series of conditions subordinated one to the other, which is itself uncon­
ditioned, also given (i.e., contained in the object and its connection).
Such a principle< of pure reason, however, is obviously synthetic; for
the conditioned is analytically related to some condition, but not to the
unconditioned. Different synthetic propositions must arise from it, of
which the pure understanding knows nothing, since it has to do only
with objects of a possible experience, whose cognition and synthesis are
always conditioned. But the unconditioned, if it actually occurs, isd par­
ticularly to be considered according to all the determinations that dis­
tinguish it from everything conditioned, and must thereby give us
material for many synthetic propositions a priori.
The principles e arising from this supreme principle of pure reason
will, however, be transcendent in respect of all appearances, i.e., no ad­
equate empirical use can ever be made of that principle. It will there­
fore be entirely distinct from all principles! of the understanding
(whose use is completely immanent, insofar as it has only the possibil­
ity of experience as its theme). But whether the principleg that the se­
ries of conditions (in the synthesis of appearances, or even in the
thinking of things in general) reaches to the unconditioned, has objec­
tive correctness or not; what consequences flow from it for the empirical use of the understanding, or whether it rather yields no such objec­
tively valid propositions of at all, but is only a logical prescription in the
ascent to ever higher conditions to approach completeness in them and
thus to bring the highest possible unity of reason into our cognition;
whether, I say, this need of reason has, through a misunderstanding,
been taken for a transcendental principleh of reason, which overhastily
Grundsatz
b Principium
, Grundsatz
a

d

Reading with the fourth edition, wird for kann.

, Grundsiitze
f Grundsiitze
g Grundsatz
h Grundsatz
3 92

Introduction

postulates such an unlimited completeness in the series of conditions in
the objects themselves; but in this case what other kinds of misinter­
pretations and delusionso may have crept into the inferences of reason
whose major premise (and that perhaps more a petition than a postu­
late) is taken from pure reason and ascends from experience to its con­
ditions: All this will be our concern in the transcendental dialectic,
which we will now develop from its sources hidden deep in human rea­
son. We will divide it into two main parts, the first of which will treat
of the transcendent concepts of pure reason, and the second of rea­
son's transcendent and dialectical inferences of reason.b
n Verblendungen

b dialektischen Vernunftschlufien, which (once again) could also be translated "dialectical
syllogisms. "

393

Transcendental Dialectic
First Book
On the concepts ofpure reason.

B 367

A

3II

B 368

However i t may b e with the possibility o f concepts from pure reason,
they are not merely reflected concepts but inferred concepts. Concepts
of the understanding are also thought a priori before experience and on
behalf of it; but they contain nothing beyond the unity of reflection on
appearances, insofar as these appearances are supposed to belong nec­
essarily to a possible empirical consciousness. Through them alone is
cognition, and determination of an object, possible. They also first give
material for inferring, and no a priori concepts of objects precede them,
from which they could be inferred. On the contrary, their objective re­
ality is founded solely on the fact that because they constitute the intel­
lectual form of all experience, it must always be possible to show their
application in experience.
The term "a concept of reason," however, already shows in a provi­
sional way that such a concept will not let itself be limited to experience,
because it deals with a cognition (perhaps the whole of possible experi­
ence or its empirical synthesis) of which the empirical is only one part;
no actual experience is fully sufficient for it, but every experience be­
longs to it. Concepts of reason serve for comprehension, just as con­
cepts of the understanding serve for understanding (of perceptions). If
they contain the unconditioned, then they deal with something under
which all experience belongs, but that is never itself an object of expe­
rience; something to which reason leads through its inferences, and by
which reason estimates and measures the degree of its empirical use,
but that never constitutes a member of the empirical synthesis. If de­
spite this such concepts have objective validity, then they can be called
conceptus ratiocinati a (correctly inferred concepts); but if not, they have
at least been obtained by a surreptitious illusion of inference, and so
might be called conceptus ratiocinantesb (sophistical concepts). Since,
however, this can be made out only in the chapter on dialectical infera

reasoned concepts

b ratiocinated concepts
3 94

Section I. On the ideas in general

ences, we will not take account of it yet, but just as we called the con­
cepts of understanding "categories," we will ascribe a new name to the
concepts of pure reason and call them "transcendental ideas," which
term we now elucidate and justify.

First book of the trans cen dental dialectic
First s ection
On the ideas in general

A312

.

In the great wealth of our languages, the thinking mind nevertheless
often finds itself at a loss for an expression that exactly suits its concept,
and lacking this it is able to make itself rightly intelligible neither to
others nor even to itself. Coining new words is a presumption to legislate in language that rarely succeeds, and before we have recourse to
this dubious means it is advisable to look around in a dead and learned
language to see if an expression occurs in it that is suitable to this concept; and even if the ancient use of this expression has become somewhat unsteady owing to the inattentiveness of its authors, it is better to
fix on the meaning" that is proper to it (even if it is doubtful whether it
always had exactly this sense) than to ruin our enterprise by making
ourselves unintelligible.
For this reason, if there perhaps occurs only one single word for a
certain concept that, in one meaning already introduced, exactly suits
this concept, and if it is of great importance to distinguish it from other
related concepts, then it is advisable not to be prodigal with that word
or use it merely as a synonym or an alternative in place of other words,
but rather to preserve it carefully in its proper meaning; for it may otherwise easily happen that when the expression does not particularly occupy our attention but is lost in a heap of others having very divergent
meaning, the thought which it alone can preserve may get lost as well.
Plato made use of the expression idea in such a way that we can readily see that he understood by it something that not only could never be
borrowed from the senses, but that even goes far beyond the concepts
of the understanding (with which Aristotle occupied himself), since
nothing encountered in experience could ever be congruent to it. I I
Ideas for him are archetypes of things themselves, and not, like the cat­
egories, merely the key to possible experiences. In his opinion they
flowed from the highest reason, through which human reason partakes
in them; our reason, however, now no longer finds itself in its original
state, but must call back with toil the old, now very obscure ideas
through a recollection (which is called philosophy).12 I do not wish to
n

Bedeutung; for the remainder of Book I of the "Dialectic," "meaning" will translate this
word; bedeuten, however, will continue to be translated "signifY."
395

B 369

A3 I 3

B 3 70

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Book I

A3 14

B 371

A3 15

B 3 72

A 3 14 / B 3 7 1

go into any literary investigation here, in order to make out the sense
which the sublime philosopher combined with his word. I note only
that when we compare the thoughts that an author expresses about a
subject, in ordinary speech as well as in writings, it is not at all unusual
to find that we understand him even better than he understood himself,
since he may not have determined his concept sufficiently and hence
sometimes spoke, or even thought, contrary to his own intention.
Plato noted very well that our power of cognition feels a far higher
need than that of merely spelling out appearances according to a synthetic unity in order to be able to read them as experience, and that our
reason naturally exalts itself to cognitions that go much too far for any
object that experience can give ever to be congruent, but that none­
theless have their reality and are by no means merely figments of the
brain.
Plato found his ideas preeminently in everything that is practical,* i.e.
in what rests on freedom, which for its part stands under cognitions that
are a proper product of reason. Whoever would draw the concepts of
virtue from experience, whoever would make what can at best serve as
an example for imperfect illustration into a model for a source of cog­
nition (as many have actually done), would make of virtue an ambigu­
ous non-entity, changeable with time and circumstances, useless for any
sort of rule. On the contrary, we are all aware that when someone is
represented as a model of virtue, we always have the true original in our
own mind alone, with which we compare this alleged model and ac­
cording to which alone we estimate it. But it is this that is the idea of
virtue, in regard to which all possible objects of experience do service as
examples (proofs of the feasibility, to a certain degree, of what the con­
cept of reason requires), but never as archetypes. That no human being
will ever act adequately to what the pure idea of virtue contains does not
prove in the least that there is something chimerical in this thought.
For it is only by means of this idea that any judgment of moral worth
or unworth is possible; and so it necessarily lies at the ground of every
approach to moral perfection, even though the obstacles in human na­
ture, as yet to be determined as to their degree, may hold us at a dis­
tance from it.
* Of course he also extended his concept to speculative cognitions, whenever
they were pure and given wholly a priori, and even to mathematics, even
though mathematical cognitions have their object nowhere except in possible
experience. Now I cannot follow him in this, just as little as I can in the mys­
tical deduction of these ideas or in the exaggerated way in which he hyposta­
tized them, as it were; although the lofty language that served him in this field
is surely quite susceptible of a milder interpretation, and one that accords bet­
ter with the nature of things.
3 96

Section 1. On the ideas in general

The Platonic republic has become proverbial as a supposedly striking example of a dream of perfection that can have its place only in the
idle thinker's brain; and Bruckerl3 finds it ridiculous for the philosopher
to assert that a prince will never govern well unless he participates in
the ideas. But we would do better to pursue this thought further, and (at
those points where the excellent man leaves us without help) to shed
light on it through new endeavors, rather than setting it aside as useless
under the very wretched and harmful pretext of its impracticability. A
constitution providing for the greatest human freedom according to
laws that permit the freedom of each to exist together with that of
others (not one providing for the greatest happiness, since that would
follow of itself) is at least a necessary idea, which one must make the
ground not merely of the primary plan of a state's constitution but of all
the laws too; and in it we must initially abstract from the present obstacles, which may perhaps arise not so much from what is unavoidable in
human nature as rather from neglect of the true ideas in the giving of
laws. For nothing is more harmful or less worthy of a philosopher than
the vulgar appeal to allegedly contrary experience, which would not
have existed at all if institutions had been established at the right time
according to the ideas, instead of frustrating all good intentions by
using crude concepts in place of ideas, just because these concepts were
drawn from experience. The more legislation and government agree
with this idea, the less frequent punishment will become, and hence it
is quite rational to assert (as Plato does) that in perfect institutional
arrangements nothing of the sort would be necessary at all. 14 Even
though this may never come to pass, the idea of this maximum is nev­
ertheless wholly correct when it is set forth as an archetype, in order to
bring the legislative constitution of human beings ever nearer to a possible greatest perfection. For whatever might be the highest degree of
perfection at which humanity must stop, and however great a gulf must
remain between the idea and its execution, no one can or should try to
determine this, just because it is freedom that can go beyond every proposed boundary.
But Plato was right to see clear proofs of an origin in ideas not only
where human reason shows true causality, and where ideas become ef­
ficient causes (of actions and their objects), namely in morality, but also
in regard to nature itself.15 A plant, an animal, the regular arrangement
of the world's structure (presumably thus also the whole order of nature) - these show clearly that they are possible only according to ideas;
although n o individual creature, under the individual conditions o f its
existence, is congruent with the idea of what is most perfect of its
species (as little as a human being is congruent with the idea of humanity that he bears in his soul as the archetype of his actions), nevertheless
these ideas :'-re in the highest understanding individual, unalterable,
3 97

A3 16

B 373

A3 I7

B 3 74

A3 I8

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Book I

B 375

A319

B 3 76

A 320

thoroughly determined, and the original causes of things, and only the
whole its combination in the totality of a world is fully adequate to its
idea. If we abstract from its exaggerated expression, then the philoso­
pher's spiritual flight, which considers the physical copies a in the world
order, and then ascends to their architectonic connection according to
ends, i.e., ideas, is an endeavor that deserves respect and imitation; but
in respect of that which pertains to principles b of morality, legislation
and religion where the ideas first make the experience (of the good) it­
self possible, even if they can never be fully expressed in experience,
perform a wholly unique service, which goes unrecognized precisely be­
cause it is judged according to empirical rules, whose validity as princi­
plese should be cancelled by those very ideas. For when we consider
nature, experience provides us with the rule and is the source of truth;
but with respect to moral laws, experience is (alas!) the mother of illusion, and it is most reprehensible to derive the laws concerning what I
ought to do from what is done, or to want to limit it to that.
But instead of these matters, the prosecution of which in fact makes
up the proper dignity of philosophy, we now concern ourselves with a
labor less spectacular but nevertheless not unrewarding: that of making
the terrain for these majestic moral edifices level and firm enough to be
built upon; for under this ground there are all sorts of passageways,
such as moles might have dug, left over from reason's vain but confident
treasure hunting, that make every building insecure. It is the transcen­
dental use of pure reason, of its principlesd and ideas, whose closer ac­
quaintance we are now obligated to make, in order properly to
determine and evaluate the influence and the worth of pure reason. Yet
before I conclude this provisional introduction, I entreat those who take
philosophy to heart (which means more than is commonly supposed), if
they find themselves convinced by this and the following discussion, to
take care to preserve the expression idea in its original meaning, so that
it will not henceforth fall among the other expressions by which all sorts
of representations are denoted in careless disorder, to the detriment of
science. We are not so lacking in terms properly suited to each species
of representation that we have need for one to encroach on the property of another. Here is their progression:e The genus is representa­
tion in general (repraesentatio). Under it stands the representation with
consciousness (perceptio). A perception! that refers to the subject as a
modification of its state is a sensation (sensatio); an objective percepa

b
,
d
,
f

von der copeilichen Betrachtung des Physischen
Principien
Principien
Principien
Stufenleiter
Perception
3 98

Section II. On the transcendental ideas

tion a is a cognition (cogn itio). The latter is either an intuition or a concept (intuitus vel conceptus). The former i s immediately related to the
object and is singular; the latter is mediate, by means of a mark, which
can be common to several things. A concept is either an empirical or a
pure concept, and the pure concept, insofar as it has its origin solely in
the understanding (not in a pure image of sensibility), is called notio.b A
concept made up of notions, which goes beyond the possibility of ex­
perience, is an idea or a concept of reason. Anyone who has become
accustomed to this distinction must find it unbearable to hear a repre­
sentation of the color red called an idea. It is not even to be called a notion (a concept of the understanding).'6

B 377

First book of the transcendental dialectic
Second section
On the transcendental ideas."

A 32 1

The transcendental analytic gave us an example of how the mere logical form of our cognition can contain the origin of pure concepts a priori, which represent objects prior to all experience, or rather which
indicate the synthetic unity that alone makes possible an empirical cognition of objects. The form of judgments (transformed into a concept
of the synthesis of intuitions) brought forth categories that direct all use
of the understanding in experience. In the same way, we can expect that
the form of the syllogisms, if applied to the synthetic unity of intuitions
under the authority of the categories, will contain the origin of special
concepts a priori that we may call pure concepts of reason or transcendental ideas, and they will determine the use of the understanding ac­
cording to principlesd in the whole of an entire experience.
The function of reason in its inferences consisted in the universality
of cognition according to concepts, and the syllogism is itself a judgment determined a priori in the whole domain of its condition. I can
draw the proposition "Caius is mortal" from experience merely through
the understanding. But I seek a concept containing the condition under
which the predicate (the assertion in general) of this judgment is given
(i.e., here, the concept "human"), and after I have subsumed [the predicate] under this condition, taken in its whole domain ("all humans are
a

b

Perception

notion
, In his copy of the first edition, Kant inserted these comments:
"In experience we can [encounter] no concepts of reason, e.g., of the simple, which
cannot exhibit any experience, the [absolutely] unconditioned of every kind.
"The cosmological ideas, to be sure, pertain to objects [Objecte] of the sensible
world, but . . . . " (the end of the manuscript is missing) (E CLII, p. 46; 2 3 : 3 8)

d Principien
3 99

B 37 8

A322

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Book I

B 379

A3 2 3

B 3 80

A 3 24

B 38 1

mortal"), I determine the cognition of my object according to it ("Caius
is mortal").
Accordingly, in the conclusion of a syllogism we restrict a predicate
to a certain object, after we have thought it in the major premise in its
whole domain under a certain condition. This complete magnitude of
the domain, in relation to such a condition, is called universality (uni­
versalitas). In the synthesis of intuition this corresponds to allness (uni­
versitas), or the totality of conditions. So the transcendental concept of
reason is none other than that of the totality of conditions to a given
conditioned thing. Now since the unconditioned alone makes possible
the totality of conditions, and conversely the totality of conditions is al­
ways itself unconditioned, a pure concept of reason in general can be
explained a through the concept of the unconditioned, insofar as it con­
tains a ground of synthesis for what is conditioned. 17
There will be as many concepts of reason as there are species of relationb represented by the understanding by means of the categories; and
so we must seek an unconditioned, first, for the categorical synthesis
in a subject, second for the hypothetical synthesis of the members of a
series, and third for the disjunctive synthesis of the parts in a system. 18
There are, therefore, just as many species of syllogism, and in each
of them prosyllogisms proceed to the unconditioned: one, to a subject
that is no longer a predicate, another to a presupposition that presupposes nothing further, and the third to an aggregate of members of a
division such that nothing further is required for it to complete the di­
vision of a concept. Hence the pure rational concepts of the totality in
a synthesis of conditions are necessary at least as problems of extend­
ing the unity of the understanding, if possible, to the unconditioned,
and they are grounded in the nature of human reason, even if these
transcendental concepts lack a suitable use in concreto and have no other
utility than to point the understanding in the right direction so that it
may be thoroughly consistent with itself when it extends itself to its ut­
tennost extremes.
However, while we are speaking here about the totality of conditions
and the unconditioned, as the common title of all concepts of reason, we
once again run up against an expression with which we cannot dispense
and at the same time cannot safely use because of an ambiguity it has ac­
quired through long misuse. The term absolute is one of the few words
that in its original meaning was suited to one concept that by and large
no other word in the same language precisely suits, and so its loss, or
what is the same thing, its vacillating use, must carry with it the loss of
the concept itself, but this is indeed a concept with which we cannot disa erkliirt
b Verhiiltnis
400

Section II. On the transcendental ideas

pense except at great disadvantage to all transcendental estimations.a
The word absolute is now more often used merely to indicate that
something is valid of a thingb considered in itself and thus internally.
In this meaning, "absolutely possible" would signify what is possible in
itself (internally), which is in fact the least one can say of an object. On
the contrary, however, it is also sometimes used to indicate that some­
thing is valid in every relation (unlimitedly) (e.g., absolute dominion);
and in this meaning absolutely possible would signify what is possible
in all respects in every relation, which is again the most that I can say
about the possibility of a thing. Now sometimes, to be sure, these two
meanings coincide. So, for example, what is internally impossible i s also
impossible in every relation, and hence absolutely impossible. But in
most cases they are infinitely far apart from each other, and so I can by
no means infer that because something is possible in itself it is therefore
also possible in every relation, hence absolutely possible. Indeed, in
what follows I will show about absolute necessity that it by no means depends in all cases on what is internal, and so must not be regarded as signifying the same as what is internal. That whose opposite is internally
impossible, that whose opposite is clearly also impossible in all respects,
is therefore itself absolutely necessary; but I cannot infer conversely that
what is absolutely necessary is something whose opposite is internally
impossible, i.e., that the absolute necessity of a thing is an internal necessity; for this "internal necessity" is in certain cases a wholly empty ex­
pression, with which we cannot connect the least concept; on the
contrary, the concept of the necessity of a thing in every relation (to
everything possible) carries with it very special determinations. Now because the loss of a concept that has great application in speculative phi­
losophy can never be a matter of indifference to the philosopher, I hope
he will also not be indifferent to carefully preserving the determination
and the expression on which the concept depends.
It is in this extended meaning that I will make use of the word absolute, opposing i t t o what i s merely comparative, o r valid i n some particular respect; for the latter is restricted to conditions, while the former
is valid without any restriction.
Now a transcendental concept of reason always goes to the absolute
totality in the synthesis of conditions, and never ends except with the
absolutely unconditioned, i.e., what is unconditioned in every relation.
For pure reason leaves to the understanding everything that relates directly to objects of intuition or rather to their synthesis in imagination.
It reserves for itself only the absolute totality in the use of concepts, and
seeks to carry the synthetic unity, which is thought in the categories, all
a Beurteilungen; in the third edition, this word is in the singular.
b

Sacbe

401

A325

B 382

A 32 6

B 3 83

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Book I

A327

B 3 84

A 328

B 3 85

the way to the absolutely unconditioned. We can therefore call this the
unity of reason in appearances, just as that which the category ex­
presses can be called the unity of understanding. Thus reason relates
itself only to the use of the understanding, not indeed insofar as the lat­
ter contains the ground of possible experience (for the absolute totality
of conditions is not a concept that is usable in an experience, because no
experience is unconditioned), but rather in order to prescribe the di­
rection toward a certain unity of which the understanding has no con­
cept, proceeding to comprehend all the actions of the understanding in
respect of every object into an absolute whole. Hence the objective use
of the pure concepts of reason is always transcendent, while that of the
pure concepts of understanding must by its nature always be imma­
nent, since it is limited solely to possible experience.
By the idea of a necessary concept of reason, I understand one to
which no congruent object can be given in the senses. Thus the pure
concepts of reason we have just examined are transcendental ideas.
They are concepts of pure reason; for they consider all experiential
cognition as determined through an absolute totality of conditions.
They are not arbitrarily invented, but given as problemsa by the nature
of reason itself, and hence they relate necessarily to the entire use of the
understanding. Finally, they are transcendent concepts, and exceed the
bounds of all experience, in which no object adequate to the transcen­
dental idea can ever occur. When we call something an idea, we are say­
ing a great deal about its objectb (as an object of pure understanding),
but just for this reason very little about the subject (i.e., in respect of its
actuality under empirical conditions), since, as the concept of a maxi­
mum, nothing congruent to it can ever be given in concreto. Now because in the merely speculative use of reason the latter is really the
whole aim, and approaching a concept that will, however, never be
reached in execution, is the same as simply lacking that concept, it is
said of a concept of this sort that it is only an idea. Thus we might say
that the absolute whole of appearances is only an idea, since, because
we can never project it in an image, it remains a problem C without any
solution. On the contrary, because in the practical use of understanding it is only a matter of execution according to rules, an idea of prac­
tical reason can always be actually given in concreto, though only in part;
indeed, it is the indispensable condition of every practical use of rea­
son. Its execution is always bounded and defective, but within bounds
that cannot be determined, hence always under the influence of the
concept of an absolute completeness. Accordingly, the practical idea is
aufgegeben
Object
,- Problem
a

b

402

Section II. On the transcendental ideas

always fruitful in the highest degree and unavoidably necessary in re­
spect of actual actions. In it practical reason even has the causality ac­
tually to bring forth what its concept contains; and hence of such
wisdom we cannot likewise say disparagingly: It is only an idea; rather
just because it is the idea of a necessary unity of all possible ends, it
must serve as a rule, the original and at least limiting condition, for
everything practical.
Although we have to say of the transcendental concepts of reason:
They are only ideas, we will by no means regard them as superfluous
and nugatory. For even if no object can be determined through them,
they can still, in a fundamental and unnoticed way, serve the under­
standing as a canon for its extended and self-consistent use, through
which it cognizes no more objects than it would cognize through its
concepts, yet in this cognition it will be guided better and further. Not
to mention the fact that perhaps the ideas make possible a transition
from concepts of nature to the practical, and themselves generate support for the moral ideas and connection with the speculative cognitions
of reason. About all this we must expect to be informed in due course.
But given our present aims, we will set aside the practical ideas, and
hence consider reason only in its speculative use, and in this even more
narrowly, namely only in its transcendental use. Here we must strike
out on the same path as we took above in the deduction of the cate­
gories; that is, we must consider the logical form of rational cognition,
and see whether in this way reason will not perhaps also be a source of
concepts, regarding objectsa in themselves as determined synthetically
a priori in respect of one or another function of reason.
Reason, considered as the faculty of a certain logical form of cognition, is the faculty of inferring, i.e., of judging mediately (through the
subsumption of a condition of a possible judgment under the condition
of something given). The given judgment is the universal rule (major
premise, major). The subsumption of the condition of another possible
judgment under the condition of the rule is the minor premise (minor).
The actual judgment that expresses the assertion of the rule in the subsumed caseb is the conclusion (conclusio). The rule says something universal under a certain condition. Now in a case that comes before us the
condition of the rule obtains. Thus what is valid universally under that
condition is also to be regarded as valid in the case before us (which carries this condition with it). We easily see that reason attains to a cognition through actions of the understanding that constitute a series of
conditions. Thus suppose I arrive at the proposition "All bodies are al­
terable" only by beginning with the more remote cognition (in which
a Objecte

b The fourth edition reads "to the subsumed case."

403

A 3 29

B 3 86

A330

B 3 87

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Book I

A33 1

B 3 88

A 33 2

B 3 89

the concept of a body does not occur, but that contains the condition of
this concept) that "Everything composite is alterable," and go from
this to a closer proposition standing under the condition of the former:
"Bodies are composite"; and then from this finally to a third proposi­
tion, conjoining the more distant cognition ("alterable") with the one
lying before us: "Consequently, bodies are alterable"; then I arrive at a
cognition (a conclusion) through a series of conditions (premises). Now
every series whose exponent (whether that of the categorical or the hy­
pothetical judgment) is given may be continued; hence the very same
action of reason leads to a ratiocinatio prosyllogistica, a which is a series of
inferences, that can be continued to an indeterminate extent either on
the side of the conditions (per prosyllogismos)b or on the side of the con­
ditioned (per episyllogismos).c
But we soon come to be aware that the chain or series of prosyllo­
gisms, i.e., of inferred cognitions on the side of the grounds, or of the
conditions of a given cognition - in other words, the ascending series
of syllogisms - has to be related to the faculty of reason differently from
the descending series, i.e., the progression of reason on the side of
that which is conditioned through episyllogisms. For since in the first
case the cognition (the conclusio) is given only as conditioned, we cannot
reach it by means of reason except at least on the presupposition that all
members of the series are given on the side of the conditions (totality in
the series of premises), because only under this presupposition is the
judgment before us possible a priori; on the contrary, on the side of that
which is conditioned or of the consequences, there is thought only a series that becomes, and that is not already presupposed or given as a
whole, and so only a potential progression. Hence if a cognition is re­
garded as conditioned, reason is necessitated to regard the series of con­
ditions in an ascending line as completed and given in their totality. But
if the very same cognition is at the same time regarded as a condition of
other cognitions that constitute a series of consequences in a descend­
ing line, then reason can be entirely indifferent about how far this pro­
gression stretches a parte posteriori, and whether a totality of these
conditions is even possible at all; for it does not need a series of the
same sort for the conclusion that lies before us, since this conclusion is
already sufficiently determined and secured through its grounds a parte
priori. Now it may or may not be that on the side of the conditions, the
series of premises has a first [member] as the supreme condition, and
hence that it is without bound a parte priori; nevertheless it must still
a "Prosyllogistic reasoning," that is, reasoning through a series of syllogisms to arrive at
a desired conclusion.

b by prosyllogisms
, by episyllogisms

404

Section III. System of transcendental ideas

contain the totality of the condition, assuming that we could never suc­
ceed in grasping it; and the whole series must be unconditionally true if
the conditioned, which is regarded as a consequence arising from it, is
supposed to count as true. This is a demand of reason, which declares
its cognition to be determined a priori and necessary either as it is in it­
self - in which case it needs no grounds - or else - if it is derived - as a
member of a series of grounds that is itself unconditionally true.

The first book of the transcendental dialectic
Third section
The system of the transcendental ideas.
What we have to do with here is not a logical dialectic that abstracts
from every content of cognition and merely discovers false illusion in
the form of syllogisms, but rather a transcendental dialectic, that, fully
a priori, is supposed to contain both the origin of certain cognitions
from pure reason and inferred concepts, whose object cannot be given
empirically at all, and so lies wholly outside the faculty of the pure un­
derstanding. We have gathered from the natural relation that the tran­
scendental use of our cognition must have in its inferences as well as in
its judgments that there will be only three species of dialectical infer­
ences, relating to the three species of inference by which reason can ar­
rive at cognitions from principles;a and that in everything the concern
of reason is to ascend from the conditioned synthesis, to which the un­
derstanding always remains bound, toward the unconditioned, which
the understanding can never reach.
Now what is universal in every relation that our representations can
have is r) the relation to the subject, 2) the relation to objects, b and in­
deed either asC appearances, or as objects of thinking in general. If we
combine this subdivision with the above division, then all the relationd
of representations of which we can make either a concept or an idea are
of three sorts: I ) the relatione to the subject, 2) to the manifold of the
object! in appearance, and 3) to all things in general. '9
Now all pure concepts have to do generally with the synthetic unity
of representations, but concepts of pure reason (transcendental ideas)
have to do with the unconditioned synthetic unity of all conditions in
general. Consequently, all transcendental ideas will be brought under
a

b
C

d

Principien
Objecte
In the first edition: entweder erstlich als, which could be translated "either firstly as," or
"either only as."

Verhdltnis
Verhdltnis
f Object
e

405

B 391
A 3 34

Doctrine o f Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Book I

B 39 2
A335

three classes, of which the first contains the absolute (unconditioned)
unity of the thinking subject, the second the absolute unity of the se­
ries of conditions of appearance, the third the absolute unity of the
condition of all objects of thought in general.
The thinking subject is the object of psychology, the sum total of all
appearances (the world) is the object of cosmology, and the thing that
contains the supreme condition of the possibility of everything that can
be thought (the being of all beings) is the object of theology.zo Thus
pure reason provides the ideas for a transcendental doctrine of the soul
(psychologia rationalis),a a transcendental science of the world (cosmologia
rationalis),b and finally also a transcendental cognition of God (theologia
transcendentalis). c Even so much as the mere sketch of these sciences is
not prescribed by the understanding, even if it is combined with the
highest logical use of reason, i.e., with all the inferences through which
we can think of progressing from an object of the understanding (ap­
pearance) to all other objects, even to the most distant members of the
empirical synthesis; rather, such a project is exclusively a pure and gen­
uine product or problemd of pure reason.
What modi of pure rational concepts stand under these three titles of
transcendental ideas will be finally displayed in the following sections.
They run along the thread of the categories. For pure reason is never
related directly to objects, but instead to concepts of them given by the
understanding. Likewise, it can be made clear only in the complete ex­
ecution how reason, exclusively through the synthetic use of the same
function it employs in the categorical syllogism, must necessarily come
to the concept of the absolute unity of the thinking subject, how
the logical procedure in hypothetical syllogisms e [leads to] the ideas of
the absolutely unconditioned in a series of given conditions, and finally
how the mere form of the disjunctive syllogism necessarily carries with
it the highest rational concept of a being of all beings; a thought which
at first glance appears extremely paradoxical.
No objective deduction of these transcendental ideas is really pos­
sible, such as we could provide for the categories. For just because they
are ideas, they have in fact no relation to any object! that could be given
congruent to them. But we can undertake a subjective introduction t�
a rational psychology
b rational cosmology
C

d

transcendental theology

Problem

, The text here seems garbled. It reads "in hypothetischen Ideen die vom Schlechthinunbedin­
gten . . . . " (in the first edition: " . . . die Idee vom . . . . ". We follow Erdmann in inserting
the word Vernunftschlussen.

f Object
g

Anleitung; Erdmann reads Ableitung (derivation of).
406

Section III. System of transcendental ideas

them from the nature of our reason, and this is to be accomplished in
the present section.
We easily see that pure reason has no other aim than the absolute to­
tality of synthesis on the side of conditions (whether they are condi­
tions of inherence, dependence, or concurrence), and that reason has
nothing to do with absolute completeness from the side of the condi­
tioned. For it needs only the former series in order to presuppose the
whole series of conditions and thereby give it to the understanding a
priori. But once a complete (and unconditioned) given condition exists,
then a concept of reason is no longer needed in respect of the progress
of the series; for the understanding by itself makes every step downwards from the condition to the conditioned. In this way, the transcendental ideas serve only for ascending in the series of conditions to
the unconditioned, i.e., to the principles.a But regarding descent to the
conditioned, there is a very extensive logical use that our reason makes
of the laws of the understanding, but no transcendental use and if we
make ourselves an idea of absolute totality of such a synthesis (of a pro­
gressive one), e.g., an idea of the whole series of all future alterations
in the world, then this is just a thing of thought (an ens rationis),b which
is thought up only arbitrarily, and not presupposed necessarily by reason. For the possibility of something conditioned presupposes the totality of its conditions, but not the totality of its consequences.
Consequently such a concept is not a transcendental idea, which is what
exclusively concerns us here.
Finally we also come to be aware that a certain connection and unity
showing itself among the transcendental ideas tl1emselves and that pure
reason by means of it brings all its cognitions into a system. To progress
from the cognition of oneself (of the soul) to cognition of the world
and, by means of this, to the original being, is so natural that this pro­
gression appears similar to the logical advance of reason from premises
to a conclusion.* Whether there is actually here an affinity of the same
* c<Metaphysics has as the proper end of its investigation only three ideas: God,
freedom, and immortality; so that the second concept, combined with the
first, should lead to the third as a necessary conclusion. Everything else with
which this science is concerned serves merely as a means of attaining these
ideas and their reality. It does not need them for the sake of natural science, but
instead to get beyond nature. The insight into these ideas would make theology, morals, and, through their combination, religion, thus the highest ends
of our existence, dependent solely on the faculty of speculative reason and on
nothing else. In a systematic representation of those ideas, the suggested order,
a Principien

b
C

being of reason
This note was added in the second edition.

407

B 394

A 337

B 3 95
B 3 95

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Book I

kind that grounds the logical and transcendental procedures is one of
the questions we must expect to answer in the course of our investiga­
tion. We have provisionally reached our end already, since we have re­
moved from this ambiguous position the transcendental concepts of
reason, which are usually mixed with other concepts in the theories of
philosophers who do not distinguish them from concepts of the under­
standing, and thereby provided their determinate number, since there
can never be any more of them, and we have been able to represent
them in a systematic connection, through which a special field of pure
reason has been marked out and its limits have been set.
which is a synthetic one, would be the most appropriate; but in working
through them, which must necessarily be done first, the analytic order, which
inverts this one, is more suitable to the end of completing our great project,
proceeding from what experience makes immediately available to us from the
doctrine of the soul, to the doctrine of the world and from there all the way
to the cognition of God.>

408

The Transcendental Dialectic
Book Two
The dialectical inferences ofpure reason

It can be said that the object of a merely transcendental idea is some­
thing of which we have no concept, even though this idea is generated
in an entirely necessary way by reason according to its original laws. For
in fact no concept of the understanding is possible for an object that is
to be adequate to the demand of reason, i.e., an object such as can be
shown and made intuitive in a possible experience. But we would ex­
press ourselves better and with less danger of misunderstanding if we
said that we can have no acquaintance with an objecta that corresponds
to an idea, even though we can have a problematic concept of it.
Now at least the transcendental (subjective) reality of pure concepts
of reason rests on the fact that we are brought to such ideas by a neces­
sary syllogism. Thus there will be syllogisms containing no empirical
premises, by means of which we can infer from something with which
we are acquainted to something of which we have no concept, and yet
to which we nevertheless, by an unavoidable illusion, give objective re­
ality. In respect of their result, such inferences are thus to be called so­
phistical rather than rational inferences; b even though they might lay
claim to the latter term on account of what occasions them, because
they are not thought up, nor do they arise contingently, but have sprung
from the nature of reason. They are sophistriesc not of human beings
but of pure reason itself, and even the wisest of all human beings can­
not get free of them; perhaps after much effort he may guard himself
from error, but he can never be wholly rid of the illusion, which cease­
lessly teases and mocks him.
There are, therefore, only three species of these dialectical syllo­
gisms, as many as there are ideas in which their conclusions result. In
the first class of syllogisms, from the transcendental concept of a sub­
ject that contains nothing manifold I infer the absolute unity of this
a Object
b

vernunftelnde, als Vernunftschlusse, which could also be translated "rationalizing rather
than rational inferences" or "sophistical inferences rather than syllogisms."

, Sophistikationen

409

A 3 39
B 397

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Book II

subject itself, even though in this way I have no concept at all of it. This
dialectical inference I will call a transcendental paralogism. The sec­
ond class of sophistical inference is applied in general to the transcen­
dental concept of absolute totality in the series of conditions for a given
appearance; and from the fact that I always have a self-contradictory
concept of the unconditioned synthetic unity in the series on one side,
I infer the correctness of the opposite unity, even though I also have no
concept of it. I will call the condition of reason with regard to these di­
alectical inferences the antinomy of pure reason. Finally, in the third
kind of sophistical inference, from the totality of conditions for think­
ing objects in general insofar as they can be given to me I infer the ab­
solute synthetic unity of all conditions for the possibility of things in
general; i.e., from things with which I am not acquainted as to their
merely transcendental concept, I infer a being of all beings, with which
I am even less acquainted through its transcendental a concept, and of
whose unconditioned necessity I can make for myself no concept at all.
This dialectical syllogism I will call the ideal of pure reason.
a Reading, with the fourth edition, transcendentalen for transcendenten.

410

Second Book of the Transcendental Dialectic
First Chapter
The paralogisms ofpure reasona

A logical paralogism consists in the falsity of a syllogism due to its form,
whatever its content may otherwise be. A transcendental paralogism,
however, has a transcendental ground for inferring falsely due to its
form.2I Thus a fallacy of this kind will have its ground in the nature of
human reason, and will bring with it an unavoidable, although not in­
soluble, illusion.
Now we come to a concept that was not catalogued above in the gen­
eral list of transcendental concepts, and nevertheless must be assigned
to it, yet without altering that table in the least and declaring it defec­
tive. This is the concept - or rather, if one prefers, the judgment - I
think. But one will easily see that this concept is the vehicle of all con­
cepts whatever, and hence also of transcendental concepts, and is thus
always comprehended among them, and hence is likewise transcenden­
tal, but that it can have no special title, because it serves only to introa Note added to Kant's copy of the first edition: "The question is whether, if 1 cognize a

transcendental object [Object] (I) througb pure categories, without otherwise having any
properties of it, 1 thereby actually cognize it or have only a negative concept of it.
Further, whether these categories could be cognized through perception regarding this
object, or whether they lie a priori in thinking in general. Third, whether through these
cognition would be extended." (E CLN, p. 47; 2 3 :38; cf. A 59z1B 620)
"A paralogism is a syllogism that is false in forma. Now it also belongs to the form
that the major is a universal proposition, and also that the premises are not tautologi­
cal. But here the major is a singular judgment and contains a tautology in itself.
Consequently, the syllogism has only two termini." (E CLV; p. 47, 2 3 : 3 8)
"The paralogisms begin from existence as modality: 'I am'; proceed to relation
[Relation] in order to determine existence not in time, which would be empirical.
Therefore: 1 am as substance, simple as to quality, identical in my duration. The time
of my duration is thus the time of my own self-determination." (E CLVI, p. 47;
2 Fl 8-9; cf. B 4 I 8)
"The proposition 'a exists,' is a simple substance, always the same, must in other
cases be cognized through marks: 1 . of perception, at least in time; 2. through proper­
ties that are persisting; 3· through demonstration of their [parts] in space and time; 4.
through perception. Here I, as it were, [have sensation of] the categories or know them
a priori." (E CLVII, p. 48; 2 3 ' 39)

41 1

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. Bk. II. Ch. I

ducea all thinking as belonging to consciousness. Meanwhile, however
pure from the empirical (from impressions of sense) it may be, it still
serves to distinguish two kinds of objects through the nature of our
power of representation. I, as thinking, am an object of inner sense, and
am called "soul." That which is an object of outer sense is called "body."
Accordingly, the expression "I," as a thinking being, already signifies
the object of a psychology that could be called the rational doctrine of
the soul, if I do not seek to know anything about the soul beyond what,
independently of all experience (which always determines me more
closely and in concreto), can be inferred from this concept I insofar as it
occurs in all thinking.
Now the rational doctrine of the SOUP2 is really an undertaking of
this kind; for if the least bit of anything empirical in my thinking, any
particular perception of my inner state, were mixed among the
grounds of cognition of this science, then it would no longer be a ra­
tional but rather an empirical doctrine of the soul. We have thus al­
ready before us a putative science, which is built on the single
proposition I think; and we can, in accordance with the nature of a
transcendental philosophy, quite appropriately investigate its ground
or groundlessness. One should not be brought up short by the fact that
I have an inner experience of this proposition, which expresses the per­
ception of oneself, and hence that the rational doctrine of the soul that
is built on it is never pure but is grounded in part on an empirical prin­
ciple.b For this inner perception is nothing beyond the mere apper­
ception I think, which even makes all transcendental concepts possible,
which say "I think substance, cause, etc."c For inner experience in gen­
eral and its possibility, or perception in general and its relationd to an­
other perception, without any particular distinction or empirical
determination being given in it, cannot be regarded as empirical cog­
nition, but must be regarded as cognition of the empirical in general,
and belongs to the investigation of the possibility of every experience,
which is of course transcendental. The least object e of perception (e.g.,
pleasure or displeasure), which might be added to the general repreauffiihren
b Principium
a

C

d

Added in Kant's copy of the first edition: "The propositions of rational psychology all are
grounded on the 'I am.' For if even time should be added to them, then it would be an ob­
ject of experience that they were treating of, and everything that would be produced
through this would not have to reach any further than to this life." (E CLVIII, p. 48; 2 3 : 3 9)
" [The] I, object and subject of thoughts, is identical, exists, [substance, reality], but
as unity in itself . . . of the subject in all its consciousness - these are purely identical
propositions." ( E CLIX, p. 48; 2 3 : 39)

Verhdltnis
, Object
412

Chapter I. On the paralogisms of pure reason

sentation of self-consciousness, would at once transform rational psy­
chology into an empirical psychology.
I thinka is thus the sole text of rational psychology, from which it is
to develop its entire wisdom. One easily sees that this thought, if it is to
be related to an object (myself), can contain nothing other than its tran­
scendental predicates; because the least empirical predicate would cor­
rupt the rational purity and independence of the science from all
experience.
Here, however, we have merely to follow the guide of the categories;
only since here first a thing, I as a thinking being, is given, we will not,
to be sure, alter the above order of the categories to one another as represented in their table, but we will begin here with the category of substance, and thus go backwards through the series. The topics of the
rational doctrine of the soul, from which everything else that it may
contain has to be derived, are therefore the following:
I.

The soul is
substance b
2.

3·

I n the different times
in which it exists,
numerically identical
i.e., unity (not plurality)

In its quality,
simple

4·

In relation'
to possible objects in space*

* The reader, who will not so easily guess from these expressions in their tran­
scendental abstraction, their psychological sense and why the ultimate at­
tribute of the soul belongs to the category of existence, will find this ade­
quately explained and justified in what follows. Besides, on account of the
Latin expressions that, contrary to good taste in writing, have inundated us
here in place of equivalent German ones, in this section as well as in the whole
work, I must adduce the following by way of apology: I would rather lose
something by way of elegance of language than make scholastic usage even
more difficult through the least unintelligibility.
a Note in Kant's copy of the first edition: " [This] is a proposition a priori, is a mere cate­

b

gory of the subject, intellectual representation without anywhere or at any time, hence
not empirical. Whether the category of reality lies in it, whether objective inferences
are to be drawn from it." (E CLX, p. 48; 2 3:39)
Kant's copy of the critique contains the revision: "The soul exists as substance" (E
CLXI, p. 49).

, Verhdltnis
413

A 344/ B 402

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. Bk. II

A 3 45 / B 40 3

B 404
A 346

B 405

From these elements, at least through composition, spring all the
concepts of the pure doctrine of the soul, without any other principlea
being cognized in the least. This substance, merely as an object of inner
sense, gives us the concept of immateriality; as simple substance, it
gives us that of incorruptibility; its identity, as an intellectual sub­
stance, gives us personality; all these points together give us spiritual­
ity; the relationb to objects in space gives us the interactionc with
bodies; thus it represents the thinking substance as the principled of life
in matter, i.e., as a soul (anima) and as the ground of animality, and
this - limited by spirituality - is immortality.
Now to these concepts four paralogisms of a transcendental doctrine
of the soul are related, which are falsely held to be a science of pure rea­
son about the nature of our thinking being. At the ground of this doc­
trine we can place nothing but the simple and in content for itself
wholly empty representation I, of which one cannot even say that it is
a concept, but a mere consciousness that accompanies every concept.
Through this I, or He, or It (the thing), which thinks, nothing further
is represented than a transcendental subject of thoughts = x, e which is
recognized only through the thoughts that are its predicates, and about
which, in abstraction, we can never have even the least concept; because
of which we therefore turn in a constant circle, since we must always al­
ready avail ourselves of the representation of it at all times in order to
judge anything about it; we cannot separate ourselves from this incon­
venience, because the consciousness in itself is not even a representa­
tion distinguishing a particular object! but rather a form of represen­
tation in general, insofar as it is to be called a cognition; for of itg alone
can I say that through it I think anything.
But right at the start it must seem strange that the condition under
which I think in general, and which is therefore merely a propertyh of
my subject, is at the same time to be valid for everything that thinks, and
that on an empirical-seeming proposition we can presume to ground an
apodictic and universal judgment, namely, that everything that thinks is
constituted as the claim of self-consciousness asserts of me. But the cause
of this lies in the fact that we must necessarily ascribe to things a priori
Principium
Verhiiltnis
, das Commercium
d Principium
a

b

, In the first and third editions, this letter is capitalized.

f Object
g sie, which probably refers to "cognition," but would also agree grammatically with "rep­
h

resentation."

Beschaffenheit; elsewhere in the passage, "property" translates Eigenschaft.

414

Chapter I. On the paralogisms of pure reason <A>

all the properties that constitute the conditions under which alone we
think them. Now 1 cannot have the least representation of a thinking
being through an external experience, but only through self-consciousness. Thus such objects are nothing further than the transference of this
consciousness of mine to other things, which can be represented as
thinking beings only in this way. The proposition "I think" is, however,
taken here only problematically; not insofar as it may contain a perception of an existence (the Cartesian cogito, ergo sum) ,a but only in its mere
possibility, in order to see which properties might flow from so simple a
proposition as this for its subject (whether or not such a thing might now
exist).
If more than the cogitob were the ground of our pure rational cognition of thinking beings in general; if we also made use of observations
about the play of our thoughts and the natural laws of the thinking self
created from them: then an empirical psychology would arise, which
would be a species of the physiology of inner sense, which would perhaps explain the appearances of inner sense, but could never serve to reveal such properties as do not belong to possible experience at all (as
properties of the simple), nor could it serve to teach apodictically
about thinking beings in general something touching on their nature;
thus it would be no rational psychology.
Now since the proposition I think (taken problematically) contains
the form of every judgment of understanding whatever and accompanies all categories as their vehicle, it is clear that the conclusions from
this can contain a merely transcendental use of the understanding,
which excludes every admixture of experience; and ofc whose progress,
after what we have shown above, we can at the start form no advantageous concept. Thus we will follow it through all the predications of the
pure doctrine of the soul with a critical eye.d
First paralogism
of substantiality.
That the representation of which is the absolute subject of our judg­
ments, and hence cannot be used as the determination of another thing,
is substance.
I, as a thinking being, am the absolute subject of all my possible
a I think, therefore I am.
b

I think.
, In the first edition: "in."
d From this point on, Kant completely rewrote the remainder of the chapter for the sec­
ond edition. The first-edition version follows immediately; the remainder of the chap­
ter as rewritten for the second edition follows below.

415

A 347

B 406
A 348

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. Bk. II <A>

judgments, and this representation of Myselfa cannot be used as the
predicate of any other thing.
Thus I, as thinking being (soul), am substance.23
Criticism of the first paralogism
of pure psychology.

A 349

We have shown in the analytical part of the Transcendental Logic that
pure categories (and among them also the category of substance) have
in themselves no objective significance at all unless an intuition is subsumed underb them, to the manifold of which they can be applied as
functions of synthetic unity. Without that they are merely functions of
a judgment without content. Of any thing in general I can say that it is
a substance, insofar as I distinguish it from mere predicates and deter­
minations of things. Now in all our thinking the I is the subject, in
which thoughts inhere only as determinations, and this I cannot be used
as the determination of another thing. Thus everyone must necessarily
regard Himself as a substance, but regard his thinking only as accidents
of his existence and determinations of his state.
But now what sort of use am I to make of this concept of a sub­
stance?' That I, as a thinking being, endured for myself, that naturally
I neither arise nor perish this I can by no means infer, and yet it is
for that alone that the concept of the substantiality of my thinking sub­
ject can be useful to me; without that I could very well dispense with it
altogether.
So much is lacking for us to be able to infer these properties solely
from the pure category of substance, that we must rather ground the
persistence of a given object on experience if we would apply to that ob­
ject the empirically usable concept of a substance. But now we have not
grounded the present proposition on any experience, but have merely
inferred [it] from the concept of the relation that all thought has to the
I as the common subject in which it inheres. Nor would we be able to
establish such a persistence through any secure observation, even if we
supposed one. For the I is, to be sure, in all thoughts; but not the least
intuition is bound up with this representation, which would distinguish
it from other objects of intuition. Therefore one can, to be sure, per­
ceive that this representation continually recurs with every thought, but
-

A

3 50

a

Mir selbst, the capitalization is nonstandard, suggesting that "Mir" is a noun rather than
a pronoun; changed to mir selbst in fourth edition. Below capitalizations of "Me,"

"Myself," "Self," "Himself," etc., will be used to translate similar nonstandard capital­
izations in Kant's German.
b untergelegt; fourth edition: unterlegt, "an intuition underlies them".
, Kant ends this sentence with a period.

d fortdaure
416

Chapter I. On the paralogisms of pure reason <A>

not that it is a standing and abiding intuition, in which thoughts (as
variable) would change.
From this it follows that the first syllogism of transcendental psychology imposes on us an only allegedly new insight when it passes off the
constant logical subject of thinking as the cognition of a real subject of
inherence, with which we do not and cannot have the least acquaintance,
because consciousness is the one single thing that makes all representations into thoughts, and in which, therefore, as in the transcendental
subject, our perceptions must be encountered; and apart from this logical significance of the I, we have no acquaintance with the subject in itself that grOlmds this I as a substratum, just as it grounds all thoughts.
Meanwhile, one can quite well allow the proposition The soul is substance to be valid, if only one admits that this concept of ours leads no
further, that it cannot teach us any of the usual conclusions of the rationalistic doctrine of the soul, such as, e.g., the everlasting duration of the
soul through all alterations, even the human being's death, thus that it
signifies a substance only in the idea but not in reality.

A35I

Second paralogism
of simplicity.
That thing whose action can never be regarded as the concurrence of
many acting things, is simple.
Now the soul, or the thinking I, is such a thing.
Thus etc.24
Criticism of the second paralogism
of transcendental psychology.
This is the Achilles of all the dialectical inferences of the pure doctrine
of the soul, nothing like a mere sophistical play that a dogmatist devised
in order to give his assertions a fleeting plausibility,a but an inference
that seemsb to withstand even the sharpest testing and the greatest scru­
ples of inquiry. Here it is.
Every composite substance is an aggregate of many, and the action
of a composite, or of that which inheres in it as such a composite, is an
aggregate of many actions or accidents, which is distributed among the
multitudeC of substances. Now of course an effect that arises from the
concurrence of many acting substances is possible if this effect is merely
external (as, e.g., the movement of a body is the united movement of all
a Schein
b scheint
, Menge
417

A352

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. Bk. II <A>

A 353

A 3 54

A352

its parts). Yet with thoughts, as accidents belonging inwardly to a think­
ing being, it is otherwise. For suppose that the composite were think­
ing; then every part of it would be a part of the thought, but the parts
would first contain the whole thought only when taken together. Now
this would be contradictory. For because the representations that are di­
v:ided among different beings (e.g., the individual words of a verse)
never constitute a whole thought (a verse), the thought can never inhere
in a composite as such.25 Thus it is possible only in one substance,
which is not an aggregate of many, and hence it is absolutely simple. *
The so-called nervus probandi a of this argument lies in the proposition
that many representations have to be contained in the absolute unity of
the thinking subject in order to constitute one thought. But no one can
prove this proposition from concepts. For how could he set about to
accomplish this? The proposition "A thought can be only the effect of
the absolute unity of a thinking being" cannot be treated as analytic.
For the unity of a thought consisting of many representations is collec­
tive, and, as far as mere concepts are concerned, it can be related to the
collective unity of the substances cooperating in it (as the movement of
a body is the composite movement of all its parts) just as easily as to the
absolute unity of the subject. Thus there can be no insight into the ne­
cessity of presupposing a simple substance for a composite thought ac­
cording to the rule of identity. But that this same proposition should be
cognized synthetically and fully a priori from sheer concepts - that an­
swer no one will trust himself to give when he has insight into the
ground of the possibility of synthetic propositions a priori as we have es­
tablished it above.
But now it is also impossible to derive this necessary unity of the sub­
ject, as a condition of the possibility of every thought, from experience.
For experience gives us cognition of no necessity, to say nothing of the
fact that the concept of absolute unity is far above its sphere. Where,
then, will we get this proposition, on which the whole psychological
syllogism rests?
It is obvious that if one wants to represent a thinking being, one must
put oneself in its place, and thus substitute one's own subject for the ob­
jectb one wants to consider (which is not the case in any other species
of investigation); and it is also obvious that we demand absolute unity
for the subject of a thought only because otherwise it could not be said:
* It i s very easy to give this proof the usual dress of scholastic precision. Yet it
is sufficient for my purpose to lay before our eyes the mere ground of proof,
though in a popular manner.
•

b

the nub (literally, "nerve") of what is to be proved

Object
418

Chapter I. On the paralogisms of pure reason <A>

"I think" (the manifold in a representation). For although the whole of
the thought could be divided and distributed among many subjects, the
subjective I cannot be divided or distributed, and this I we presuppose
in all thinking.
Here, therefore, as in the previous paralogism, the formal proposi­
tion of apperception, I think, remains the entire ground on which ra­
tional psychology ventures to extend its cognitions; this proposition is
of course obviously not an experience, but rather the form of appercep­
tion, on which every experience depends and which precedes it, yet it
must nevertheless always be regarded only in regarda to a possible cog­
nition in general, as its merely subjective condition, which we un­
justly make into a condition of the possibility of the cognition of
objects, namely into a concept of a thinking being in general, because
we are unable to represent this being without positing ourselves along
witll the formula of our consciousness, in the place of every other in­
telligent being.
But the simplicity of my self (as soul) is not really inferred from the
proposition "I think," but rather the former lies already in every thought
itself. The proposition I am simple must be regarded as an immediate
expression of apperception, just as the supposed Cartesian inference cogito, ergo sumb is in fact tautological, since the cogito (sum cogitans/ immediately asserts the reality. But I am simple signifies no more than that
this representation I encompasses not the least manifoldness within itself, and that it is an absolute (though merely logical) unity.
Thus the so famous psychological proof is grounded merely on the
indivisible unity of a representation, which governs the verb only in re­
gard to a person. But it is obvious that the subject of inherence is des­
ignated only transcendentally through the I that is appended to
thoughts, without noting the least property of it, or cognizing or know­
ing anything at all about it. It signifies only a Something in general (a
transcendental subject), the representation of which must of course be
simple, just because one determines nothing at all about it; for certainly
nothing can be represented as more simple than that which is repre­
sented through the concept of a mere Something. But the simplicity of
the representation of a subject is not therefore a cognition of the sim­
plicity of the subject itself, since its properties are entirely abstracted
from if it is designated merely through the expression "I," wholly empty
of content (which I can apply to every thinking subject).
This much is certain: through the I, I always think" an absolute but
a nur in Ansehung . . . angesehen
b I think, therefore I am.
e

I think (I am thinking).

d gedenke

419

A3SS

A 3 S6

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. Bk. II <A>

A357

A358

logical unity of the subject (simplicity), but I do not cognize the real
simplicity of my subject. Just as the proposition "I am substance" signi­
fies nothing but the pure category, of which I can make no (empirical)
use in concreto, so is it permitted to me to say, "I am a simple substance,"
i.e., a substance the representation of which never contains a synthesis
of the manifold; but this concept, or even this proposition, teaches us
not the least bit in regard to myself as an object of experience, because
the concept of substance is used only as a function of synthesis, without
an intuition being subsumed under it, hence without an object; a and it
is valid only of the condition of our cognition, but not of any particular
object that is to be specified. We will perform an experiment concern­
ing the supposed usefulness of this proposition.
Everyone must admit that the assertion of the simple nature of the
soul is of unique value only insofar as through it I distinguish this sub­
ject from all matter, and consequently except it from the perishability to
which matter is always subjected.26 It is really only to this use that the
above proposition is applied, hence it is often expressed thus: the soul is
not corporeal. Now if I can show that even if one concedes all objective
validity to this cardinal proposition of the rational doctrine of the soul
(that everything which thinks is a simple substance) in its pure signifi­
cance as a merely rational judgment (from pure categories), neverthe­
less not the least use of this proposition can be made in respect of its
dissimilarity to or affinity with matter, then this would be the same as if
I had consigned this supposed psychological insight to the field of mere
ideas, which lack the reality of an objective use.
In the transcendental aesthetic we have undeniably proved that bod­
ies are mere appearances of our outer sense, and not things in them­
selves. In accord with this, we can rightfully say that our thinking
subject is not corporeal, meaning that since it is represented as an ob­
ject of our inner sense, insofar as it thinks it could not be an object of
outer sense, i.e., it could not be an appearance in space. Now this is to
say as much as that thinking beings, as such, can never come before us
among outer appearances, or: we cannot intuit their thoughts, their
consciousness, their desires, etc. externally; for all this belongs before
inner sense. In fact this argument seems to be the natural and popular
one, by which even the commonest understanding seems always to have
been pleased and thereby to have begun very early to consider souls as
beings wholly distinct from their bodies.
But now although extension, impenetrability, composition and mo­
tion - in short, everything our outer senses can transmit to us - areb not
thoughts, feelings, inclinations or decisions, and cannot contain them,
a

b

Object
sein, which makes no grammatical sense. Following Erdmann, we read sind.
420

Chapter I. On the paralogisms of pure reason <A>

as these are never objects of outer intuition, yet that same Something
that grounds outer appearances and affects our sense so that it receives
the representations of space, matter, shape, etc. - this Something, considered as noumenon (or better, as transcendental object) could also at
the same time be the subject of thoughts, even though we receive no intuition of representations, volitions, etc. in the way we are affected
through outer sense, but rather receive merely intuitions of space and
its determinations. But this Something is not extended, not impenetrable, not composite, because these predicates pertain only to sensibility
and its intuition, insofar as we are affected by such objects a (otherwise
unknown to us). These expressions, however, do not give us cognition
of what kind of object it is, but only that, since it is considered in itself
without relation to outer sense, it is such that these predicates of outer
appearances cannot be applied to it. Yet the predicates of inner sense,
representation and thought, do not contradict it. Accordingly, even
through the conceded simplicity of its nature the human soul is not at
all sufficiently distinguished from matter in regard to its substratum, if
one considers matter (as one should) merely as appearance.
If matter were a thing in itself, then as a composite being it would be
completely distinguished from the soul as a simple being. But it is
merely an outer appearance, whose substratum is not cognized through
any specifiable predicates; hence I can well assume about this substra­
tum that in itself it is simple, even though in the way it affects our outer
senses it produces in us the intuition of something extended and hence
composite; and thus I can also assume that in the substance in itself, to
which extension pertains in respect of our outer sense, thoughts may
also be present, which may be represented with consciousness through
their own inner sense. In such a way the very same thing that is called
a body in one relation would at the same time be a thinking being in an­
other, whose thoughts, of course, we could not intuit, but only their
signs in appearance. Thereby the expression that only souls (as a par­
ticular species of substances) think would be dropped; and instead it
would be said, as usual, that human beings think, i.e., that the same
being that as outer appearance is extended is inwardly (in itself) a subject, which is not composite, but is simple and thinks.
But without allowing such hypotheses, one can remark generally that
if by a "soul" I understand a thinking being in itself, then it is already in
itself an unsuitable question to ask whether or not it is of the same
species as matter (which is not a thing in itself at all, but only a species
of representations in us); for it is already self-evident that a thing in it­
self is of another nature than the determinations that merely constitute
its state.
a Objecte
42 1

A 359

A 3 60

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. Bk. II <A>

A361

But if we compare the thinking I not with matter but with the intel­
ligible that grounds the outer appearance we call matter, than because
we know nothing at all about the latter, we cannot say that the soul is
inwardly distinguished from it in any way at all.
Accordingly, the simplicity of consciousness a is thus no acquaintance
with the simple nature of our subject, insofar as this subject is supposed
thereby to be distinguished from matter as a composite being.
If this concept still does not serve to determine itb what is proper and
distinctive to its nature even in the one case where it is useful, namely
in the comparison of my self with objects of outer experience, one may
still pretend to know that the thinking I , the soul (a name for the tran­
scendental object of inner sense), is simple; nevertheless on this account
this expression has no use at all that reaches to real objects, and hence
it cannot extend our cognition in the least.
Accordingly, the whole of rational psychology collapses along with its
chief supports, and here as elsewhere we can have little hope of broad­
ening our insight through mere concepts without any relation to possi­
ble experience (still less through the mere subjective form of all our
concepts, our consciousness); above all, since even the fundamental
concept of a simple nature is of such a kind as cannot be encountered
anywhere in experience, and hence there is thus no path at all by which
to reach it as an objectively valid concept.
Third paralogism
of personality.
What is conscious of the numerical identity of its Selfc in different
times, is to that extent a person.
Now the soul is etc.
Thus it is a person.27
Criticism of the third paralogism
of transcendental psychology.

A 362

If I want to cognize through experience the numerical identity of an
external object, then I will attend to what is persisting in its appearance,
to which, as subject, everything else relates as a determination, and I
will notice the identity of the former in the time in which the latter
changes. But now I am an object of inner sense and all time is merely
the form of inner sense. Consequently, I relate each and every one of
das einfache Bewusstsein
b ihn a masculine accusative pronoun whose antecedent and grammatical function in

a

-

the sentence both remain unclear; it cannot grammatically refer to either "subject" or
"consciousness" in the previous sentence, since both those nouns are neuter.
, In the fourth edition: "seiner selbst. "

422

Chapter L On the paralogisms of pure reason <A>

my successive determinations to the numerically identical Self in all
time, i.e., in the form of the inner intuition of my self. On this basis the
personality of the soul must be regarded not as inferred but rather as a
completely identical proposition of self-consciousness in time, and that
is also the cause of its being valid a priori. For it really says no more than
that in the whole time in which I am conscious of myself, I am con­
scious of this time as belonging to the unity of my Self, and it is all the
same whether I say that this whole time is in Me, as an individual unity,
or that I am to be found with numerical identity, in all of this time.
The identity of person is therefore inevitably to be encountered in
my own consciousness. But if I consider myself from the standpoint of
another (as an object of his outer intuition), then it is this external ob­
server who originally considers a me as in time; for in apperception
time is properly represented only in me. Thus from the I that accompanies - and indeed with complete identity - all representations at every
time in my consciousness, although he admits this I, he will still not
infer the objective persistence of my Self. For just as the time in which
the observer posits me is not the time that is encountered in my sensibility but that which is encountered in his own, so the identity that is
necessarily combined with my consciousness is not therefore combined
with his consciousness, i.e., with the outer intuition of my subject.
The identity of the consciousness of Myself in different times is there­
fore only a formal condition of my thoughts and their connection, but it
does not prove at all the numerical identity of my subject, in which - de­
spite the logical identity of the I - a change can go on that does not allow
it to keep its identity; and this even though all the while the identical­
sounding "I" is assigned to it, which in every other state, even in the re­
placement of the subject, still keeps in view the thought of the previous
subject, and thus could also pass it along to the following one.*
* An elastic ball that strikes another one in a straight line communicates to the
latter its whole motion, hence its whole state (if one looks only at their posi­
tions in space). Now assuming substances, on the analogy with such bodies, in
which representations, together with consciousness of them, flow from one to
another, a whole series of these substances may be thought, of which the first
would communicate its state, together with its consciousness, to the second,
which would communicate its own state, together with that of the previous
substance, to a third substance, and this in turn would share the states of all
previous ones, together with their consciousness and its own. The last substance would thus be conscious of all the states of all the previously altered
substances as its own states, because these states would have been carried over
to it, together with the consciousness of them; and in spite of this it would not
have been the very same person in all these states.28
a allererst .

.

.

erwagt
42 3

A 363

A 364

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. Bk. II <A>

A 3 64

A 36S

A 366

Even if the saying of some ancient schools, that everything is transitory and nothing in the world is persisting and abiding/9 cannot hold
as soon as one assumes substances, it is still not refuted through the
unity of self-consciousness. For we cannot judge even from our own
consciousness whether as soul we are persisting or not, because we as­
cribe to our identical Self only that of which we are conscious; and so
we must necessarily judge that we are the very same in the whole of the
time of which we are conscious. But from the standpoint of someone
else we cannot declare this to be valid because, since in the soul we en­
counter no persisting appearance other than the representation "I,"
which accompanies and connects all of them, we can never make out
whether this I (a mere thought) does not flow as well as all the other
thoughts that are linked to one another through it.
It is remarkable, however, that personality, and its presupposition,
persistence, hence the substantiality of the soul, must be proved only
now for the first time. For if we could presuppose these, then what
would of course follow is not the continuous duration of consciousness,
but rather the possibility of a continuing consciousness in an abiding
subject, which is already sufficient for personality, since that does not
cease at once just because its effect is perhaps interrupted for a time.
This persistence, however, is not given to us through anything prior to
the numerical identity of our Self, which we conclude from identical
apperception, but rather is concluded for the first time from it (and, if
things went rightly, we would have to conclude from this first of all the
concept of substance, which is usable only empirically). Now since this
identity of person in no way follows from the identity of the I in the
consciousness of all the time in which I cognize myself, even the sub­
stantiality of the soul cannot be grounded on it above.
Meanwhile, the concept of personality, just like the concepts of sub­
stance and of the simple, can remain (insofar as it is merely transcen­
dental, i.e., a unity of the subject which is otherwise unknown to us, but
in whose determinations there is a thoroughgoing connection of apper­
ception), and to this extent this concept is also necessary and sufficient
for practical use; but we can never boast of it as an extension of our self­
knowledgea through pure reason, which dazzles us with the uninter­
rupted continuous duration of the subject drawn from the mere concept
of the identical self, since this concept merely revolves in a circle
around itself and brings us no farther in regard to even one single ques­
tion about synthetic cognition. VVhat matter is, as a thing in itself (tran­
scendental object) ,b is of course entirely unknown to us; nevertheless its
persistence will be observed as appearance as long as it is represented to
a Selbsterkenntnis
b Object
424

Chapter 1. On the paralogisms of pure reason <A>

us as something external. But since I want to observe the mere I
through the change in all my representations, I have once again no cor­
relate other than Myself for my comparisons with the general condi­
tions of my consciousness; I can therefore give nothing but tautological
answers to all questions, because I substitute my concept and its unity
for the properties pertaining to my self as an object,a and thus merely
presuppose what one demanded to know.
The fourth paralogism
of the ideality
(of outer relation).b
That whose existence can be inferred only as a cause of given percep­
tions has only a doubtful existence:
Now all outer appearances are of this kind: their existence cannot be
immediately perceived, but can be inferred only as the cause of given
perceptions:
Thus the existence of all objects of outer sense is doubtful. This un­
certainty I call the ideality of outer appearances, and the doctrine of this
ideality is called idealism, in comparison with which the assertion of a
possible certainty of objects of outer sense is called dualism.

A 367

Criticism of the fourth paralogism
of transcendental psychology.
First we will subject the premises to examination. We can rightly assert
that only what is in ourselves can be immediately perceived, and that my
own existence alone could be the object of a mere perception. Thus the
existence of a real object outside me (if this last word is taken in an in­
tellectual signification) is never given directly in perception, but can
only be added in thought to what is a modification of inner sense as its
external cause, and hence can only be inferred. Therefore Descartes also
rightly limited all perception in the narrowest sense to the proposition
"I (as a thinking being) am."30 Thus it is clear that since the external is
not in me, I cannot encounter it in my apperception, hence not in any
perception, which is properly only a determination of apperception.
Thus I cannot really perceive external things, but only infer their ex­
istence from my inner perception, insofar as I regard this as the effect
of which something external is the proximate cause. But now the infer­
ence from a given effect to its determinate cause is always uncertain,
since the effect can have arisen from more than one cause. Accordingly,
a Object
b Verba/tnisses
42 5

A 368

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. Bk. II <k-

A 3 69

A 370

in the relation of perception to its cause, it always remains doubtful
whether this cause is internal or external, thus whether all so-called
outer perceptions are not a mere play of our inner sense, or whether
they are related to actual external objects as their cause. At least the ex­
istence of the latter is only inferred, and runs the risk of all inferences;
by contrast, the object of inner sense (I myself with all my representa­
tions) is immediately perceived, and its existence suffers no doubt at all.
Ey an idealist, therefore, one must understand not someone who de­
nies the existence of external objects of sense, but rather someone who
only does not admit that it is cognized through immediate perception
and infers from this that we can never be fully certain of their reality
from any possible experience.
Now before I display our paralogism in its deceptive illusion, I must
first remark that one would necessarily have to distinguish a twofold
idealism. I understand by the transcendental idealism of all appear­
ances the doctrine a that they are all together to be regarded as mere
representations and not as things in themselves, and accordingly that
space and time are only sensible forms of our intuition, but not deter­
minations given for themselves or conditions of objectsb as things in
themselves. To this idealism is opposed transcendental realism, which
regards space and time as something given in themselves (independent
of our sensibility). The transcendental realist therefore represents outer
appearances (if their reality is conceded) as things in themselves, which
would exist independently of us and our sensibility and thus would also
be outside us according to pure concepts of the understanding. It is re­
ally this transcendental realist who afterwards plays the empirical ideal­
ist; and after he has falsely presupposed about objects of the senses that
if they are to exist they must have their existence in themselves even
apart from sense, he finds that from this point of view all our represen­
tations of sense are insufficient to make their reality certain.
The transcendental idealist, on the contrary, can be an empirical realist, hence, as he is called, a dualist, i.e., he can concede the existence of
matter without going beyond mere self-consciousness and assuming
something more than the certainty of representations in me, hence the
cogito, ergo sum.C For because he allows this matter and even its inner pos­
sibility to be valid only for appearance - which, separated from our sen­
sibility, is nothing - matter for him is only a species of representations
(intuition), which are called external, not as if they related to objects that
are external in themselves but because they relate perceptions to space,
where all things are external to one another, but that space itself is in us.
a

b

Lehrbegriff
Objecte

, I think, therefore I

am.

426

Chapter I. On the paralogisms of pure reason <A>

Now we have already declared ourselves for this transcendental ide­
alism from the outset. Thus our doctrinea removes all reservations
about assuming the existence of matter based on the testimony of our
mere self-consciousness, and it declares this to be proved in the same
way as the existence of myself as a thinking being. For I am indeed con­
scious to myself of my representations; thus these exist, and I myself,
who has these representations. But now external objects (bodies) are
merely appearances, hence also nothing other than a species of my rep­
resentations, whose objects are something only through these repre­
sentations, but are nothing separated from them. Thus external things
exist as well as my self, and indeed both exist on the immediate testimony of my self-consciousness, only with this difference: the representation of my Self, as the thinking subject, is related merely to inner
sense, but the representations that designate extended beings are also
related to outer sense. I am no more necessitated to draw inferences in
respect of the reality of external objects than I am in regard to the reality of the objects of my inner sense (my thoughts), for in both cases they
are nothing but representations, the immediate perception (consciousness) of which is at the same time a sufficient proof of their reality.
Thus the transcendental idealist is an empirical realist, and grants to
matter, as appearance, a reality which need not be inferred, but is im­
mediately perceived. In contrast, transcendental realism necessarily falls
into embarrassment, and finds itself required to give way to empirical
idealism, because it regards the objects of outer sense as something different from the senses themselves and regards mere appearances as self­
sufficient beings that are found external to us; for here, even with our
best consciousness of our representation of these things, it is obviously
far from certain that if the representation exists, then the object corre­
sponding to it would also exist; but in our system, on the contrary, these
external things - namely, matter in all its forms and alterations - are
nothing but mere representations, i.e., representations in us, of whose
reality we are immediately conscious.
Now since as far as I know all those psychologists who cling to em­
pirical idealism are transcendental realists, they have obviously pro­
ceeded very consistently in conceding great importance to empirical
idealism as one of the problems from which human reason knows how
to extricate itself only with difficulty. For in fact if one regards outer ap­
pearances as representations that are effected in us by their objects, as
things in themselves found outside us, then it is hard to see how their ex­
istence could be cognized in any way other than by an inference from ef­
fect to cause, in which case it must always remain doubtful whether the
cause is in us or outside us. Now one can indeed admit that something
a Lehrbegriff
42 7

A371

A 3 72

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. Bk. II <A>

A 3 73

A 3 74

that may be outside us in the transcendental sense is the cause of our
outer intuitions, but this is not the object we understand by the repre­
sentation of matter and corporeal things; for these are merely appear­
ances, i.e., mere modes of representation, which are always found only
in us, and their reality, just as much as that of my own thoughts, rests on
immediate consciousness. The transcendental object is equally unknown
in regard to inner and to outer sense. But we are talking not about that,
but about the empirical object, which is called an external object if it is
in space and an inner object if it is represented simply in the relationa
of time; but space and time are both to be encountered only in us.
But since the expression outside us carries with it an unavoidable
ambiguity, since it sometimes signifies something that, as a thing in it­
self, exists distinct from us and sometimes merely something that be­
longs to outer appearance, then in order to escape uncertainty and use
this concept in the latter significance - in which it is taken in the proper
psychological question about the reality of our outer intuition - we will
distinguish empirically external objects from those that might be
called "external" in the transcendental sense, by directly calling them
"things that are to be encountered in space." 3I
Space and time are of course representations a priori, which dwell in
us as forms of our sensible intuition before any real object has even de­
termined our inner sense through sensation in such a way that we rep­
resent it under those sensible relations.b This material or real entity,
however, this Something that is to be intuited in space, necessarily pre­
supposes perception, and it cannot be invented by any power of imagi­
nation or produced independently of perception, which indicates the
reality of something in space. Thus sensation is that which designates a
reality in space and time, according to whether it is related to the one or
the other mode of sensible intuition. Once sensation is given (which, if
it is applied to an object in general without determining it, is called per­
ception), then through its manifold many an object can be invented C in
imagination that has no empirical place outside imagination in space or
time. Whether we take sensations, pleasure and pain, or even external
sensations, such as colors, warmth, etc., it is certain beyond doubt that
it is perception through which the material must first be given for think­
ing objects of sensible intuition. This perception thus represents (stay­
ing for now only with outer intuitions) something real in space. For
first, perception is the representation of a reality, just as space is the rep­
resentation of a mere possibility of coexistence.d Second, this reality is
Verhiiltnis
Verhiiltnisse
, gedichtet
d Beisammenseins
a

b

428

Chapter I. On the paralogisms of pure reason <A>

represented before outer sense, i.e., in space. Third, space is nothing
other than a mere representation, hence only what is represented* in it
can count as real, and conversely, what is given in it, i.e., represented
through perception, is also real in it; for if it were not real in space, i.e.,
immediately given through empirical intuition, then it could not also be
invented,a because one cannot just think up the real in intuition a priori.b
Every outer perception therefore immediately proves something real
in space, or rather is itself the real; to that extent, empirical realism is
beyond doubt, i.e., to our outer intuitions there corresponds something
real in space. Of course space itself with all its appearances, as repre­
sentations, is only in me; but in this space the real, or the material of all
objects of outer intuition is nevertheless really given, independently of
all invention; and it is also impossible that in this space anything outside us (in the transcendental sense) should be given, since space itself
is nothing apart from our sensibility. Thus the strictest C idealist cannot
demand that one prove that the object outside us (in the strictd sense)
corresponds to our perception. For if there were such a thing, then it
still could not be represented and intuited outside us, because this
would presuppose space; and reality in space, as a mere representation,
is nothing other than perception itself. The real in outer appearances is
thus actual only in perception, and cannot be actual in any other way.
Now cognition of objects can be generated from perceptions, either
through a mere play of imagination or by means of experience. And
then of course there can arise deceptive representations, to which ob­
jects do not correspond, and where the deception is sometimes to be at­
tributed to a semblance of the imagination (in dreams), sometimes to a
false step of judgment (in the case of so-called sense-deceptions). In
order to avoid the false illusion here, one proceeds according to the
* One must note well this paradoxical but correct proposition, that nothing is
in space except what is represented in it. For space itself is nothing other than
representation; consequently, what is in it must be contained in representation, and nothing a t all i s i n space except insofar a s i t i s really represented in
it. A proposition which must of course sound peculiar is that a thing can exist
only in the representation of it; but it loses its offensive character here, because the things with which we have to do are not things in themselves but
only appearances, i.e., representations.
a erdichtet
b

Note in Kant's copy of the second edition: "Objects of outer senses contain the ground
of time-determination of inner sense, consequently, however, also of inner experience,
though not the ground of consciousness, [even if . . . J" (the end of the sentence is miss­
ing in the manuscript). (E CLXII, p. 49; 2 3 :39)

, strengste
d strikter
429

A 375

A 376

A 3 74
A 375

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. Bk. II <A>

rule: Whatever is connected with a perception according to em­
pirical laws, is actualY Only this deception, as much as the measures
taken against it, concerns idealism as much as dualism, since here it is
only a question of the form of experience. In order to refute empirical
idealism, as a false scruple concerning the objective reality of our outer
perceptions, it is already sufficient that outer perception immediately

A 3 77

A 3 78

proves a reality in space, which space, though in itself it is only a mere
form of representations, nevertheless has objective reality in regard to
all outer appearances (which are also nothing but mere representa­
tions); and it is likewise sufficient to refute empirical idealism that with­
out perception even fictions and dreams are not possible, so our outer
senses, as regards the data from which experience can arise, have actual
corresponding objects in space.
The dogmatic idealist would be one who denies the existence of
matter, the skeptical idealist one who doubts them because he holds
them to be unprovable.33 The former can be so only because he believes
he can find contradictions in the possibility of a matter in general, and
just now we are not yet dealing with that. The following section on di­
alectical inferences, which represents reason in its internal conflict re­
garding the concepts belonging to the possibility of the connection of
experience, will also help us out of this difficulty.34 The skeptical ideal­
ist, however, who impugns merely the grounds of our assertion of the
existence of matter and declares insufficient our persuasion of it, which
is grounded on immediate perception, is a benefactor to human reason,
since he requires us to open our eyes well even in the smallest steps of
common experience, and not immediately to take for a well-earned pos ­
session what we perhaps obtain only surreptitiously. The utility created
by these idealistic projects is now clearly before our eyes. They drive us
forcefully - if we do not want to become tangled in confusions in our
commonest assertions - to regard all perceptions, whether they are
called inner or outer, merely as a consciousness of something that de­
pends on our sensibility, and to regard their external objects not as
things in themselves but only as representations, of which we can be­
come immediately conscious like any other representation, but which
are called external because they depend on that sense which we call
outer sense; its intuition is space, but it is itself nothing other than an
inner mode of representation, in which certain perceptions are con­
nected with one another.
If we let outer objects count as things in themselves, then it is ab­
solutely impossible to comprehend how we are to acquire cognition of
their reality outside us, since we base this merely on the representation,
which is in us. For one cannot have sensation outside oneself, but only
in oneself, and the whole of self-consciousness therefore provides noth­
ing other than merely our own determinations. Skeptical idealism thus
430

Chapter I. On the paralogisms of pure reason <A>

requires us to take the only refuge remaining to us, namely to grasp the
ideality of all appearances, which we have already established in the
Transcendental Aesthetic independently of these consequences, which
we could not then have foreseen. Now if one asks whether dualism
alone holds in the doctrine of the soul, then the answer is: Of course,
but only in the empirical sense, i.e., in the connection of experience
matter as substance in appearance is really given to outer sense, just as
the thinking I is given to inner sense, likewise as substance in appearance; and in the connection of our outer as well as our inner perceptions, appearances on both sides must be connected among themselves
into one experience according to the rules that the category of substance brings in. But if one wants to broaden the concept of dualism as
it is usually applied and take it in a transcendental sense, then neither it,
nor the pneumatism that is opposed to it on the one side, nor the ma­
terialism on the other side, have the least ground, since then one's concepts would lack determination, and one would take the difference in
the mode of representing objects, which are unknown to us as to what
they are in themselves, for a difference in these things themselves. I,
represented through inner sense in time, and objects in space outside
me, are indeed specifically a wholly distinct appearances, but they are
not thereby thought of as different things. The transcendental objectb
that grounds both outer appearances and inner intuition is neither matter nor a thinking being in itself, but rather an unknown ground of
those appearances that supply us with our empirical concepts of the former as well as the latter.
If, therefore, as the present critique obviously requires of us, we re­
main true to the rule established earlier not to press our questions be­
yond that with which possible experience and its objectC can supply us,
then it will not occur to us to seek information about what the objects
of our senses may be in themselves, i.e., apart from any relation to the
senses. But if a psychologist takes appearances for things in themselves,
then as a materialist he may take up matter into his doctrine, or as a
spiritualist he may take up merely thinking beings (namely, according
to the form of our inner sense) as the single and sole thing existing in
itself, or as a dualist he may take up both; yet through misunderstand­
ing he will always be confined to sophistical reasonings about the way
in which that which is no thing in itself, but only the appearance of a
thing in general, might exist in itself.
a The text of the first edition reads skeptisch, but in the preface (A xxii), Kant corrects it to

specifisch.
Object
, Object

b

43 1

A 3 79

A 380

Observation a on

A3 8 r

the sum of the pure doctrine of the soul,
following these paralogisms.

A 3 82

If we compare the doctrine of the soul, as the physiology of inner
sense, with the doctrine of bodies, as a physiology of the objects of
outer sense, then we will find that aside from the fact that in both doc­
trines much can be cognized empirically, there is nevertheless this re­
markable difference, that in the latter science much can be cognized a
priori from the mere concept of an extended impenetrable being, but in
the former science nothing at all can be cognized a priori from the con­
cept of a thinking being. The cause is this: Although both are appear­
ances, the appearance before outer sense has something standing and
abiding in it, which supplies a substratum grounding the transitory de­
terminations, and thus also a synthetic concept, namely that of space
and of an appearance in it; whereas time, which is the only form of our
inner intuition, has in it nothing abiding, and hence gives cognition only
of a change of determinations, but not of the determinable object. For
in that which we call the soul, everything is in continual flux, and it has
nothing abiding, except perhaps (if one insists) b the I, which is simple
only because this representation has no content, and hence no manifold,
on account of which it seems to represent a simple object,c or better put,
it seems to designate one. This I would have to be an intuition, which,
since it would be presupposed in all thinking in general (prior to all ex­
perience), would, as an intuition, supply a priori synthetic propositions
if it were to be possible to bring about a pure rational cognition of the
nature of a thinking being in general. Yet this I is no more an intuition
than it is a concept of any object; rather, it is the mere form of con­
sciousness,d which accompanies both sorts of representations and which
can elevate them to cognitions only insofar as something else is given in
intuition, which provides the material for the representation of an ob­
ject. Thus the whole of rational psychology, as a science transcending all
the powers of human reason, collapses, and nothing is left except to

n

b

Betrachtung
Kant later indicated that "perhaps (if one insists)" was to be omitted (E CLXIII p. 49;
2 3 : 5 0).

, Object
d Kant corrects this to: " . . . the (unknown to us) object [Object] of consciousness,
(E CLXIV p. 49; 2 3 : 5 0).

432

. . .

"

Chapter 1. On the paralogisms of pure reason <A>

study our soul following the guidelinea of experience, and to remain
within the limit of those questions that do not go beyond that whose
content can be provided by possible inner experience.
But if it has no utility as an extension of our cognition, but so re­
garded is rather composed of mere paralogisms, it still cannot be denied
an important negative utility even if it is to count for nothing more than
a critical treatment of our dialectical inferences, those of common and
natural reason.
Why do we have need of a doctrine of the soul grounded merely on
pure rational principles?b Without doubt chiefly with the intent of securing our thinking Self from the danger of materialism. But this is
achieved by the rational concept of our thinking Self that we have
given. For according to it, so little fear remains that if one took matter
away then all thinking and even the existence of thinking beings would
be abolished, that it rather shows clearly that if I were to take away the
thinking subject, the whole corporeal world would have to disappear, as
this is nothing but the appearance in the sensibility of our subject and
one mode of its representations.
Thereby of course I obviously cognize this thinking Self no better as
to its properties, nor can I have any insight into its persistence, or even
the independence of its existence from whatever transcendental sub­
stratum of outer appearances there may be, for this is just as unknown
to me as the self is. But since it is likewise possible that I may find cause,
drawn from somewhere else than mere speculative grounds, to hope for
an existence of my thinking nature that is self-sufficient and persisting
through all possible changes of my state, much is still won if, through
the free confession of my ignorance, I can nevertheless repel the dogmatic attacks of a speculative opponent, and show him that he can never
know more in which to deny my expectations about the nature of my
subject than I can in order to hold to them.
On this transcendental illusion of our psychological concepts, then,
three dialectical questions are grounded, which constitute the proper
goal of rational psychology, and cannot be decided otherwise than by
the above investigations. These questions are, namely: J ) about the pos­
sibility of the community of the soul with an organic body, i.e., the an­
imality and the state of the soul in the life of the human being; 2 ) about
the beginning of this community, i.e., of the soul in and before the birth
of the human being; and 3) as to the end of this community, i.e., of the
soul in and after the death of the human being (the question concern­
ing immortality).
Leitfaden
b Principien

a

433

A383

A 3 84

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. I <A>

A 3 85

A 386

Now I assert that all the difficulties one believes he finds in these ques­
tions, and with which, as dogmatic objections, one seeks to give the ap­
pearance of having a deeper insight into the nature of things than the
common understanding can have, rest on a mere semblance, according
to which one hypostatizes what exists merely in thoughts, and - assum­
ing it to be a real object outside the thinking subject - takes the same
quality, namely extension, which is nothing but appearance, for a prop­
erty of external things subsisting even apart from our sensibility, and
takes motion for its effect, which really takes place in itself outside our
senses. For matter, whose community with the soul excites such great
reservations, is nothing other than a mere form, or a certain mode of rep­
resentation of an unknown object, through that intuition that one calls
outer sense. Thus there may very well be something outside us, which we
call matter, corresponding to this appearance; but in the same quality as
appearance it is not outside us, but is merely as a thought in us, even
though this thought, through the sense just named, represents it as being
found outside us. Matter thus signifies not a species of substances quite
different and heterogeneous from the object of inner sense (the soul), but
rather only the heterogeneity of the appearances of substances (which in
themselves are unknown to us), whose representations we call external in
comparison with those that we ascribe to inner sense, even though they
belong as much to the thinking subject as other thoughts do; only they
have in themselves this deceptive feature, that since they represent ob­
jects in space, they seem to cut themselves loose from the soul, as it were,
and hover outside it; although space itself, in which they are intuited, is
nothing but a representation, whose counterpart in the same quality out­
side the soul cannot be encountered at all. Now the question is no longer
about the community of the soul with other known but different sub­
stances outside us, but merely about the conjunction of representations
in inner sense with the modifications of our outer sensibility, and how
these may be conjoined with one another according to constant laws, so
that they are connected into one experience.35
As long as we keep inner and outer appearances together with one
another, as mere representations in experience, we find nothing absurd
and nothing that makes the community of both modes of sense appear
strange. But as soon as we hypostatize outer appearances, no longer re­
lating them to our thinking subject as representations but rather relat­
ing them to it in the same quality as they are in us as things external
to us and subsisting by themselves, and relating their actions, which
show themselves as appearances in relationa to one another, to our
thinking subject, then we have a characteristic of the efficient causes

a

Verhiiltnis

434

Chapter 1. On the paralogisms of pure reason <A>

outside us that is not coherent with their effects in us, because the char­
acter of the cause relates merely to outer sense, while the effects relate
to inner sense; which senses, although united in one subject, are never­
theless most unlike each other. There we have no other external effects
except alterations of place, and no powers except efforts that result in
relations a in space as their effects. But in us the effects are thoughts,
among which no relations b of place, motion, shape or spatial determination occur, and we wholly lose the guidance of causes in the effects
which they are to exhibit in inner sense. But we should consider that
bodies are not objects in themselves that are present to us, but rather a
mere appearance of who knows what unknown object; that motion is
not the effect of this unknown cause, but merely the appearance of its
influence on our senses; that consequently neither of these is something
outside us, but both are merely representations in us, hence that it is not
the motion of matter that causes representations in us, but that motion
itself (hence also the matter that makes itself knowable through it) is a
mere representation; and finally that the whole self-made difficulty
comes to this: How and through what cause do the representations of
our sensibility stand in combination with one another, so that those
representations that we call outer intuitions can be represented according to empirical laws as objects outside us? - a question that does not in
tlle least contain the supposed difficulty of explaining the origin of rep­
resentations by entirely different sorts of efficient causes found outside
us, as when we take the appearance of an unknown cause for the cause
outside us, which can occasion nothing but confusion. In judgments in
which a misinterpretation is deeply rooted through long habit, it is im­
possible to correct them immediately with that lucidity that can be furthered in other cases, where our concept is not confused by such an
unavoidable illusion. Hence our liberation of reason from sophistical
theories can hardly have the clarity necessary for complete satisfaction.
I believe I can further it in the following way.
All objections can be divided into dogmatic, critical and skeptical
ones. A dogmatic objection is one that is directed against a proposition,
but a critical one is directed against its proof. The former requires an
insight into the constitution of the nature of the object, in order to be
able to assert the opposite of what the proposition claims about the ob­
ject; it is itself dogmatic, therefore, and claims to have better acquain­
tance with the constitution of the object being talked about than its
opposite has. The critical objection, because it leaves the proposition
untouched in its worth or worthlessness, and impugns only the proof,

a Verhiiltnisse
b

Verhiiltnisse
43 5

A 387

A 3 88

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II <A>

A 3 89

A 390

does not at all need to have better acquaintance with the object or to
pretend to better acquaintance with it; it shows only that the assertion
is groundless, not that it is incorrect. The skeptical objection puts the
proposition and its opposite over against one another, as objections of
equal weight, each alternatively a dogma with the other as an objection
to it; thus on both opposed sides it is dogmatic in appearance,a in order
to annihilate entirely every judgment about the object. Thus both, the
dogmatic as well as the skeptical objection, must claim as much insight
into its object as is necessary to assert something about it either affir­
matively or negatively. The critical objection alone is of such a kind that
it overturns a theory merely by showing that one assumes on behalf of
its assertion something that is nugatory and merely imagined, thereby
withdrawing from it the presumed foundation without otherwise want­
ing to decide anything about the constitution of the object.
Now according to the common concepts of our reason in regard to
the community in which our thinking subject stands to things outside
us we are dogmatic, and regard these things as objects truly subsisting
independently of us, according to a certain transcendental dualism that
does not count those outer appearances as representations of the sub­
ject but rather displaces them, as the sensible intuition that provides
them to us, outside us as objects,b separating them entirely from the
thinking subject. Now this subreption is the foundation of all theories
about the community between soul and body, and it is never asked
whether this objective reality of appearances is completely correct, but
rather this is taken for granted, and the sophistry is only about the way
this is to be explained and comprehended. The three usual systems that
have been thought up about this, really the only possible ones, are those
of physical influence, of preestablished harmony, and of supernat­
ural assistance.36
The last two ways of explaining the community of the soul with mat­
ter are grounded on objections to the first, which is the conception c of
the common understanding; they object, namely, that what appears as
matter could not, through its immediate influence, be the cause of rep­
resentations, since these are an entirely heterogeneous species of effects.
However, they cannot combine what they understand as the object of
outer sense with the concept of matter, which is nothing but an appear­
ance, thus in itself a mere representation caused by some external object
or other, for then they would be saying that the representations of ex­
ternal objects (appearances) could not be external causes of representa­
tions in our mind; that would be a wholly senseless objection, because it
a dem Scheine nach
b Objecte
Vorstellung
C

436

Chapter I. On the paralogisms of pure reason <A>

would never occur to anyone to take as an external cause what he has al­
ready recognized as a mere representation. According to our principles
they would therefore have to direct their theory at this: that what is the
true (transcendental) object of our outer sense could not be the cause of
those representations (appearances) that we understand under the name
of matter. Now since no one can claim with good ground to be acquainted with anything of the transcendental cause of our representations of outer sense, any assertion about it is entirely groundless. But if
the supposed improvers of the doctrine of physical influence, in accordance with the common way of representing a transcendental dualism,
want to regard matter as such as a thing in itself (and not as the mere ap­
pearance of an unknown thing), and to direct their objection to showing
that such an external object, which exhibits in itself no other causality
than that of motion, could never be the efficient cause of representations, but rather that a third being must mediate between them in order
to establish, if not reciprocity, then at least correspondence and harmony, then in that case they would have to begin their refutation by assuming in their dualism the JtQwtQv 1jJ£u60s; o of physical influence, and
thus their objection would refute not so much the natural influence as
their own dualistic presupposition. For all the difficulties that concern
the combination of thinking nature with matter arise without exception
solely from the surreptitious dualistic notionb that matter as such is not
an appearance, i.e., a mere representation of the mind, which corresponds to an unknown object, but is rather ::In object in itself, as it exists
outside us and independently of all sensibility.
Thus no dogmatic objection can be made against the physical influence that is commonly assumed. For if the opponent assumes that matter and its motion are mere appearances and thus themselves only
representations, then he can place the difficulty only in the fact that the
unknown object of our sensibility could not be the cause of representations in us; a claim, however, for which he has not the least justification,
because no one can decide about an unknown object what it can or cannot do. But according to our proof above, he must necessarily admit this
transcendental idealism, unless he wants to hypostatize what are obviously representations and displace them outside himself, as true things.
Nonetheless, a well-grounded critical objection can be made against
the common doctrinal opinionc of physical influence. The sort of com­
munity that is claimed to occur between two species of substances,
thinking and extended, is grounded on a crude dualism, and makes the
latter substances, which are nothing but mere representations of the
a primary falsity
b Vorstellung
, Lehrmeinung
43 7

A39I

A 392

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II <A>

4. 393

thinking subject, into things subsisting for themselves. Thus the mis­
understood physical influence can be completely thwarted by revealing
the argument for it to be nugatory and surreptitious.
Thus if one separates out everything imaginary, the notorious ques­
tion about the community between what thinks and what is extended
would merely come to this: How is outer intuition namely, that of
space (the filling of it by shape and motion) possible at all in a think­
ing subject? But it is not possible for any human being to find an an­
swer to this question, and no one will ever fill this gap in our knowledge,
but rather only indicate it, by ascribing outer appearances to a tran­
scendental object that is the cause of this species of representations, with
which cause, however, we have no acquaintance at all, nor will we ever
get a concept of it. In all the tasks that may come before us in the field
of experience, we treat those appearances as objects in themselves, with­
out worrying ourselves about the primary ground of their possibility (as
appearances). But if we go beyond their boundary, then the concept of
a transcendental object becomes necessary.
An immediate consequence of these considerationsa concerning the
community between thinking and extended beings is the decision of all
disputes or objections concerning the state of the thinking nature prior
to this community (to life) or after such a community is terminated (in
death). The opinion that the thinking subject could have thought prior
to all community with bodies would be expressed this way: that bef0fe
the beginning of the kind of sensibility through which something appears to us in space, the same transcendental objects that appear as bod­
ies in the present state could have been intuited in a wholly different
way. But the opinion that the soul could still continue to think after all
community with the corporeal world has been terminated would be ex­
pressed in this form: that if the mode of sensibility through which tran­
scendental (and for now entirely unknown) objects appear as a material
world should cease, then not all intuition would thereby be terminated,
and it might well be possible for the very same unknown object to con­
tinue to be cognized by the thinking subject, even though obviously not
in the quality of bodies.
Now of course no one can adduce the least ground for such an asser­
tion from speculative principles ,b nor even indeed establish its possibil­
ity, but rather it can only be presupposed; yet just as little can anyone
make any valid dogmatic objection against it. For whoever he may be,
he knows just as little as I or anyone else about the absolute and inner
cause of external and corporeal appearances. Therefore he cannot claim
to know what the reality of outer appearances rests on in the present
-

-

A 394

a Erinnerungen
b Principien
43 8

Chapter 1. On the paralogisms of pure reason <A>

state (in life), hence he also cannot claim to know that the condition of
all outer intuition, or even of the thinking subject itself, will cease after
this state (after death).
Thus every dispute about the nature of our thinking being and its
conjunction with the corporeal world is merely a consequence of the
fact that one fills the gaps regarding what one does not know with par­
alogisms of reason, making thoughts into things and hypostatizing
them; from this arises an imagined science, both in regard to affirma­
tive and negative assertions, in that everyone either presumes to know
something about objects about which no human being has any concept,
or else makes his own representations into objects, and thus goes round
and round in an eternal circle of ambiguities and contradictions.
Nothing but the sobriety of a strict but just criticism can liberate us
from these dogmatic semblances, which through imagined happiness
hold so many subject to theories and systems, and limit all our specula­
tive claims merely to the field of possible experience, not by stale mock­
ery at attempts that have so often failed, or by pious sighing over the
limits of our reason, but by means of a complete determination of rea­
son's boundaries according to secure principles, which with the greatest
reliability fastens its nihil ulteriusa on those Pillars of Hercules37 that
nature has erected, so that the voyage of our reason may proceed only
as far as the continuous coastline of experience reaches, a coastline that
we cannot leave without venturing out into a shoreless ocean, which,
among always deceptive prospects, forces us in the end to abandon as
hopeless all our troublesome and tedious efforts.

A 395

A 396

* * *

We still owe a distinct and general exposition of the transcendental
and yet natural illusion in the paralogisms of pure reason, and also of a
justification of their systematic ordering, running parallel to the table of
categories. We could not have undertaken it at the beginning of this
section without the danger of falling into obscurity or clumsily getting
ahead of ourselves. Now we want to try to fulfill this obligation.
One can place all illusion in the taking of a subjective condition of
thinking for the cognition of an object.b In the Introduction to the
Transcendental Dialectic we have further shown that pure reason con­
cerns itself solely with totality in the synthesis of conditions for a given
conditioned. Since now the dialectical illusion of pure reason cannot be
any empirical illusion occurring along with determinate empirical cog­
nitions, it must have to do with the universal conditions of thinking;
and there are only three cases of the dialectical use of pure reason:
a nothing farther
b Objects
439

A397

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. I <A>

1 . The synthesis of the conditions of a thought in general.
2. The synthesis of the conditions of empirical thinking.
3 . The synthesis of the conditions of pure thinking.

A 398

In all three of these cases pure reason is concerned merely with the
absolute totality of this synthesis, i.e., with that condition that is itself
unconditioned. On this division is grounded the threefold transcenden­
tal illusion, which occasions the three sections of the Dialectic, and pro­
vides us with the idea for an equal number of putative sciences of pure
reason: transcendental psychology, cosmology and theology. Here we
have to do only with the first.
Because in thinking in general we abstract from every relation of the
thought to any objecta (whether of sense or of the pure understanding),
the synthesis of conditions of a thought in general (No. I) is not objec­
tive at all, but merely a synthesis of thought with the subject, which is,
however, falsely taken to be a synthetic representation of an object.b
But it follows from this that the dialectical inference to the conditions
of every thought in general, which is itself unconditioned, does not
commit a mistake in content (for it abstracts from all content or ob­
jects),c but rather that it is mistaken in form alone, and would have to
be called a paralogism.
Because, further, the only condition accompanying all thinking is the
I, in the universal proposition "I think," reason has to do with this con­
dition insofar as it is itself unconditioned. But it is only the formal con­
dition, namely the logical unity of every thought, in which I abstract
from every object; and yet it is represented as an object that I think,
namely I itself, and its unconditioned unity.
If anyone were to pose the question to me: What is the constitutiond
of a thing that thinks? then I do not know the least thing to answer a
priori, because the answer ought to be synthetic (for an analytic answer
perhaps explains thinking, but gives no extended cognition of that on
which thinking rests as to its possibility).' But for every synthetic solu­
tion, intuition is necessary; but this is entirely left out of so universal a
problem. Likewise, no one can give a general answer to the question:
Of what kind must a thing be in order to be movable? For then impen­
etrable extension (matter) is not given. But now although I know no
general answer to that question, yet it seems to me that I could give it
in the individual case, in the proposition that expresses self-consciousa Object
b
Object
, Objecte
d Beschaffenheit

, Kant's text fails to close the parenthesis, but following Erdmann, we close it at this
point.
440

Chapter I. On the paralogisms of pure reason <A>

ness: "I think." For this I is the primary subject, i.e., substance, it is simpIe, etc. But then these would have to be mere propositions of experience, which, in the absence of a universal rule expressing in general and
a priori the conditions of the possibility of thinking, coulda nevertheless
contain no such predicates (since these are not empirical). In this way,
my insight (so plausible at the start) into the nature of a thinking being,
and indeed judged from mere concepts, becomes suspicious, even
though I still have not discovered any mistake in it.
Further investigation, however, going back behind the origin of these
attributes that I ascribe to Myself as a thinking being in general, can dis­
cover this error. They are nothing more than pure categories, through
which I never think a determinate object, but rather only the unity of
representations in order to determine their object. Without an intuition
to ground it, the category alone cannot yield any concept of an object;
for only through intuition is an object given, which is then thought in
accordance with the category. If I declare a thing to be a substance in
appearance, predicates of its intuition must be given to me previously,
in which I distinguish the substratum (the thing itself) from that which
merely depends on it. When I call a thing simple in appearance, then
by that I understand that its intuition is of course a part of the appearance, but cannot itself be further divided, etc. But if something is cognized as simple only in the concept and not in appearance, then I really
have no cognition of the object, but only of my concept, which I make
of something in general that is not susceptible of any real intuition. I say
only that I think something entirely simple, because I really do not
know anything further to say about it than merely that it is something.
Now mere apperception ("I") is substance in concept, simple in concept, etc., and thus all these psychological theorems are indisputably
correct. Nevertheless, one by no means thereby cognizes anything
about the soul that one really wants to know, for all these predicates are
not valid of intuition at all, and therefore cannot have any consequences
that could be applied to objects of experience; hence they are com­
pletely empty. For that concept of substance does not teach me that the
soul endures for itself, that it is not a part of outer intuitions that cannot be further divided and hence could not arise or perish through any
natural alterations - pureh properties that could provide acquaintance
with the soul in the connection of the experience, and disclosure con­
cerning its origin and future state. Now if ! say through mere category:
"The soul is a simple substance," then it is clear that since the under­
standing's naked concept of substance contains nothing beyond the fact
n

Kant's verb is singular, but its subject appears to be plural, namely the relative pronoun
referring to "propositions of experience."

b tauter
44 1

A 399

A 400

A 40 1

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II <A>

A 402

A 403

that the thing is to be represented as a subject in itself without in turn
being the predicate of another subject, nothing about its persistence
follows, and the attribute of simplicity certainly cannot be added to this
persistence; hence one is not in the least instructed about what the soul
can encounter in the alterations in the world. If one would tell us that
it is a simple part of matter, then from what experience teaches us
about this, we could derive its persistence and, together with its simple
nature, its immortality. But the concept of the 1, in the psychological
principle ("1 think"), tells us not one word about this.
But that the being that thinks in us supposes that it cognizes itself
through pure categories, and indeed through those under each heading
that express absolute unity, follows from this: Apperception is itself the
ground of the possibility of the categories, which for their part represent
nothing other than the synthesis of the manifold of intuition, insofar as
that manifold has unity in apperception. Self-consciousness in general is
therefore the representation of that which is the condition of all unity,
and yet is itself unconditioned. Hence of the thinking 1 (the soul), which
[thus represents] itself as substance, simple, numerically identical in all
time, and the correlate of all existence from which all other existence
must be inferred, one can say not so much that is cognizes itself
through the categories, but that it cognizes the categories, and through
them all objects, in the absolute unity of apperception, and hence cog­
nizes them through itself. Now it is indeed very illuminating that 1 can­
not cognize as an objecta itself that which 1 must presuppose in order to
cognize an objectb at all; and that the determining Self (the thinking) is
different from the determinable Self (the thinking subject) as cognition
is different from its object. Nevertheless, nothing is more natural and se­
ductive than the illusion of taking the unity in the synthesis of thoughts
for a perceived unity in the subject of these thoughts. One could call it
the subreption of hypostatized consciousness (apperceptionis substantiate).c
If one wants to give a logical title to the paralogism in the dialectical
syllogisms of the rational doctrine of the soul, insofar as they have cor­
rect premises, then it can count as sophisma figurae dictionis, d in which
the major premise makes a merely transcendental use of the category,
in regard to its condition, but in which the minor premise and the con­
clusion, in respect of the soul that is subsumed under this condition,
make an empirical use of the same category. Thus e.g., the concept of
substance in the paralogism of simplicity is a pure intellectual concept,
which in the absence of conditions of sensible intuition is merely of
Object
b Object
a

, "of substantized apperception." Kant's text reads apperceptiones; we follow Erdmann in
correcting his Latin grammar.
d "sophistry of a figure of speech," or fallacy of equivocation. See Logic § 90, 9: 1 3 5.

442

Chapter I. On the paralogisms of pure reason <A>

transcendental use, i.e., of no use at all. But in the minor premise the
very same concept is applied to the object of all inner experience, yet
without previously establishing it in concreto and grounding the condi­
tion of its application, namely its persistence; and hence here an empir­
ical, though unreliable, use is being made of it.
In order, finally, to show the systematic connection of all these di­
alectical assertions in a sophisticala doctrine of the soul, in a connection
of pure reason, and hence to show its completeness, one notes that ap­
perception is carried through by all classes of categories, but only to­
ward those concepts of the understanding which in each class ground
the unity of the remaining ones in a possible perception, consequently,
subsistence, reality, unity (not plurality), and existence; yet reason rep­
resents them all here as conditions of the possibility of a thinking being,
which are themselves unconditioned. Thus in itself the soul cognizes:
I.

2.

The unconditioned unity
of relation,b
l.e.,
itself, not as inhering
but rather
subsisting
3.

The unconditioned unity
in the multiplicity in time,
i.e.,
not numerically different
in different times,
but rather as
One and the very same subject

The unconditioned unity
of quality
i.e.,
not as a real whole
but rather simple*

4.

The unconditioned unity
of existence in space
l.e.,
nothing as the consciousness of several things outside itself,
but rather
only of the existence of itself,
and of other things merely
as its representations.

* How the simple here once again corresponds to the category of reality, I now
cannot yet show, but rather it will be proved in the following chapter, on the
occasion of another use by reason of the very same concept.
a

b

vernunftelnden
Verba/tnisses
443

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II <A>

A 405

Reason is the faculty of principles.a The assertions of pure psychology contain not empirical predicates of the soul, but rather those pred­
icates which, if they exist, ought to determine the object in itself
independently of experience, hence through mere reason. Thus they
would properly have to be grounded on principles b and universal con­
cepts of thinking nature in general. Instead, it turns out that one single
representation, "I am," governs them all which, just because it expresses
(indeterminately) what is purely formal in all my experience, proclaims
itself as a universal proposition, valid for every thinking being, and
which, since it is individual in all respects, brings with it the illusion of
being an absolute unity of conditions of thought in general, and thereby
extends itself farther than any possible experience could reach.
a Principien
b Principien

444

a

[Paralogisms ofPure Reason] 38

Now since the proposition I think (taken problematically) contains the B 406
form of every judgment of understanding whatever, and accompanies
all categories as their vehicle, it is clear that the inferences from this
proposition can contain a merely transcendental use of the under­
standing, excluding every admixture of experience; and ofb such a procedure, after what we have shown above, we cannot at the outset form
any very favorable concept. Thus we will follow it through all the
predications of the pure doctrine of the soul with a critical eye, <yet for
the sake of brevity we will proceed to examine them in an uninterrupted exposition.c
To begin with, the following general remarks can sharpen O!lJ: atten­
tiveness to this mode of inference. I do not cognize any objectd merely
by the fact that I think, but rather I can cognize any object only by de­
­
termining a given intuition with regard to the unity of consclOusnesS;-in
which all thinking consists. Thus I cognize myself not by being con­
scious of myself as thinking, but only if I am conscious to myself of the
intuition of myself as determined in regard to the function of thought.
All modi e of self-consciousness in thinking are therefore not yet them- B 407
selves concepts of the understanding of objects! (categories), but mere
functions, which provide thought with no object at all, and hence also
do not present my self as an object to be cognized. It is not the con­
sciousness of the determining self, but only that of the determinable
self, i.e., of my inner intuition (insofar as its manifold can be combined
in accord with the universal condition of the unity of apperception in
thinking), that is the object. g
I ) Now in every judgment I am always the determining subject of
What follows is the portion of the "Paralogisms" chapter that was rewritten for the sec­
ond edition. In the original, it follows the part of the text common to both editions
without any interruption or new title. The new text actually begins with the last clause
of the following paragraph.
b In the first edition: "in."
, Zusammenhange; with this final clause begins the second-edition version of the
"Paralogisms."
a

d

Object

, modes

f Objecte
g Object
445

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. I <B>

B 408

B 409

that relationa that constitutes the judgment. However, that the I that I
think can always be considered as subject, and as something that does
not depend on thinking merely as a predicate, must be valid - this is an
apodictic and even an identical proposition; but it does not signify
that I as objectb am for myself a self-subsisting being or substance.
The latter goes very far, and hence demands data that are not encoun­
tered at all in thinking, and thus (insofar as I consider merely what
thinks as such) perhaps demands more than I will ever encounter any­
where (in it).
2 ) That the I of apperception, consequently in every thought, is a
single thing that cannot be resolved into a plurality of subjects, and
hence a logically simple subject, lies already in the concept of thinking,
and is consequently an analytic proposition; but that does not signify
that the thinking I is a simple substance, which would be a synthetic
proposition. The concept of substance is always related to intuitions,
which in me cannot be other than sensible, and hence must lie wholly
outside the field of understanding and its thinking, which is all that is
really under discussion here if it is said that the I in thinking is simple.
It would also be miraculous if what otherwise requires so much care in
order to distinguish what is the substance and what is displayed in intu­
ition, and even more to tell whether this substance could be simple (as
in the parts of matter), were given here so directly, in the poorest rep­
resentation of all, as if by a revelation.
3) The proposition of the identity of myself in everything manifold
of which I am conscious is equally one lying in the concepts themselves,
and hence an analytic proposition; but this identity of the subject, of
which I can become conscious in every representation, does not con­
cern the intuition of it, through which it is given as object,' and thus
cannot signify the identity of the person, by which would be understood
the consciousness of the identity of its own substance as a thinking
being in all changes of state; in order to prove that what would be de­
manded is not a mere analysis of the proposition "I think," but rather
various synthetic judgments grounded on the given intuition.
4) [That] I distinguish my own existence, that of a thinking being,
from other things outside me (to which my body also belongs) - this is
equally an analytic proposition; for other things are those that I think of
as distinguished from me. But I do not thereby know at all whether this
consciousness of myself would even be possible without things outside
me through which representations are given to me, and thus whether I
could exist merely as a thinking being (without being a human being).
Verhdltnis
Object
, Object
a

b

446

On the paralogisms of pure reason <B>

Thus through the analysis of the consciousness of myself in thinking
in general not the least is won in regard to the cognition of myself as
object.a The logical exposition of thinking in general is falsely held to
be a metaphysical determination of the object.b
It would be a great, or indeed the only stumbling block to our entire
critique, if it were possible to prove a priori that all thinking beings are
'in themselves simple substances, thus (as a consequence of the same
ground of proof) that personality is inseparable from them, and that
they are conscious of their existence as detached from all matter. For in
this way we would have taken a step beyond the sensible world, entering into the field of noumena,c and then no one could deny that we are
entitled to extend ourselves farther into this field, settle in it, and, as far
as each of us might be favored by an auspicious star, to take possession
of it. For the proposition "Every thinking being as such is a simple substance" is a synthetic proposition a priori, first because it goes beyond
the concept that grounds it by adding the way of existing to thinking
in general and second because it adds to that concept a predicate (simplicity) that cannot be given in any experience whatever. Thus synthetic
propositions a priori would not, as we have asserted, be feasible and ac­
cessible merely in relation to objects of possible experience, and in particular as principles d of the possibility of this experience itself, but
rather they could reach as far as things in general and in themselves,
which consequence would put an end to this whole critique and would
bid us to leave things the same old way they were before. Yet that danger is not so great here if one approaches nearer to the matter.
The procedure of rational psychology is governed by a paralogism,
which is exhibited through the following syllogism:

What cannot be thought otherwise than as subject does not
exist otherwise than as subject, and is therefore substance.
Now a thinking being, considered merely as such, cannot be
thought otherwise than as subject.
Therefore it also exists only as such a thing, i.e., as substance.
The major premise talks about a being that can be thought of in
every respect, and consequently even as it might be given in intuition.
But the minor premise talks about this being only insofar as it is con­
sidered as subject, relative only to thinking and the unity of con­
sciousness, but not at the same time in relation to the intuition
through which it is given as an objecte for thinking. Thus the concluObject
b Object

a

, Nat in roman type.

d

Principien
, Object
447

B 41 0

B4II

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. I <B>

B412

B 413

B 41 I

B 41 2

sion is drawn per Sophisma figurae dictionis,a hence by means of a de­
ceptive inference. *
That this resolution of the famous argument into a paralogism is entirely correct shows itself clearly if one reviews in this connection the
general remark to the systematic representation of the principlesb and
the section on noumena,39 where it was proved that the concept of a
thing that can exist for itself as subject but not as a mere predicate car­
ries with it no objective reality at all, i.e., that one cannot know whether
it applies to any object, since one has no insight into the possibility of
such a way of existing, and consequently that it yields absolutely no cog­
nition. Thus if that concept, by means of the term "substance," is to in­
dicate an objectC that can be given, and if it is to become a cognition,
then it must be grounded on a persisting intuition as the indispensable
condition of the objective reality of a concept, namely, that through
which alone an object is given. But now we have in inner intuition noth­
ing at all that persists, for the I is only the consciousness of my think­
ing; thus if we stay merely with thinking, we also lack the necessary
condition for applying the concept of substance, i.e., of a subject sub­
sisting for itself, to itself as a thinking being; and the simplicity of sub­
stance that is bound up with the objective reality of this concept com­
pletely falls away and is transformed into a merely logically qualitative
unity of self-consciousness in thinking in general, whether or not the
subject is composite.

* "Thinking" is taken in an entirely different signification in the two premises:
in the major premise, as it applies to an objectd in general (hence as it may
be given in intuition); but in the minor premise only as it subsists in relation
to self-consciousness, where, therefore, no objecte is thought, but only the
relation to oneself as subject (as the form of thinking) is represented. In the
first premise, things are talked about that cannot be thought of other than as
subjects; the second premise, however, talks not about things, but about
thinking (in that one abstracts from every object),! in which the I always
serves as subject of consciousness; hence in the conclusion it cannot follow
that I cannot exist otherwise than as subject, but rather only that in thinking
my existence I can use myself only as the subject of judgment, which is an
identical proposition, that discloses absolutely nothing about the manner of
my existence.
a

"by a sophism of a figure of speech," i.e., a fallacy of equivocation.

b That is, the Principles of Pure Understanding.
, Object
d Object
, Object
f Object
448

On the paralogisms of pure reason <B>

Refutation of Mendelssohn's proof
of the persistence of the sou1.4°
This acute philosopher soon noticed that the usual argument through
which it is to be proved that the soul (if one grants that it is a simple
being) cannot cease through disintegration, is insufficient for the aim
of securing the soul's necessary continuing duration, since one could
still assume cessation of its existence by vanishing. In his Phaedo, he
sought to avoid this perishability, which would be a true annihilation,
by attempting to prove that a simple being cannot cease to be at all because, since it cannot be diminished and thus lose more and more of its
existence, and so be gradually transformed into nothing (since it has no
parts and thus no plurality in itself), there would be no time at all between a moment in which it is and another moment in which it is not,
which is impossible. - Yet he did not consider that even if we allow the
soul this simple nature, namely, that it contains no manifold [of parts]
outside one another, and hence no extensive magnitude, one nevertheless cannot deny to it, any more than to any other existence, an intensive magnitude, i.e., a degree of reality in regard to all its faculties,
indeed to everything in general that constitutes its existence, which
might diminish through all the infinitely many smaller degrees; and
thus the supposed substance (the thing whose persistence has not been
otherwise established already) could be transformed into nothing, although not by disintegration, but by a gradual remission (remissio) of all
its powers (hence, if I may be allowed to use this expression, through
elanguescence). For even consciousness always has a degree, which can
always be diminished;* consequently, so does the faculty of being conscious of oneself, and likewise with all other faculties. - Thus the persistence of the soul, merely as an object of inner sense, remains
unproved and even unprovable, although its persistence in life, where
the thinking being (as a human being) is at the same time an object of
* Clarity is not, as the logicians say, the consciousness of a representation;41 for
a certain degree of consciousness, which, however, is not sufficient for memory, must be met with even in some obscure representations, because without
any consciousness we would make no distinction in the combination of obscure representations; yet we are capable of doing this with the marks of some
concepts (such a s those o f right and equity, o r those o f a musician who, when
improvising, hits many notes at the same time). Rather a representation is
clear if the consciousness in it is sufficient for a consciousness of the difference between it and others. To be sure, if this consciousness suffices for a dis­
tinction, but not for a consciousness of the difference, then the representation
must still be called obscure. So there are infinitely many degrees of con­
sciousness down to its vanishing.
449

B 414

B 415

B 414

B415

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. I <B>

outer sense, is clear of itself; but this is not at all sufficient for the ra­
tional psychologist, who undertakes to prove from mere concepts the
absolute persistence of the soul even beyond life.*
B 415
B 41 6

B 41 7

B418

* Those who believe that they have done enough to get a new possibility started
properly when they defy one to show a contradiction in its presuppositions (as
are all those who believe that they have insight into the possibility of thinking even after life has ceased, though they have a n example o f thinking only
through the empirical intuitions in human life) can be brought into great em­
barrassment through other possibilities that are not the least bit bolder. Such
a possibility is the division of a simple substance into several substances, or
conversely, the fusing together (coalition) of several substances into a simple
one. For although divisibility presupposes a composite, what it requires is not
necessarily a composite made up of substances, but merely a composite of de­
grees (of several faculties) of one and the same substance. Just as one can think
of all the powers and faculties of the soul, even that of consciousness, as dis­
appearing by halves, but in such a way that the substance always remains; so
likewise one can without contradiction represent this extinguished half as pre­
served, yet not in it but outside it; onlya since everything real in it, conse­
quently having a degree, and so its whole existence, lacking in nothing, has
been halved, another particular substance would arise outside it. For the mul­
tiplicity that was divided already existed previously, yet not as a multiplicity of
substances, but rather of that reality as a quantum of existence in it, b and the
unity of substance was only a way of existing, which through this division
alone is transformed into a plurality of subsistence. But in this way too several
simple substances could once again fuse together into one, and nothing would
be lost except merely the plurality of subsistence, since the one substance
would contain the degree of reality of all the previous ones together in itself;
and perhaps the simple substance, which gives us the appearance of a matter
(though of course not through a mechanical or chemical influence on each
other, but through one unknown to us, of which these would be only the ap­
pearance) might produce offspring-souls through such a dynamic division of
the parent-souls, as intensive magnitudes, which would meanwhile replace
what had departed from them by a coalition with new material of the same
kind. I am far from allowing any worth or validity to such figments of the
brain, and the above principles' of the Analytic have sufficiently enjoined us
to make none other than an experiential use of the categories (such as sub­
stance). But if the rationalist is keen to make the mere faculty of thinking into
a self-subsisting being without any persisting intuition through which an ob­
ject is given, merely because for him the unity of apperception in thinking
allows o f n o explanation from something composite, instead o f admitting, as
would be better to do, that he does not know how to explain the possibility of
Reading nur with the fourth edition; earlier editions have undo
in ihr, whose referent is presumably die Substanz; however, the context would appear to
require the pronoun to be plural: "in them" (in ihnen), sc. "in the substances."
, Principien

a

b

450

On the paralogisms of pure reason <B>

If we take the above propositions in a synthetic connection, as valid
for all thinking beings, as they must be taken in rational psychology as
a system, and if from the category of relation,a starting with the proposition "All thinking beings are, as such, substances" we go backward
through the series o f propositions until the circle closes, then we finally
come up against the existence of thinking beings, which in this system
are conscious of themselves not only as independent of external things
but also as being able to determine themselves from themselves (in regard to the persistence belonging necessarily to the character of a substance). But from this it follows that idealism, at least problematic
idealism, is unavoidable in that same rationalistic system, and if the existence of external things is not at all required for the determination of
one's own existence in time, then such things are only assumed, entirely
gratuitously, without a proof of them being able to be given.
If, on the contrary, we follow the analytic procedure, grounded on
the "I think" given as a proposition that already includes existence in itself, and hence grounded on modality, and then we take it apart so as to
cognize its content, whether and how this I determines its existence in
space or time merely through it, then the propositions of the ratiortal
doctrine of the soul begin not from the concept of a thinking being in
general but from an actuality; and from the way this is thought, after
everything empirical has been detached from it, it is concluded what
pertains to a thinking being in general, as the following table shows.
I

1.

think,

2.

3·

as simple subject,

as subject,
4·

as identical subject
in every state of my thinking.

Now because in the second proposition here it is not determined
whether I could exist and be thought of only as subject and not as pred­
icate of another thing, the concept of a subject is here taken merely log­
ically, and it remains undetermined whether or not substance is to be
understood by it. Yet in the third proposition the absolute unity of apa thinking nature, then why should not the materialist, even though he can
just as little present any experience in behalf of his possibilities, be justified in
an equal boldness, retaining the rationalist's formal unity while putting his
own principle to an opposite use?
a Relation
451

B 41 6
B 41 7

B 41 8

B 41 9

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. I <B>

B 420

B 42 I

perception, the simple I, in the representation to which every combina­
tion or separation constituting thought is related, also becomes impor­
tant for its own sake,a even if I have not settled anything about the
subject's constitution or subsistence. Apperception is something real,
and its simplicity lies already in its possibility. Now there is nothing real
in space that is simple; for points (which constitute the only simple en­
tities in space) are mere bounds, and not themselves something that
serves to constitute space as parts. Thus from this follows the impos­
sibility of explaining how I am constituted as a merely thinking sub­
ject on the basis of materialism. But because my existence in the first
proposition is considered as given, since it does not say that every think­
ing being exists (which would at the same time predicate absolute ne­
cessity of them, and hence say too much), but only "I exist thinking,"
that proposition is empirical, and contains the determinability of my ex­
istence merely in regard to my representations in time. But since for
this once again I first need something persisting, and, just insofar as I
think myself, nothing of the sort is given to me in inner intuition, it is
not possible at all through this simple self-consciousness to determine
the way I exist, whether as substance or as accident. Thus if material­
ism will not work as a way of explaining my existence, then spiritual­
ism is just as unsatisfactory for it, and the conclusion is that in no way
whatsoever can we cognize anything about the constitution of our soul
that in any way at all concerns the possibility of its separate existence.
And how should it be possible to go beyond experience (of our exis­
tence in life) through the unity of consciousness with which we are ac­
quainted only because we have an indispensable need of it for the
possibility of experience, and even to extend our cognition to the nature
of all thinking beings in general, through the empirical but in regard to
all kinds of intuition indeterminate proposition "I think"?
Thus there is no rational psychology as doctrine that might provide
us with an addition to our self-consciousness, but only as discipline,
setting impassable boundaries for speculative reason in this field, in
order, on the one side, not to be thrown into the lap of a soulless mate­
rialism, or on the other side not to get lost wandering about in a spiri­
tualism that must be groundless for us in life; on the contrary, it rather
reminds us to regard this refusal of our reason to give an answer to
those curious questions, which reach beyond this life, as reason's hint
that we should turn our self-knowledgeb away from fruitless and extrav­
agant speculation toward fruitful practical uses, which, even if it is al­
ways directed only to objects of experience, takes its principlesc from
for sich
b Selbsterkenntnis
, Principien
a

452

On the paralogisms of pure reason <B>

somewhere higher, and so determines our behavior, as if our vocationa
extended infinitely far above experience, and hence above this life.
From all this one sees that rational psychology has its origin in a mere
misunderstanding. The unity of consciousness, which grounds the categories, is here taken for an intuition of the subject as an object,b and the
category of substance is applied to it. But this unity is only the unity of
thinking, through which no objectC is given; and thus the category of
substance, which always presupposes a given intuition, cannot be applied
to it, and hence this subject cannot be cognized at all. Thus the subject of
the categories cannot, by thinking them, obtain a concept of itself as an
objectd of the categories; for in order to think them, it must take its pure
self-consciousness, which is just what is to be explained, as its ground.
Likewise, the subject, in which the representation of time originally has
its ground, cannot thereby determine its own existence in time, and if the
latter cannot be, then the former as a determination of its self (as a thinking being in general) through categories can also not take place. *
* The "I think" is, as has already been said, an empirical proposition, and contains within itself the proposition "I exist." But I cannot say "Everything that
thinks, exists"; for then the property of thinking would make all beings possessing it into necessary beings. Hence my existence also cannot be regarded
as inferred from the proposition "I think," as Descartes held (for otherwise the
major premise, "Everything that thinks, exists" would have to precede it), but
rather it is identical with it.4' It expresses an indeterminate empirical intuition, i.e., a perception (hence it proves that sensation, which consequendy belongs to sensibility, grounds this existential proposition), but it precedes the
experience that is to determine the object of perception through the category
in regard to time; and here existence is not yet a category, which is not related
to an indeterminately given object, but rather to an object of which one has a
concept, and about which one wants to know whether or not it is posited outside this concept. An indeterminate perception here signifies only something
real, which was given, and indeed only to thinking in general, thus not as ap­
pearance, and also not as a thing in itself (a noumenon), but rather as something that in fact exists and is indicated as an existing thing in the proposition
"I think." For it is to be noted that if I have called the proposition "I think"
an empirical proposition, I would not say by this that the I in this proposition
is an empirical representation; for it is rather purely intellectual, because it
belongs to thinking in general. Only without any empirical representation,
which provides the material for thinking, the act I think would not take place,
and the empirical is only the condition of the application, or use, of the pure
intellectual faculty.43
e

a

Bestimmung

b Object

, Object
Object
, Object

d

453

B 42 2

B 42 2

B 42 3

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. I <B>

B 424

B 42 5

In this way, then, a cognition going beyond the bounds of possible ex­
perience yet belonging to the highest interests of humanity disappears,
as far as speculative philosophy is concerned, in disappointed expecta­
tion; nevertheless the strictness of critique, by proving the impossibil­
ity of settling anything dogmatically about an object of experience
beyond the bounds of experience, performs a not unimportant service
for reason regarding this interest, in securing it likewise against all
possible assertions of the contrary; this cannot be done otherwise than
by proving one's proposition apodictically, or, if that does not succeed,
then by seeking the sources of this incapacity, which, if they lie in
the necessary limits of our reason, must then subject every opponent
to exactly the same law of renunciation for all claims to dogmatic
assertions.
Nevertheless, not the least bit is lost through this regarding the war­
rant, or indeed the necessity, for the assumption of a future life in ac­
cordance with principles of the practical use of reason, which is bound
up with its speculative use; for in any case the merely speculative proof
has never been able to have an influence on common human reason. It
so turns on a hairsplitting point that even the schools can retain it only
as long as they can keep it standing there spinning around ceaselessly
like a top, and thus even in their own eyes it provides no persisting
foundation on which anything could be built. Here all the proofs that
the world can use preserve their undiminished worth, and rather gain
in clarity and unaffected conviction through the removal of those dog­
matic pretensions, since they place reason in its proper territory, namely
the order of ends that is yet at the same time an order of nature; but
then since reason exists at the same time as a practical faculty in itself,
without being limited to the conditions of the latter order, it is justified
in extending the former order, and with it our whole existence, beyond
the bounds of experience and life. By analogy with the nature of liv­
ing beings in this world, regarding which reason must assume as a nec­
essary principle that no organ, no faculty, nothing superfluous, or
disproportionate to its use, hence nothing purposeless is to be met with,
but rather that everything is to be judged as precisely suitable to its
functiona in life, the human being, who alone can contain within him­
self the ultimate final endb of all this, would have to be the only crea­
ture excepted from it. For his natural predispositions, not only his
talents and the drives to make use of them, but chiefly the moral law in
Bestimmung
b letzten Endzweck

a

454

On the paralogisms of pure reason <B>

him, go so far beyond all the utility and advantage that he could draw
from them in this life that the latter teaches him to esteem above all else
the mere consciousness of a disposition to rectitude, even in the absence
of any advantage, even of the phantom of posthumous fame, and he
feels himself called inwardly, through his conduct in this world, and the
sacrifice of many advantages, to make himself a suitable citizen of a better one, which he has in its idea. This powerful ground of proof, which
can never be refuted, accompanied by an ever increasing cognition of
the purposiveness in everything we see and by a vision of the immensity of creation, hence also by the consciousness of a certain boundlessness in the possible extension of our knowledge, a along with a drive
commensurate to it, always still remains, even if we must equally give
up insight into the necessary continuation of our existence from the
merely theoretical cognition of our self.

B 42 6

Conclusion of the solution of the psychological
paralogism.
The dialectical illusion in rational psychology rests on the confusion of
an idea of reason (of a pure intelligence) with the concept, in every way
indeterminate, of a thinking being in general. I think of my self, in be­
half of a possible experience, by abstracting from all actual experience,
and from this conclude that I could become conscious of my existence
even outside experience and of its empirical conditions. Consequently I
confuse the possible abstraction from my empirically determined existence with the supposed consciousness of a separate possible existence
of my thinking Self, and believe that I cognize what is substantial in me
as a transcendental subject, since I have in thought merely the unity of
consciousness that grounds everything determinate as the mere form of
cognition.
The problem of explaining the community of the soul with the body
does not properly belong to the psychology that is here at issue, because
it intends to prove the personality of the soul even outside this commu­
nity (after death), and so it is transcendent in the proper sense, even
though it concerns an object b of experience, but only to the extent that
it ceases to be an object of experience. Meanwhile in accord with our
doctrineC a sufficient reply can also be given to this problem. The diffi­
culty presented by this problem consists, as is well known, in the pre­
sumed difference in kind between the object of inner sense (the soul) and
a Kenntnisse
b Object
, Lehrbegriff

455

B 42 7

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. I <B>

B 42 8

the object of outer sense, since to the former only time pertains as the
formal condition of its intuition, while to the latter space pertains also.
But if one considers that the two kinds of objects are different not in­
wardly but only insofar as one of them appears outwardly to the other,
hence that what grounds the appearance of matter a s thing in itself
might perhaps not be so different in kind, then this difficulty vanishes,
and the only difficulty remaining is that concerning how a community
of substances is possible at all, the resolution of which lies entirely out­
side the field of psychology, and, as the reader can easily judge from what
was said in the Analytic about fundamental powers and faculties, this
without any doubt also lies outside the field of all human cognition.
General remark

concerning the transition from rational psychology

to cosmology.

B 42 9

The proposition "I think, " or "I exist thinking," is an empirical propo­
sition. But such a proposition is grounded on empirical intuition, con­
sequently also on the object thought, as an appearance; and thus it
seems as if, according to our theory, the whole, even in thinking, is
completely transformed into appearance, and in such a way our con­
sciousness itself, as mere illusion, would in fact come down to nothing.o
Thinking, taken in itself,b is merely the logical function and hence
the sheer spontaneity of combining the manifold of a merely possible
intuition; and in no way does it present the subject of consciousness as
appearance, merely because i t takes n o account a t all o f the kind o f in­
tuition, whether it is sensible or intellectual. In this way I represent my­
self to myself neither as I am nor as I appear to myself, but rather I think
myself only as I do every objectd in general from whose kind of intuition
I abstract. If here I represent myself as subject of a thought or even as
ground of thinking, then these ways of representing do not signify the
categories of substance or cause, for these categories are those functions
of thinking (of judging) applied to our sensible intuition, which would
obviously be demanded if I wanted to cognize myself. But now I want
to become conscious of myself only as thinking; I put to one side how
my proper self is given in intuition, and then it could be a mere ap­
pearance that I think, but not insofar as I think; in the consciousness of
myself in mere thinking I am the being itself, about which, however,
nothing yet is thereby given to me for thinking.
aufnichts gehen
b for sich
, tauter
d Object
a

456

On the paralogisms of pure reason <B>
But the proposition "I think," insofar as it says only that I exist
thinking, is not a merely logical function, but rather determines the
subject (which is then at the same time an object)O in regard to existence,
and this cannot take place without inner sense, whose intuition always
makes available the objectb not as thing in itself but merely as appearance. Thus in this proposition there is already no longer merely spontaneity of thinking, but also receptivity of intuition, i.e., the thinking of
my self applied to the empirical intuition of the very same subject. It is
in this latter that the thinking self must now seek the conditions of the
use of its logical functions for categories of substance, cause, etc., so as
not merely to indicate itself as objectC in itself through the "I," but also
to determine its kind of existence, i.e., to cognize it as noumenon;
which, however, is impossible, since inner empirical intuition is sensible,
and makes available nothing but data of appearance, which affords nothing for knowledge of the separate existence of the objectd of pure con­
sciousness, but can serve merely in behalf of experience.
But suppose there subsequently turned up - not in experience but in
certain (not merely logical rules but) laws holding firm a priori and con­
cerning our existence - the occasion for presupposing ourselves to be
legislative fully a priori in regard to our own existence, e and as self-de­
termining in this existence! then this would disclose a spontaneity
through which our actuality is determinable without the need of condi­
tions of empirical intuition; and here we would become aware that in
the consciousness of our existence something is ,� ontained a priori that
can serve to determine our existence, which is thoroughly determinable
only sensibly, in regard to a certain inner faculty in relation to an intelligible world (obviously one only thought of).
But this would nonetheless bring all the attempts of rational psy­
chology not the least bit further. For through this admirable faculty,
which for the first time reveals to me the consciousness of the moral
law, I would indeed have a principleg for the determination of my
existence that is purely intellectual; but through which predicates?
Through none other than those that would have to be given to me in
sensible intuition, and thus I would have landed right back where I was
in rational psychology, namely in need of sensible intuitions in order
to obtain significance for my concepts of the understanding, substance,
cause, etc.; but those intuitions can never help me up beyond the field
a Object
b Object
, Object
d Object
, Dasein
f Existenz
g Princip
457

B 430

B 43 1

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. I <B>

B 43 2

of experience. Meanwhile, I would still be warranted in applying these
concepts in regard to their practical use, which is always directed to
objects of experience, according to their analogical significance in their
theoretical use, to freedom and the free subject, since by them I un­
derstand merely the logical functions of subject and predicate, ground
and consequence, in accordance with which actions or effects are determined in conformity to those laws in such a way that they can a t the
same time always be explained conformably to the laws of nature and
the categories of substance and cause, although they arise from a
wholly different principle.a This should have been said only to guard
against a misunderstanding that easily arises regarding this doctrine
about our self-intuition as appearance. In the following there will be
opportunity to make use of it.>
a Princip

I

458

The
Transcendental Dialectic
Second Book
Second Chapter
The antinomy ofpure reason44

We have shown in the introduction to this part of our work that every
transcendental illusion of pure reason rests on dialectical inferences,
whose schema is provided in general by logic in the three formal species
of syllogisms, just as the categories find their logical schema in the four
functions of all judgments. The first species of these sophistical inferences had to do with the unconditioned unity of the subjective conditions of all representations in general (of the subject or the soul),
corresponding to the categorical syllogisms, whose major premise, as a
principle, a states the relation of a predicate to a subject. Thus the second species of dialectical argument, by analogy with hypothetical syl­
logisms, will make the unconditioned unity of objective conditions in
appearance its content, just as the third species, which will come forward in the following chapter, has as its theme the unconditioned unity
of objective conditions of the possibility of objects in general.
It is remarkable, however, that the transcendental paralogism effects
a merely one-sided illusion regarding the idea of the subject of our
thought, and for the opposite assertion there is not the least plausibili­
tyb forthcoming from concepts of reason. The advantage is entirely on
the side of pneumatism, even though pneumatism cannot deny that rad­
ical defect through which its entire plausibility dissolves into mere haze
when put to the fiery test of critique.45
It turns out wholly otherwise when we apply reason to the objective
synthesis of appearances, where reason thinks to make its principlec of
unconditioned unity valid with much plausibility;d but it soon finds ita Princip
b

Schein

, Principium
d zwar mit vie/em Scheine
459

A406

B 433

A407

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 434

A408

B435

self involved in such contradictions that it is compelled to relinquish its
demands in regard to cosmology.
Here a new phenomenon of human reason shows itself, namely a
wholly natural antithetic, for which one does not need to ponder or to
lay artificial snares, but rather into which reason falls of itself and even
unavoidably; and thus it guards reason against the slumber of an imag­
ined conviction, such as a merely one-sided illusion produces, but at the
same time leads reason into the temptation either to surrender itself to
a skeptical hopelessness or else to assume an attitude of dogmatic stub­
bornness, setting its mind rigidly to certain assertions without giving a
fair hearing to the grounds for the opposite. Either alternative is the
death of a healthy philosophy, though the former might also be called
the euthanasia of pure reason.
Before we allow the divisions and dissensions occasioned by this con­
tradiction in the laws (antinomy) of pure reason to make their entrance,
we will offer certain elucidations that can classify and justify the method
we will employ in treating our subject matter. I call all transcendental
ideas, insofar as they concern absolute totality in the synthesis of appearances, world-concepts,46 partly because of the unconditioned totality on
which the concept of the world-whole also rests even though it is only an
idea, and partly because they have to do merely with the synthesis of ap­
pearances, and hence with the empirical, whereas the absolute totality of
the synthesis of the condition of all possible things in general will occasion an ideal o f pure reason, which i s wholly distinct from th e world-con­
cept, even though it stands in relation to it. Hence just as the paralogism
of pure reason laid the ground for a dialectical psychology, so the antin­
omy of pure reason will put before our eyes the transcendental principles
of an alleged pure (rational) cosmology, yet not in order to find it valid
and to appropriate it, but rather, as is already indicated by terming it a
contradiction of reason, in order to display it in its dazzling but false
plausibility a as an idea that cannot be made to agree with appearances.

The
Antinomy of Pure Reason
First Section
The system o f co sm ologi cal ideas.

A409

Now in order to be able to enumerate these ideas with systematic pre­
cision according to a principle,b we must first note that it is only from
the understanding that pure and transcendental concepts can arise, that
reason really cannot generate any concept at all, but can at most only
free a concept of the understanding from the unavoidable limitations
a

Schein

b Princip
460

Section 1. System of cosmological ideas

of a possible experience, and thus seek to extend it beyond the boundaries of the empirical, though still in connection with it. This happens
when for a given conditioned reason demands an absolute totality on
the side of the conditions (under which the understanding subjects all
appearances to synthetic unity), thereby making the category into a
transcendental idea, in order to give absolute completeness to the empirical synthesis through its progress toward the unconditioned (which
is never met with in experience, but only in the idea). Reason demands
this in accordance with the principle: If the conditioned is given, then
the whole sum of conditions, and hence the absolutely uncondi­
tioned, is also given, through which alone the conditioned was possible.47 Thus first, the transcendental ideas will really be nothing except
categories extended to the unconditioned, and the former may be
brought into a table ordered according to the headings of the latter.
Second, however, not all categories will work here, but only those in
which the synthesis constitutes a series, and indeed a series of conditions subordinated (not coordinated) one to another for any conditioned. Absolute totality is demanded by reason only insofar as reason
is concerned with the ascending series of conditions for a given conditioned, hence not when dealing with the descending line of conse­
quences, nor with the aggregate of coordinated conditions for these
consequences. For in regard to the given conditioned, conditions are
regarded as already presupposed and given along with the conditioned;
whereas, since the consequences do not make their conditions possible,
but rather presuppose them, in proceeding to the consequences (or in
descending from a given condition to the conditioned) one remains un­
troubled about whether or not in general the series stops, and the question about its totality is not at all a presupposition of reason.
Thus one necessarily thinks of the fully elapsed time up to the present
moment as also given (even if not as determinable by us). But as to the
future, since it is not a condition for attaining to the present, it is a mat­
ter of complete indifference for comprehending the present what we
want to hold about future time, whether it stops somewhere or runs on
to infinity. Let there be a series m, n, 0, in which n is given as conditioned
in respect of m, but at the same time as the condition of 0, and the series
ascends from the conditioned n to m (/, k,j, etc.); then I must presuppose
the first series in order to regard n as given, and n is possible in accordance with reason (with the totality of conditions) only by means of that
series; but its possibility does not rest on the subsequent series 0, p, q, r,
which therefore cannot" be regarded as given, but only as dabilis. b
a

nicht . . . kijnne. The fourth edition changes from the present to the imperfect subjunc­
tive, reading "nicht . . . konnte" (could not).

h capable of bei.lg given

46 1

B 436

A4IO

B 43 7

A41 I
B 438

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

I will call the synthesis of a series on the side of the conditions, thus
proceeding from the condition proximate to the given appearance to­
ward the more remote conditions, the regressive synthesis, and the
synthesis proceeding on the side of the conditioned, from its proximate
consequence to the more remote ones, the progressive synthesis. The
first proceeds in antecedienta, a the second in consequentia. b Thus the cos­
mological ideas are concerned with the totality of the regressive syn­
thesis, and go in antecedentia, not in consequentia. If this latter happens,
then that is an arbitrary and not a necessary problem of pure reason, be­
cause for the complete comprehensibility of what is given in appearance
we need its grounds but not its consequences.
Now in order to set up a table of ideas according to the table of cat­
egories, we first take the two original quanta of all intuition, space and
time. Time is in itself a series (and the formal condition of all series),
and hence in it, in regard to a given present, the antecedentia are to be
distinguished a priori as conditions (the past) from the consequentiaC (the
future). Consequently, the transcendental idea of an absolute totality of
the series of conditions for a given conditioned applies only to all past
time. According to the idea of reason, the whole elapsed past time is
thought of as given necessarily as the condition for the given moment.
But as for space, in it there is no difference between progress and
regress, because it constitutes an aggregate, but not a series, since all
its parts exist simultaneously. I could regard the present point in time
only as conditioned in regard to past time but never as its condition, be­
cause this moment first arises only through the time that has passed (or
rather through the passing of the preceding time). But since the parts
of space are not subordinated to one another but are coordinated with
one another, one part is not the condition of the possibility of another,
and space, unlike time, does not in itself constitute a series. Yet the syn­
thesis of the manifold parts of space, through which we apprehend it, is
nevertheless successive, and thus occurs in time and contains a series.48
And since in this series of aggregated spaces of a given space (e.g., the
feet in a rod), the further spaces, starting with a given one, are each
thought of as the condition of the boundaries of the previous ones,
the measurement of a space is to be regarded as a synthesis of a series
of conditions for a given conditioned; only the side of the conditions is
not in itself distinguished from the side lying beyond the conditioned,
consequently regressus and progressus in space appear to be one and the
same.49 Nonetheless, because a part of space is not given through ana

toward antecedents

b toward consequents
, In Kant's text, this word is given in the ablative (consequentibus); when Kant uses Latin
nouns he declines them as if he were writing the whole context in Latin.
462

Section L System of cosmological ideas

other part but is only bounded by it, we must to that extent regard every
bounded space as also conditioned, presupposing another space as the
condition of its boundary, and so forth. Thus regarding boundedness,
the progression is also a regress, and the transcendental idea of the ab­
solute totality of a synthesis in the series of conditions also applies to
space, and I can ask about the absolute totality of appearances in space
as well as in past time. But whether an answer to any of these questions
is possible will be determined in the future.
Second, reality in space, i.e., matter, is likewise something condi­
tioned, whose inner conditions are its parts, and the parts of those parts
are the remote conditions, so that there occurs here a regressive syn­
thesis, whose absolute totality reason demands; and that cannot occur
otherwise than through a complete division, in which the reality of mat­
ter disappears either into nothing or else into that which is no longer
matter, namely the simple. 50 Consequently here too there is a series of
conditions and a progress toward the unconditioned.
Third, as far as the categories of real relation among appearances are
concerned, the category of substance and its accidents is not suited to a
transcendental idea, i.e., in regard to this category reason has no ground
to proceed regressively toward conditions. For accidents (insofar as
they inhere in a single substance) are coordinated with one another, and
do not constitute a series. In regard to substance, however, they are not
really subordinated to it, but are rather the way substance itself exists.
What might still seem to be an idea of transcendental reason here
would be the concept of the substantial. Only since this signifies noth­
ing other than the concept of a subsisting object in general, insofar as
one thinks in it merely the transcendental subject without any predi­
cates, but here only the unconditioned in a series of appearances is
under discussion, it is clear that the substantial cannot constitute a
member of thatY The same holds for substances in community, which
are mere aggregates and have no exponents of a series, since they are
not subordinated to one another as conditions of their possibility, which
one could very well have said about spaces, whose boundaries were
never determined in themselves, but always through another space.
Thus there remains only the category of causality, which provides a se­
ries of causes for a given effect, in which one can ascend from the effect
as the conditioned to the causes as conditions, and answer the question
of reason.52
Fourth, the concepts of the possible, actual, and necessary lead to no
series, except only insofar as the contingent in existence always has to
be seen as conditioned and refers in accordance with the rule of the un­
derstanding to a condition under which it is necessary to refer this to a
higher condition, until reason attains to unconditioned necessity only
in the series in its totality. 53
463

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

There are, accordingly, no more than four cosmological ideas, ac­
cording to the four headings of the categories, if one selects those that
necessarily carry with them a series in the synthesis of the manifold.
1.

B 443

The absolute completeness
of the
composition
of a given whole of all appearances.a
2.

3·

The
absolute
completeness
of the division
of a given whole
in appearance.

The
absolute
completeness
of the arising
of an appearance in general.
4·

The absolute completeness
of the dependence of the existence
of the alterable in appearance.b
A416

B 444

The first thing to be noted here is that the idea of an absolute totality concerns nothing other than the expositionc of appearances, hence
it does not concern the understanding's pure concept of a whole of
things in general. Thus appearances are considered here as given, and
reason demands the absolute completeness of the conditions of their
possibility, insofar as these conditions constitute a series, hence an ab­
solutely (i.e., in all respects) complete synthesis, through which appear­
ance could be expoundedd in accordance with laws of the understanding.
Second, it is properly only the unconditioned that reason seeks in this
synthesis of conditions, which proceeds serially, and indeed regressively,
hence as it were the completeness in the series of premises that together
presuppose no further premise. Now this unconditioned is always con­
tained in the absolute totality of the series if one represents it in
imagination. Yet this absolutely complete synthesis is once again only
an idea; for with appearances one cannot know, at least not beforehand,
Added in Kant's copy: " 'Absolute totality' signifies the totality of the manifold of a thing
in itself and is something contradictory in respect of appearances as mere representa­
tions, which are to be encountered only in the progression, not outside it in them­
selves." (E CLxv, p. 49; 2 3 : 40)
b Added in Kant's copy: "That there is no difficulty in thinking of the form of the world,
i.e., of the commercii of substances as phenomena, for they are in space and time; but as
noumena substances do not [have] existence, and the possibility of a world is not explain­
able. But if it is assumed, then more worlds are possible." (E CLXVI, pp. 49-50; 2 3'40)

a

, Exposition
d exponiert

464

Section 1. System of cosmological ideas

whether such a synthesis is even possible. If one represents everything
through mere pure concepts of the understanding, without the condi­
tions of sensible intuition, then one can say directly that for a given
conditioned the whole series of conditions subordinated one to another
is given; for the former is given only through the latter. But with ap­
pearances a special limitation is encountered in the way conditions are
given, namely through the successive synthesis of the manifold of intu­
ition, which is supposed to be complete in the regress. Now whether
this completeness is sensibly possible is still a problem. Yet the idea of
this completeness still lies in reason, irrespective of the possibility or
impossibility of connecting empirical concepts to it adequately. Thus,
since the unconditioned is necessarily contained in the absolute totality
of the regressive synthesis of the manifold in appearance (following the
categories, which represent appearance as a series of conditions for a
given conditioned), one might also leave it undecided whether and how
this totality is to be brought about; here reason thus takes the path of
proceeding from the idea of a totality, even though it really has as its
final intent the unconditioned, whether of the whole series or one part
of it.
Now one can think of this unconditioned either as subsisting merely
in the whole series, in which thus every member without exception is
conditioned, and only their whole is absolutely unconditioned, or else
the absolutely unconditioned is only a part of the series, to which the
remaining members of the series are subordinated but that itself stands
under no other condition. * In the first case the series is given a parte pri­
ori without bounds (without a beginning), i.e., it is given as infinite and
at the same time whole, but the regress in it is never complete and can
be called only potentia/itera infinite. In the second case there is a first
[member] in the series, which in regard to past time is called the be­
ginning of the world, in regard to space and boundary of the world,
in regard to the parts of a whole given in its bounds the simple, in re­
gard to causes absolute self-activity (freedom), in regard to the exis­
tence of alterable things absolute natural necessity.
We have two expressions, world and nature, which are sometimes
run together. The first signifies the mathematical whole of all appear* The absolute whole of the series of conditions for a given conditioned is al­
ways unconditioned, because outside it there are no more conditions regard­
ing which it could be conditioned. But the absolute whole of such a series is
only an idea, or rather a problematic concept, whose possibility has to be in­
vestigated, particularly in reference to the way in which the unconditioned
may be contained in it as the properly transcendental idea that is at issue.
a

potentially
465

B 445

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

ances and the totality of their synthesis in the great as well as in the
small, i.e., in their progress through compositiona as well as through di­
vision. But the very same world is called nature* insofar as it is consid­
ered as a dynamic whole and one does not look at the aggregation in
space or time so as to bring about a quantity, but looks instead at the
unity in the existence of appearances. Now the condition of what hap­
pens is called the cause, and the unconditioned causality of the cause in
appearance is called freedom; the conditioned cause in the narrower
sense, on the contrary, is called the natural cause. The conditioned in
existence in general is called contingent, and the unconditioned neces­
sary. The unconditioned necessity of appearances can be called natural
necessity.
Above I have called the ideas with which we are now concerned "cos­
mological ideas," partly because by "world" is understood the sum total
of all appearances, and our ideas are also directed only toward the un­
conditioned among appearances, but partly too because in the tran­
scendental sense the word "world" signities the absolute totality of the
sum total of existing things, and we are directing our attention only to
the completeness of the synthesis (though properly only in the regress
toward its conditions). Considering, moreover, that taken collectively
these ideas are all transcendent and, even though they do not overstep
the object,b namely appearances, in kind, but have to do only with the
sensible world (not with noumena) , c they nevertheless carry the synthe­
sis to a degree that transcends all possible experience; thus in my opin­
ion one can quite appropriately call them collectively world-concepts.
In regard to the distinction between the mathematically and the dy­
namically unconditioned toward which the regress aims, I would call
the first two world-concepts in a narrower sense (the world in great and
* "Nature" taken adjectivally lformaliter)d signifies the connection of determi­
nations of a thing in accordance with an inner principle' of causality.
Conversely, by "nature" taken substantively (materialiter! is understood the
sum total of appearances insofar as these are in thoroughgoing connection
through an inner principleg of causality. In the first sense one speaks of the
"nature" of fluid matter, of fire, etc., and employs this word adjectivally; con­
versely, if one talks about the "things of nature," then one has in mind a sub­
sisting whole.
a Zusammensetzung

b Object
C

d

Kant declines the word in the Latin dative, as Noumenis.
formally

, Princip
f materially
g Princip
466

Section II. The antithetic of pure reason

small), but the remaining two transcendent concepts of nature. Up
to now this distinction has been of no particular relevance, but as we
proceed it may become more important.
The
Antinomy of Pure Reason
Second Section
Antithetic of pure reason.
If any sum total of dogmatic doctrines is a "thetic," then by "antithetic"
I understand not the dogmatic assertion of the opposite but rather the
conflict between what seem to be dogmatic cognitions (thesin cum an­
tithesl),a without the ascription of a preeminent claim to approval of one
side or the other. Thus an antithetic does not concern itself with onesided assertions, but considers only the conflict between general cognitions of reason and the causes of this conflict. The transcendental
antithetic is an investigation into the antinomy of pure reason, its causes
and its result. If in using principles of the understanding we apply our
reason not merely to objects of experience, for the use of principles of
understanding, but instead venture also to extend these principles beyond the boundaries of experience, then there arise sophistical theorems,b which may neither hope for confirmation in experience nor fear
refutation by it; and each of them is not only without contradiction in
itself but even meets with conditions of its necessity in the nature of
reason itself, only unfortunately the opposite has on its side equally
valid and necessary grounds for its assertion.
The questions that are naturally presented by such a dialectic of pure
reason are these: I . In which propositions is pure reason inevitably re­
ally subjected to an antinomy? 2 . On what causes does this antinomy
rest? 3 . In what way, if any, given this contradiction, does a path to cer­
tainty nevertheless remain open to reason?
A dialectical theorem of pure reason must accordingly have the fol­
lowing feature, distinguishing it from all sophisticale propositions: it
does not concern an arbitrary question that one might raise only at
one's option, but one that every human reason must necessarily come
up against in the course of its progress; and second, this proposition and
its opposite must carry with them not merely an artificial illusion that
disappears as soon as someone has insight into it, but rather a natural
and unavoidable illusion, which even if one is no longer fooled by it,
a "thesis with antithesis." The correct Latin would be thesis; Kant does not seem to have

made up his mind whether the phrase is supposed to be in Latin or in Greek.

b vernunftelnde Lehrsdtze
, sophistischen
467

A42 I

B 449

A42 2

B 450

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

A42 3

B 4S I

A424

B 4S 2

still deceives though it does not defraud and which thus can be rendered
harmless but never destroyed.
Such a dialectical doctrine will relate not to the unity of understand­
ing in concepts of experience, but to the unity of reason in mere ideas,
whose conditions, since, as a synthesis according to rules, must first be
congruent with the understanding, and yet at the same time, as the ab­
solute unity of this synthesis, must be congruent with reason, will be too
large for the understanding if this unity is to be adequate to the unity of
reason, and yet too small for reason if they are suited to the under­
standing; from this there must arise a contradiction that cannot be
avoided no matter how one may try.
These sophisticala assertions thus open up a dialectical battlefield,
where each party will keep the upper hand as long as it is allowed to attack, and will certainly defeat that which is compelled to conduct itself b
merely defensively. Hence hardy knights, whether they support the
good or the bad cause, are certain of carrying away the laurels of victory
if only they take care to have the prerogative of making the last attack,
and are not bound to resist a new assault from the opponent. One can
easily imagine that from time immemorial this arena has often been en­
tered, both sides gaining many victories, but that each time the final
victory was decisive merely because care was taken that the champion
of the good cause held the field alone, his opponent having been for­
bidden to take up his weapons again. As impartial referees we have to
leave entirely aside whether it is a good or a bad cause for which the
combatants are fighting, and just let them settle the matter themselves.
Perhaps after they have exhausted rather than injured each other, they
will see on their own that their dispute is nugatory, and part as good
friends.
This method of watching or even occasioning a contest between as­
sertions, not in order to decide it to the advantage of one party or the
other, but to investigate whether the object of the dispute is not perhaps
a mere mirage at which each would snatch in vain without being able
to gain anything even if he met with no resistance - this procedure, I
say, can be called the skeptical method. It is entirely different from
skepticism, a principle of artfuld and scientific ignorance that under­
mines the foundations of all cognition, in order, if possible, to leave no
reliability or certainty anywhere. For the skeptical method aims at cer­
tainty, seeking to discover the point of misunderstanding in disputes
that are honestly intended and conducted with intelligence by both
verniinftelnden
b veifahren; in the first edition, the word is fohren (carry on).
Blendwerk
d kunstmaflig

a

,

468

Section II. The antithetic of pure reason
sides, in order to do as wise legislators do when from the embarrass­
ment of judges in cases of litigation they draw instruction concerning
that which is defective and imprecisely determined in their laws. The
antinomy that reveals itself in the application of the law is for our lim­
ited wisdom the best way to test nomothetics,a in order to make reason,
which does not easily become aware of its false steps in abstract specu­
lation, attentive to the moments involved in determining its principles.
This skeptical method, however, is essentially suited only to tran­
scendental philosophy, and can in any case be dispensed with in every
other field of investigation, but not in this one. In mathematics its use
would be absurd, because nowhere in mathematics do false assertions
disguise themselves and make themselves invisible; for mathematical
proofs always have to proceed along the lines of pure intuition, and indeed always through a self-evident synthesis. In experimental philosophy a doubt postponing judgment can be useful, but at least there is no
possible misunderstanding that cannot be easily removed, and the ultimate means for deciding the controversy must at last lie in experience,
whether it is found early or late. Morality can also give us its principles
as a whole in concreto, along with their practical consequences in at least
possible experiences, and thereby avoid misunderstandings due to ab­
straction. On the contrary, the transcendental assertions that presume
to extend their insight beyond the field of all possible experience are
neither in the case where their synthesis could be given in an a priori intuition, nor are they so constituted that a misunderstanding could be
exposed by means of any experience. Transcendental reason thus permits no touchstone other than its own attempt to bring internal unification to its assertions, and this requires a free and unhindered contest
of these assertions among themselves, which we will now initiate.*

* The antinomies follow according to the order of the transcendental ideas in­
troduced above.
a Priifungsversuch der Nomothetik

469

A42 5

B 45 3

The Antinomy of Pure Reason
First Conflict of the Transcendental Ideas 5 4

Thesis
The world has a beginning in time, and in space it is also enclosed in
boundaries.
Proof

A42 8 / B 456

A426/ B 454
A42 8 / B 456

For if one assumes that the world has no beginning in time, then up to
every given point in time an eternity has elapsed, and hence an infinite
series of states of things in the world, each following another, has passed
away. But now the infinity of a series consists precisely in the fact that
it can never be completed through a successive synthesis. Therefore an
infinitely elapsed world-series is impossible, so a beginning of the world
is a necessary condition of its existence; which was the first point to be
proved.55
Regarding the second point, again assume the opposite: then the
world would be an infinite given whole of simultaneously existing
things. Now we can think of the magnitude of a quantuma that is not
given as within certain boundaries of every intuition* in no other way
than by the synthesis of its parts, and we can think of the totality of such
a quantumb only through the completed synthesis, or through the re­
peated addition of units to each other.t Accordingly, in order to think
* We can intuit an indeterminate quantum as a whole, if it is enclosed within
boundaries, without needing to construct its totality through measurement,
i.e., through the successive synthesis of its parts. For the boundaries already
determine its completeness by cutting off anything further.
t The concept of a totality is in this case nothing other than the representation
of the completed synthesis of its parts, because, since we cannot draw the con­
cept from an intuition of the whole (which is impossible in this case), we can
grasp it, at least in the idea, only through the synthesis of the parts up to their
completion in the infinite.
•

b

Kant prints the word in German type but declines it in the Latin genitive: Quanti.
Again, the genitive Quanti is used.
470

The Antinomy ofPure Reason
First Conflict of the Transcendental Ideas

Antithesis
The world has no beginning and no bounds in space, but is infinite with
regard to both time and space.
Proof
For suppose that it has a beginning. Since the beginning is an existence
preceded by a time in which the thing is not, there must be a preceding
time in which the world was not, i.e., an empty time. But now no aris­
ing of any sort of thing is possible in an empty time, because no part of
such a time has, in itself, prior to another part, any distinguishing con­
dition of its existence rather than its non-existence (whether one as­
sumes that it comes to be of itself or through another cause). Thus
many series of things may begin in the world, but the world itself can­
not have any beginning, and so in past time it is infinite. 56
As to the second point, first assume the opposite, namely that the
world is finite and bounded in space; then it exists in an empty space,
which is not bounded. There would thus be encountered not only a re­
lationa between things in space, but also a relation of things to space.
Now since the world is an absolute whole, besides which there is encountered no object of intuition, and hence no correlate of the world to
which the world could stand in relation, the relation o f the world to
empty space would be a relation of the world to no object. Such a relation, however, and hence also the boundedness of the world by empty
space, is nothing; therefore the world is not bounded at all in space, i.e.,
in its extension it is infinite.*
* Space is merely the form of outer intuition (formal intuition), but not a real
object that can b e outwardly intuited. Space, prior to all things determining
(filling or bounding) it, or which, rather, give an empirical intuition as to its
form, is, under the name of absolute space,5? nothing other than the mere posa

Verhaltnis; this will be the only word translated "relation" in Section 2 of the Antinomies
unless otherwise noted.
47 1

A42 9 / B45 7

A429 / B 45 7

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

the world that fills all space as a whole, the successive synthesis of the
parts of an infinite world would have to be regarded as completed, i.e.,
in the enumeration of all coexisting things, an infinite time would have
to be regarded as having elapsed, which is impossible. Accordingly, an
infinite aggregate of actual things cannot be regarded as a given whole,
hence cannot be regarded as given simultaneously. Consequently, a
world is not infinite in its extension in space, but is rather enclosed
within its boundaries, which was the second point.
Remark on the First Antinomy
1. On the Thesis

A43 0 / B 4S8

A43 2 / B 460

In these mutually conflicting arguments I have not sought semblancesa
in order to present (as one says) a lawyer's proof, which takes advantage
of an opponent's carelessness and gladly permits a misunderstanding of
the law in order to build the case for his own unjust claims on the refu­
tation of the other side. Each of these proofs is drawn from the nature
of the case, and any advantage that could be given to us by the fallacies
of dogmatists on either side is to be set aside.
I could also have given a plausibleb proof of the thesis by presuppos­
ing a defective concept of the infinity of a given magnitude, according
to the custom of the dogmatists. A magnitude is infinite if none greater
than it (i.e., greater than the multiplec of a given unit contained in it) is
possible.58 Now no multiplicity is the greatest, because one or more
units can always be added to it. Therefore an infinite given magnitude,
and hence also an infinite world (regarding either the past series or ex­
tension), is impossible; thus the world is bounded in both respects. I
could have carried out my proof in this way: only this concept does not
agree with what is usually understood by an infinite whole. It does not
represent how great it is, hence this concept is not the concept of a
maximum; rather, it thinks only of the relation to an arbitrarily as­
sumed unit, in respect of which it is greater than any number.
According as the unit is assumed to be greater or smaller, this infinity
would be greater or smaller; yet infinity, since it consists merely in the
relation to this given unit, would always remain the same, even though
in this way the absolute magnitude of the whole would obviously not be
cognized at all, which is not here at issue.
The true (transcendental) concept of infinity is that the successive
synthesis of unity in the traversal of a quantum can never be com-

Blendwerke
dem Scheine nach
, Menge
a

h

472

Section II. The antithetic of pure reason

II. Remark
On the Antithesis.

The proof for the infinity of the world-series and of the sum total of the
world rests on the fact that in the contrary case an empty time, and
likewise an empty space, would have to constitute the boundary of the
world. Now it is not unknown to me that attempts are made to avoid
this consequence by alleging that a boundary of the world in space and
time may quite well be possible without having to assume an absolute
time before the world's beginning or an absolute space spreading be­
yond the real world, which is impossible. I am quite satisfied with the
last part of this opinion of philosophers of the Leibnizian school. Space
is merely the form of outer intuition, but not a real object that can be
externally intuited, and it is not a correlate of appearances, but rather
the form of appearances themselves. Thus space taken absolutely (sim­
ply by itself) alone cannot occur as something determining the existence
of things, because it is not an object at all, but only the form of possible
objects. Thus things, as appearances, do determine space, i.e., among all
its possible predicates (magnitude and relation) they make it the case
that this or that one belongs to reality; but space, as something subsist­
ing in itself, cannot conversely determine the reality of things in regard
to magnitude and shape, because it is nothing real in itself. A space,

sibility of external appearances, insofar as they either exist in themselves or
can be further added to given appearances. Thus empirical intuition is not put
together out of appearances and space (out of perception and empty intu­
ition). The one is not to the other a correlate of its synthesis, but rather it is
only bound up with it in one and the same empirical intuition, as matter and
its form. If one would posit one of these two elements outside the other (space
outside of all appearances), then from this there would arise all sorts of empty
determinations of outer intuition, which, however, are not possible percep­
tions. E.g., the world's movement or rest in infinite empty space59 is a deter­
mination of the relation of the two to one another that can never be perceived,
and is therefore the predicate of a mere thought-entity.
473

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

pleted." From this it follows with complete certainty that an eternity of
actual states, each following upon another up to a given point in time
(the present), cannot have passed away, and so the world must have a
beginning.
In regard to the second part of the thesis, the difficulty of a series that
is infinite and yet elapsed does not arise; for the manifold of an infi­
nitely extended world is given simultaneously. Yet in order to think the
totality of such a multiplicity, where we cannot appeal to boundaries
which would of themselves constitute this totality in intuition, we have
to give an account of our concept, since in such a case it cannot go from
the whole to a determinate multiplicity of parts, but must establish the
possibility of a whole through the successive synthesis of the parts. Now
since this synthesis has to constitute a series that is never to be com­
pleted, one can never think a totality prior to it and thus also through
it. For in this case the concept of the totality itself is the representation
of a completed synthesis of the parts, and this completion, hence also
its concept, is impossible.

A432 / B 460

* This [quantum] thereby contains a multiplicity (of given units) that is greater
than any number, and that is the mathematical concept of the infinite.
a

a Menge

474

Section II. The antithetic of pure reason

therefore (whether it is full or empty),* may well be bounded by appearances, but appearances cannot be bounded by an empty space outside themselves. The same also holds for time. Admitting all this, it is
nevertheless uncontroversial that one surely would have to assume
these two non-entities, empty space outside the world and empty time
before it, if one assumes a boundary to the world, whether in space or
in time.
For as to the attempt to escape this consequence by saying that if the
world has boundaries (in time and space) then the infinite emptiness
would have to determine the existence of things as to their magnitude,
this consists in thinking surrepjtiously of who knows what intelligible
world in place of a world of sense, and, instead of a first beginning (an
existence before which a time of non-existence precedes) one thinks of
an existence in general that presupposes no other condition in the
world, rather than the boundary of extension one thinks of the limits
of the world-whole, and thus one gets time and space out of the way.
But here we are talking only about the mundus phaenomenon a and its
magnitude, where one can in no way abstract from the intended condi­
tions of sensibility without removing the being itself. The world of
sense, if it is bounded, necessarily lies in an infinite emptiness. If one
wants to leave this out, and hence leave out space in general as the a pri­
ori condition of the possibility of appearances, then the whole world of
sense is left out. But in our problem this alone is given to us. The
mundus intelligibilis b is nothing but the concept of a world in general,
abstracting from all conditions of intuiting it, and in regard to which,
consequently, no synthetic proposition at all, whether affirmative or
negative, is possible.c
* It is easy to notice what would be said here: that empty space, insofar as it
is bounded by appearances, hence space within the world, does not con­
tradict transcendental principlesd at least, and thus could be allowed by them
(even though its possibility would not be directly asserted).
a world of appearance
b

intelligible world
, In the first edition, Kant notes: "The cosmological proof of the existence of a necessary
being is that from the first mover, or still more generally, from that which first begins.
Now with this, causality must also begin, because the concept of a beginning always
presupposes a time in which the series was not. In this time it still could not have causal­
ity, hence it would have had to begin first of all." (E CLXVIII, p. 50; 2 3 =40)

d

Principien

47 5

A43 3 / B 46 I

A43 I ! B 459
A43 3 / B 46 r

The Antinomy ofPure Reason
Second Conflict ofthe Transcendental ldeas 60

Thesis
Every composite substance in the world consists of simple parts, and
nothing exists anywhere except the simple or what is composed of
simples.
Proof

A436/B464

For, assume that composite substances do not consist of simple parts:
then, if all composition is removed in thought, no composite part, and
(since there are no simple parts) no simple part, thus nothing at all
would be left over; consequently, no substance would be given. Thus ei­
ther it is impossible to remove all composition in thought or else after
its removal something must be left over that subsists without any com­
position, i.e., the simple. In the first case, the composite would once
again not consist of substances (because with substances composition is
only a contingent relation,a apart from which, as beings persisting by
themselves, they must subsist). Now since this case contradicts the pre­
supposition, only the second case is left: namely, that what is a substan­
tial composite in the world consists of simple parts.6I
From this it follows immediately that all things in the world are sim­
ple beings, that composition is only an external state of these beings,
and that even though we can never put these elementary substances
completely outside this state of combination and isolate them, reason
must still think of them as the primary subjects of all composition and
hence think of them prior to it as simple beings.b
a Relation

b In the first edition, Kant notes: "In the intellectual, if all division is brought to an end,
the simple remains. In the sensible it can never be brought to an end. In thoughts, if it
is cancelled, nothing remains." (E CLXVII, p. 50; 2 3 :40)

476

The Antinomy ofPure Reason
Second Conflict of the Transcendental Ideas

Antithesis
No composite thing in the world consists of simple parts, and nowhere
in it does there exist anything simple.
Proof
Suppose a composite thing (as substance) consists of simple parts.
Because every external relation between substances, hence every com­
position of them, is possible only in space, there must exist as many
parts of space as there are parts of the composite thing occupying it.
Now space does not consist of simple parts, but of spaces. Thus every
part of the composite must occupy a space. But the absolutely primary
parts of the composite are simple. Thus the simple occupies a space.
Now since everything real that occupies a space contains within itself a
manifold of elements external to one another, and hence is composite,
and indeed, as a real composite, it is composed not of accidents (for they
cannot be external to one another apart from substance), but therefore
of substances; thus the simple would be a substantial composite, which
contradicts itself.
The second proposition of the antithesis, that in the world nothing
at all exists that is simple, is here supposed to signify only this: The existence of the absolutely simple cannot be established by any experience
or perception, whether external or internal, and the absolutely simple is
thus a mere idea, whose objective reality can never be established in any
possible experience, and hence in the expositiona of appearances it has
no application or object. For if we assumed that this transcendental idea
could find an object in experience, then empirical intuition of some
such object would have to be recognized, an intuition containing absolutely no manifold whose elements are external to one another and
bound into a unity. Now since there is no inference from our not being
conscious of <such a manifold to its> complete impossibility in any ina Exposition
477

A 4 3 7 / B 465

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

Remark on the Second Antinomy
I. On the Thesis
When I talk about a whole which necessarily consists of simple parts, I
understand thereby a substantial whole only as a proper composite, i.e.,
as a contingent unity of a manifold that, given as separated (at least in
thought), is posited in a reciprocal combination and thereby constitutes
one entity. Properly speaking, one should call space not a c0711positu711o
but a totU711, b because its parts are possible only in the whole, and not the
whole through the parts. In any case, it could be called a c0711positu711 ide­
aleC but not a c0711positu711 reale. d Yet this is only a subtlety. For since space
is not a composite of substances (not even of real accidents), if I remove
all composition from it, then nothing, not even a point, might be left
over; for a point is possible only as the boundary of a space (hence of a
composite). Thus space and time do not consist of simple parts. What
belongs only to the state of a substance, even if it has a magnitude (e.g.,
alteration), does not, therefore, consist of the simple, i.e., a certain de­
gree of alteration does not arise through the accumulation of many sim­
ple alterations. Our inference from the composite to the simple is valid
only for things subsisting by themselves.' But accidents of a state do not
subsist by themselves. Thus one can easily ruin the proof for the neces­
sity of simples as constituent parts of every substantial composite (and
thus also the whole thesis), if one extends the proof too far and tries to
make it valid for all composites without distinction, as has sometimes
actually happened.
a composite
b

whole
, ideal composite
d real composite

, for sich
478

Section II. The antithetic of pure reason

tuition of an object,a but this intuition is definitely required for absolute
simplicity, it follows that this simplicity cannot be inferred from any
perception, whatever it might be. Since, therefore, nothing can ever be
given as an absolutely simple object b in any possible experience, but the
world of sense must be regarded as the sum total of all possible experi­
ences, nothing simple is given anywhere in it.
This second proposition of the antithesis goes much further than the
first, since the first banishes the simple only from the intuition of the
composite, while the second, on the other hand, does away with the
simple in the whole of nature; hence also it could not have been proved
from the concept of a given object of outer intuition (of the composite),
but only from itsC relation to a possible experience in general.

II. Remark
On the Antithesis
Against this proposition that matter is infinitely divisible, for which the
ground of proof is merely mathematical, objections have been put for­
ward by monadists,62 who already lay themselves open to suspicion by
the fact that they would not allow even the clearest mathematical proofs
to count as insights into the constitution of space, insofar as it is in fact
the formal condition of the possibility of all matter, but would rather re­
gard these proofs only as inferences from abstract but arbitraryd con­
cepts which could not be relatede to real things. It is as if it were possible
to think up another kind of intuition than the one given in the original
intuition of space, and to treat the determinations of space a priori as
not at the same time applying to what is possible only insofar as it fills
space. If one listens to them, then besides mathematical points, which
are simple but are boundaries rather than parts of space, one would
have to think of physical points too as being not only simple, but as also
having, as parts of space, the privilege of filling it through their mere
aggregation. Without repeating here the common and clear refutations
of this absurdity, of which there are many, just as it is entirely pointless
to try by merely discursive concepts to rationalizeraway the evidence of
a Object; In the first edition: " . . . from the non-consciousness of a manifold to the com­
b

plete impossibility of such a [manifold] in any intuition of the same object . . . "

Object
, desselben; the grammatically possible antecedents for this possessive pronoun are: ( 1 )
"object" (in "a given object of outer intuition"); (2) "concept" (in "the concept of [the
object (1)]"; and (3) "the composite." Given the argument of the previous paragraph,
the most likely candidate seems to us to be (1), or possibly ( 2 ) .

d willkurlichen
, bezogen
f vernunfteln

479

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

A442 / B 470

Moreover, I am talking here only about the simple insofar as it is nec­
essarily given in the composite, so that the latter can be resolved into
the former as its constituent parts. The proper signification of the word
monas (in Leibniz's usage)63 refers only to the simple given immedi­
ately as simple substance (e.g., in self-consciousness) and not as ele­
ment of the composite, which one could better call the atom. And since
it is only in regard to composites that I want to prove simple substances,
as their elements, I could call the antithesis a of the second antinomy
"transcendental atomistic." But because this word has for some time al­
ready been used to indicate a special way of explaining corporeal ap­
pearances (molecularum),b and hence presupposes empirical concepts, it
may be called the dialectical principle of monadology.
Antithese; following Erdmann, we read These.
b of molecules
a

480

Section II. The antithetic of pure reason

mathematics, I will remark only that when philosophy quibbles with
mathematics, this happens only because it forgets that this question has
to do only with appearances and their conditions. Here, however, it is
not enough to find the concept of the simple for the pure concept of
the understanding of the composite, but one must find the intuition
of the simple for the intuition of the composite (for matter), and this is
entirely impossible in accordance with the laws of sensibility, hence impossible with objects of sense. Thus for a whole made up of substances
thought through the pure understanding it might very well hold that
prior to all composition of such substances we must have a simple; but
this does not hold for a totum substantiale phaenomenon,a which, as empirical intuition in space, carries with it the necessary property that no
part of it is simple, because no part of space is simple. Meanwhile, the
monadists are subtle enough to try to escape from this difficulty by not
presupposing space as a condition of the possibility of objects of outer
intuition (bodies), but rather presupposing these objects and the dynamical relation of substances in general as the condition of the possibility of space. Now we have a concept of bodies only as appearances,
but as such they necessarily presuppose space as the condition of the
possibility of all external appearance; and so this dodge is futile, just as
it has also been sufficiently blocked above in the Transcendental
Aesthetic. If they were things in themselves, then the proof of the
monadists would of course hold.
The second dialectical assertion has the peculiarity that it has against
i t a dogmatic assertion that is the only one o f all the sophisticalb assertions that undertakes to provide visible proof, in an object of experience, of the reality of something we have ascribed above merely to
transcendental ideas, namely the simplicityc of substance: namely, that
the object of inner sense, the I that thinks, is an absolutely simple substance. Without going into this (since it was considered more completely above), I will remark only that if something is merely thought as
an object, without adding any synthetic determination of its intuition
(as happens in the completely bare representation "I"), then of course
nothing manifold and no composition can be perceived in such a representation. Since, further, the predicates through which I think this
object are mere intuitions of inner sense, nothing can occur in them
that could prove a manifold of elements external to one another, and
hence real composition. Thus self-consciousness is such that because
the subject that thinks is simultaneously its own object,d it cannot divide
a substantial phenomenal whole
b verniinftelnden
, Simplicitiit
d Object
48 1

A44I / B 469

A443 / B 47 I

Section II. The antithetic of pure reason

itself (though it can divide the determinations inhering in it); for in re­
gard to its own self every object is absolute unity. Nonetheless, if this
subject is considered externally, as an object of intuition, then it would
indeed exhibit composition in its own appearance. This is the way in
which it must be considered, however, if one wants to know whether or
not there is in it a manifold of elements external to one another.

48 3

The Antinomy ofPure Reason
Third Conflict of the Transcendental Ideas 64

Thesis
Causality in accordance with laws of nature is not the only one from
which all the appearances of the world can be derived. It is also necessary
to assume another causality through freedom in order to explain them.
Proof

A446/ B474

Assume that there is no other causality than that in accordance with
laws of nature: then everything that happens presupposes a previous
state, upon which it follows without exception according to a rule. But
now the previous state itself must be something that has happened
(come to be in a time when it previously was not), since if it had been
at every time, then its consequence could not have just arisen, but
would always have been. Thus the causality of the cause through which
something happens is always something that has happened, which ac­
cording to the law of nature presupposes once again a previous state and
its causality, and this in the same way a still earlier state, and so on. If,
therefore, everything happens according to mere laws of nature, then at
every time there is only a subordinate but never a first beginning, and
thus no completeness of the series on the side of the causes descending
one from another. But now the law of nature consists just in this, that
nothing happens without a cause sufficiently determined a priori. Thus
the proposition that all causality is possible only in accordance with laws
of nature, when taken in its unlimited universality, contradicts itself,
and therefore this causality cannot be assumed to be the only one.
Accordingly, a causality must be assumed through which something
happens without its cause being further determined by another previ­
ous cause, i.e., an absolute causal spontaneity beginning from itselfb
a series of appearances that runs according to natural laws, hence tran­
scendental freedom, without which even in the course of nature the se­
ries of appearances is never complete on the side of the causes.
a subaltern
b von selbst
484

The Antinomy ofPure Reason
Third Conflict of the Transcendental Ideas

Antithesis
There is no freedom, but everything in the world happens solely in ac­
cordance with laws of nature.
Proof
Suppose there were a freedom in the transcendental sense, as a special
kind of causality in accordance with which the occurrences of the world
could follow, namely a faculty of absolutely beginning a state, and hence
also a series of its consequences; then not only will a series begin ab­
solutely through this spontaneity, but the detem1ination of this spon­
taneity itself to produce the series, i.e., its causality, will begin absolutely,
so that nothing precedes it through which this occurring action is deter­
mined in accordance with constant laws. Every beginning of action, how­
ever, presupposes a state of the not yet acting cause, and a dynamically
first beginning of action presupposes a state that has no causal connec­
tion at all with the cause of the previous one, i.e., in no way follows from
it. Thus transcendental freedom is contrary to the causal law, and is a
combination between the successive states of effective causes in accordance with which no unity of experience is possible, which thus cannot
be encountered in any experience, and hence is an empty thought-entity.
Thus we have nothing but nature in which we must seek the con­
nection and order of occurrences in the world. Freedom (indepen­
dence) from the laws of nature is indeed a liberation from coercion,
but also from the guidancea of all rules. For one cannot say that in
place of the laws of nature, laws of freedom enter into the course of the
world, because if freedom were determined according to laws, it would
not be freedom, but nothing other than nature.b Thus nature and tran­
scendental freedom are as different as lawfulness and lawlessness; the

Leitfoden
b In the first edition: " . . . it would be not freedom, but nature."

a

48 5

A447/ B 475

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

A448 / B 476

A450/ B 478

Remark on the Third Antinomy
1. On the Thesis
The transcendental idea of freedom is far from constituting the whole
content of the psychological concept of that name, which is for the most
part empirical, but constitutes only that of the absolute spontaneity of
an action, as the real ground of its imputability; but this idea is never­
theless the real stumbling block for philosophy, which finds insuperable
difficulties in admitting this kind of unconditioned causality. Hence
that in the question of freedom of the will which has always put specu­
lative reason into such embarrassment is really only transcendental,
and it concerns only whether a faculty of beginning a series of succes­
sive things or states from itself a is to be assumed. How such a faculty
is possible is not so necessary to answer, since with causality in accor­
dance with natural laws we likewise have to be satisfied with the a pri­
ori cognition that such a thing must be presupposed, even though we do
not in any way comprehend how it is possible for one existence to be
posited through another existence, and must in this case keep solely to
experience. We have really established this necessity of a first beginning
of a series of appearances from freedom only to the extent that this is
required to make comprehensible an origin of the world, since one can
take all the subsequent states to be a result of mere natural laws. But because the faculty of beginning a series in time entirely on its ownb is
thereby proved (though no insight into it is achieved), now we are per­
mitted also to allow that in the course of the world different series may
begin on their own as far as their causality is concerned, and to ascribe
to the substances in those series the faculty of acting from freedom.
One should not, however, be stopped here by a misunderstanding,
namely, that since a successive series in the world can have only a com­
paratively first beginning, because a state of the world must always pre­
cede it, perhaps no absolutely first beginning of the series is possible
fl

b

von
von

selbst
selbst
486

Section II. The antithetic of pure reason

former burdens the understanding with the difficulty of seeking the an­
cestry of occurrences ever higher in the series of causes, because the
causality in them is at every time conditioned, but it promises in com­
pensation a thoroughgoing and lawful unity of experience, while the
miragea of freedom, on the contrary, though of course offering rest to
the inquiring understanding in the chain of causes by leading it to an
unconditioned causality that begins to act from itself, since it is itself
blind, breaks away from the guidance of those rules by which alone a
thoroughly connected experience is possible.

II. Remark
On the Antithesis
The defender of the omnipotenceb of nature (transcendental physioc­
racy), in counteraction to the doctrine of freedom, would maintain his
proposition against the sophisticale inferences of the latter, in the fol­
lowing way. If you do not assume anything mathematically first in
the world as far as time is concerned, then it is also not necessary
for you to seek for something dynamically first as far as causality
is concerned. Whoever told you to think up an absolutely first state of
the world, and hence an absolute beginning of the continuously elaps­
ing series of appearances, and then, so that your imagination might find
some point at which to rest, to set a boundary to limitless nature? Since
the substances in the world have always existed - at least the unity of ex­
perience makes such a presupposition necessary - there is no difficulty
in also assuming that the change of their states, i.e., the series of their
alterations, has always existed, and hence that no first beginning,
whether mathematical or dynamical, need be sought. The possibility of
such an infinite descent, without any first member to which the rest is
merely subsequent, cannot, as to its possibility, be made comprehensi­
ble.d But if you reject this riddle of nature on this account, then you will
see yourself compelled to dispense with many fundamental properties
(fundamental powers) which you can just as little comprehend, and even
the possibility of an alteration in general must become a stumbling
block for you. For if you did not find through experience that alteration
really exists, then you would never be able to imagine' a priori how such
an uninterrupted sequence of being and not-being is possible.
a Blendwerk

b Allvermogenheit
, verniinftelnden

d
e

There is indeed an awkward redundancy in this sentence: "Die MiJglichkeit einer solchen

unendlichen Abstammung . . . lasst sich, seiner MiJglichkeit nach, nicht begreijlich machen."
ersinnen
487

A449 / B 477

A4S I / B 479

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

during the course of the world. For here we are talking of an absolute
beginning not, as far as time is concerned, but as far as causality is con­
cerned. If (for example) I am now entirely free, and get up from my
chair without the necessarily determining influence of natural causes,
then in this occurrence, along with its natural consequences to infinity,
there begins an absolutely new series, even though as far as time is con­
cerned this occurrence is only the continuation of a previous series. For
this decision and deed do not lie within the succession of merely nat­
ural effects and are not a mere continuation of them; rather, the deter­
mining natural causes of that series entirely cease in regard to this
event, which indeed follows upon that series, but does not follow
from it;a and therefore it must be called, not as far as time is concerned
but in regard to causality, an absolutely first beginning of a series of
appearances.
The confirmation of the need of reason to appeal to a first beginning
from freedom in the series of natural causes is clearly and visibly evident
from the fact that (with the exception of the Epicurean school) all the
philosophers of antiquity saw themselves as obliged to assume a first
mover65 for the explanation of motions in the world, i.e., a freely act­
ing cause, which began this series of states first and from itself. For they
did not venture to make a first beginning comprehensible on the basis
of mere nature.
a die zwar aufjene folgt, aber daraus nicht eifolgt

4 88

Section II. The antithetic of pure reason

Moreover, even if a transcendental faculty of freedom is conceded in
order to begin alterations in the world, then this faculty would in any
case have to be outside the world (although it always remains a bold
presumption to assume an object outside the sum total of all possible in­
tuitions, which cannot be given in any possible perception). Yet it can
never be permitted to ascribe such a faculty to substances in the world
itself, because then the connection of appearances necessarily deter­
mining one another in accordance with universal laws, which one calls
nature, and with it the mark of empirical truth, which distinguishes ex­
perience from dreaming, would largely disappear. For alongside such a
lawless faculty of freedom, nature could hardly be thought any longer,
because the laws of the latter would be ceaselessly modified by the for­
mer, and this would render the play of appearances, which in accor­
dance with mere nature would be regular and uniform, confused and
disconnected.

489

The Antinomy ofPure Reason
Fourth Conflict ofthe Transcendental Ideas 66

Thesis
To the world there belongs something that, either as a part of it or as its
cause, is an absolutely necessary being.a
Proof

A45� B 482

A452 / B 482

The world of sense, as the whole of all appearances, at the same time
contains a series of alterations. For without these, even the temporal
series, as a condition of the possibility of the world of sense, would not
be given to us. * Every alteration, however, stands under its condition,
which precedes it in time, and under which it is necessary. Now every
conditioned that is given presupposes, in respect of its existence, a
complete series of conditions up to the unconditioned, which alone is
absolutely necessary. Thus there must exist something absolutely nec­
essary, if an alteration exists as its consequence. This necessary being
itself, however, belongs to the world of sense. For supposing it is out­
side it, then the series of alterations in the world would derive from it,
without this necessary cause itself belonging to the world of sense.
Now this is impossible. For since the beginning of a time-series can be
determined only through what precedes it in time, the supreme condi­
tion of the beginning of a series of changes must exist in the timeb
when the series was not yet (for the beginning is an existence, preceded
by a time in which the thing that begins still was not). Thus the causal* Time, as formal condition of the possibility of alterations, indeed precedes ite
objectively, yet subjectively and in the reality of consciousness, this represen­
tation is given, like any other, only through the occasion of perceptions.
a

ein schlechthin notwendiges Wesen ist. In the first edition: . . . ein schlechthin notwendig
Wesen ist" C . . a being that is absolutely necessarily).

.

.

.

"

.

b Fourth edition: " . . . in the world"
dieser. The antecedent of this singular dative feminine pronoun is unclear, and a matter
of dispute; Erdmann prefers to read diesen, making the pronoun plural, and (by impli­
C

cation) referring it to "alterations"; on our reading, the singular pronoun refers to the

possibility of alterations (thus requiring no textual emendation).
490

The Antinomy ofPure Reason
Fourth Conflict of the Transcendental Ideas

Antithesis
There is no absolutely necessary being existing anywhere, either in the
world or outside the world as its cause.
Proof
Suppose that either the world itself is a necessary being or that there is
such a being in it; then in the series of its alterations either there would
be a beginning that is unconditionally necessary, and hence without a
cause, which conflicts with the dynamic law of the determination of all
appearances in time; or else the series itself would be without any be­
ginning, and, although contingent and conditioned in all its parts, it
would nevertheless be absolutely necessary and unconditioned as a
whole, which contradicts itself, because the existence of a multiplicity
cannot be necessary if no single part of it possesses an existence neces­
sary in itself.
Suppose, on the contrary, that there were an absolutely necessary
cause of the world outside the world; then this cause, as the supreme
member in the series of causes of alterations in the world, would first
begin these changes and their series.* But it would have to begin to act
then, and its causality would belong in time, and for this very reason in
the sum total of appearances, i.e., in the world; consequently, it itself,
the cause, would not be outside the world, which contradicts what was
presupposed. Thus neither in the world nor outside it (yet in causal
connection with it) is there any absolutely necessary being.
* The word "begin" is taken in two significations. The first is active, as when
the cause begins (infit) a series of states as its effect. The second is passive, as
when the causality in the cause itself commences (fit). I infer here from the
former to the latter.

491

A4SS / B 48 3

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

ity of the necessary cause of the alterations, hence the cause itself, be­
longs to time,a hence to appearance (in which alone time is possible, as
its form); consequently, it cannot be thought as detached from the
world of sense as the sum total of all appearances. Thus in the world
itself there is contained something absolutely necessary (whether as
the whole world-series itself or as a part of it).
A4S6/ B 484

A4S8/B486

Remark on the Fourth Antinomy
I. On the Thesis
In order to prove the existence of a necessary being, I am here obliged
to use no argument except the cosmological one, which ascends from
the conditioned in appearance to the unconditioned in concept by view­
ing the latter as the necessary condition for the absolute totality of the
series. It belongs to another principleb of reason to attempt the proof
using only the idea of a being that is supreme over all others, and such
a proof will therefore have to be put forward separately.
Now the pure cosmological proof can establish the existence of a
necessary being in no other way than by leaving it unsettled whether
this being is the world itself or a thing distinct from it. For in order to
ascertain the latter, principles would be required that are no longer cos­
mological and do not continue in the series of appearances, but proceed
from concepts of contingent beings in general (insofar as they are con­
sidered merely as objects of understanding), and a principle connecting
such beings with a necessary being through mere concepts; all this be­
longs to a transcendent philosophy, for which this is still not the place.
But if one begins the proof cosmologically, by grounding it on the se­
ries of appearances and the regress in this series in accordance with em­
pirical laws of causality, then one cannot later shift from this and go
over to something that does not belong to the series as one of its mem­
bers. For something regarded as a condition must be taken in just the
same significance as it has in the relatione of conditioned to its condi­
tion in the series, if it is to lead this series to its highest condition
through a continuous progress. Now if this relation is sensible and be­
longs to a possible empirical use of the understanding, then the highest
condition or cause can conclude the regress only in accordance with
laws of sensibility, hence only as something belonging to the time-se­
ries, and the necessary being must be regarded as the supreme member
of the world-series.
Nevertheless, some have taken the liberty of making such a shift
a Fifth edition: "to

b Princip
, Relation

a

time"

492

Section II. The antithetic of pure reason

II. Remark
On the Antithesis
If one supposes that difficulties are to be encountered in ascending in
a series of appearances to the existence of an absolutely necessary cause,
then these difficulties must not be grounded on the mere concepts of the
necessary existence of a thing, hence they cannot be merely ontological,
but must arise from the causal connection with a series of appearances,
when it tries to assume a condition which is itself unconditioned, thus
they must be cosmological and based on empirical laws. It must be
shown, however, that ascent in the series of causes (in the world of sense)
could never end with an empirically unconditioned condition, and that
the cosmological argument from the contingency of states of the
world - from its alterations - comes out against the assumption of a first
cause that primarily and absolutely initiates the series.
But an odd contrast shows itself in this antinomy: namely, that the
same ground of proof from which the thesis of the existence of an original being was inferred, is used also in the antithesis to prove its nonexistence, and indeed with equal rigor. First it is said There is a
necessary being because the whole past time includes within itself the
series of all conditions, and thus with it also the unconditioned (the necessary). Then it is said There is no necessary being just because the
whole of the time that has elapsed includes within itself the series of all
conditions (which therefore, taken all together, are once again conditioned). The cause is this. The first argument looks only to the absolute totality of the series of conditions, each determined by another
in time, and from this it gets something unconditioned and necessary.
The second argument, on the contrary, takes into consideration the
contingency of everything determined in the time-series (because before each [member] a time must precede, in which its condition must
once again be determined conditionally), and this completely gets rid of
everything unconditioned and all absolute necessity. The mode of inference in both, moreover, is entirely suited to common human reason,
which falls repeatedly into the trap of disagreeing with itself when it
considers its object from two different standpoints. M. de Mairan took
the controversy between two famous astronomers, arising from a similar difficulty in the choice of a standpoint, to be a sufficiently strange
493

A45 7 / B 485

A459/ B 487

A46 I / B 489

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

A46o/ B488

"

(/-LE7cx{3cun<; H,> CXAAO )lEVO'» . a That is, from the alterations in the world
they have inferred their empirical contingency, i.e., their dependence
on empirically determining causes, and thus they obtained an ascending
series of empirical conditions, which was quite right too. But since they
could not find in this series a first beginning or a highest member, they
suddenly abandoned the empirical concept of contingency and took up
the pure category, which then occasioned a merely intelligible series,
whose completeness rests on the existence of an absolutely necessary
cause, which now, since it was no longer bound to sensible conditions,
was also liberated from the time-condition that even its causality should
begin. But this proceeding is entirely illegitimate, as one can conclude
from the following.
In the pure sense of the category, the contingent is that whose con­
tradictory opposite is possible. Now from empirical contingency one
cannot at all infer this intelligible contingency. When something is altered, its opposite (the opposite of its state) is actual at another time,
and hence possible; hence this is not the contradictory opposite of its
previous state, for which it would be required that at the very time when
the previous state was, its opposite could have been there in place of it,
which cannot at all be inferred from the alteration. A body that was in
motion (= A), comes to be in rest (= not-A ). Now from the fact that an
opposed state follows upon state A it cannot be inferred that the con­
tradictory opposite of A is possible, and hence that A is contingent; for
to have this it would be required that in the very time when there was
motion, rest could have been there instead. Now we know nothing be­
yond the fact that rest was actual in the time that followed, and hence
that it was possible too. But motion at one time and rest at another time
are not contradictory opposites. Thus the succession of opposed deter­
minations, i.e., alteration, in no way proves contingency in accordance
with concepts of the pure understanding, and thus it also cannot lead to
the existence of a necessary being in accordance with pure concepts of
the understanding. Alteration proves only empirical contingency, i.e.,
that the new state could not at all have occurred on its own, without a
cause belonging to the previous time, in accordance with the law of
causality. This cause, even if it is assumed to be absolutely necessary,
must yet be of such a kind as to be encountered in time and belong to
the series of appearances.
a change to another kind

494

Section II. The antithetic of pure reason

phenomenon that he wrote a special treatise about it.67 One inferred,
namely, that the moon turns on its axis because it constantly turns the
same side toward the earth; the other, that the moon does not turn on
an axis, just because it constantly turns the same side toward the earth.
Both inferences were correct, depending on the standpoint taken when
observing the moon's motion.

495

The
Antinomy of Pure Reason
Third Section
On the interest of reason in these conflicts.

A463 i B 49 1

A464i B 49 2

Now we have before us the entire dialectical play of the cosmological
ideas, which do not permit an object congruent to them to be given in
any possible experience, which, indeed, do not even permit reason to
think them in agreement with the universal laws of experience, but
which have not been thought up arbitrarily; reason, rather, in continu­
ous progression of the empirical synthesis, has been led to them neces­
sarily when it tries to liberate from every condition, and to grasp in its
unconditioned totality, that which can always be determined only
conditionally in accordance with rules of experience. These sophistical a
assertions are only so many attempts to solve four natural and unavoid­
able problems of reason; there can be only so many of them, no more
and no less, because there are no more series of synthetic presupposi­
tions that bound the empirical synthesis a priori.
We have represented the glittering pretensions of reason to extend its
territory beyond all the bounds of experience only in dry formulas,
which contain merely the ground o f reason's legal claims; and, as is fit­
ting for a transcendental philosophy, we have divested these claims of
everything empirical, even though the full splendor of reason's asser­
tions can shine forth only in such a combination. But in this application,
and in the progressive extension of the use of reason, since it com­
mences with the field of experience and only gradually soars aloft to
these sublime ideas, philosophy exhibits such a dignity that, if it could
only assert its pretensions, it would leave every other human science far
behind in value, since it would promise to ground our greatest expecta­
tions and prospects concerning the ultimate ends in which all reason's
efforts must finally unite. The questions whether the world has a be­
ginning and its extension in space a boundary; whether there is any­
where, perhaps in my thinking self, an indivisible and indestructible
unity, or whether there is nothing but that which is divisible and per­
ishable; whether my actions are free or, like those of other beings, con­
trolled by the strings of nature and fate; whether, finally, there is a
supreme cause of the world, or whether natural things and their order
constitute the ultimate object, at which all our consideration of things
must stop - these are questions for whose solution the mathematician
would gladly give up his entire science; for that science cannot give him
any satisfaction in regard to the highest and most important ends of hu­
manity. Even the proper dignity of mathematics (that pride of human
a

vernunftelnden
496

Section III. On the interest of reason in these conflicts

reason) rests on the fact that since in the great as well as the small, in its
order and regularity, and in the admirable unity of the forces moving
nature, mathematics guides reason's insight into nature far beyond
every expectation of any philosophy built on common experience, it
gives occasion and encouragement even to the use of reason which ex­
tends beyond all experience, just as it provides to the philosophy a con­
cerned with nature the most excellent materials for supporting its
inquiries, as far as their characterb allows, with appropriate intuitions.
Unfortunately for speculation (but perhaps fortunately for the practi­
cal vocation)C of humanity, reason sees itself, in the midst of its greatest
expectations, so entangled in a crowd of arguments and counterargu­
mentsd that it is not feasible, on account either of its honor or even of
its security, for reason to withdraw and look upon the quarrel with in­
difference, as mere shadow boxing, still less for it simply to command
peace, interested as it is in the object of the dispute; so nothing is left ex­
cept to reflect on the origin of this disunity of reason with itself, on
whether a mere misunderstanding might perhaps be responsible for it,
after the elucidation of which perhaps both sides will give up their proud
claims, but in place of which reason would begin a rule of lasting tranquility over understanding and sense.
For now we will postpone this fundamental inquiry a little longer,
and first take into consideration on which side we would prefer to fight
if we were forced to take sides. Since in this case we would consult not
the logical criterion of truth but merely our interest, our present inves­
tigation, even though it would settle nothing in regard to the disputed e
rights of both parties, will have the utility of making it comprehensible
why the participants in this dispute have sooner taken one side than the
other, even if no superior insight into the object has been the cause of
it, and it likewise explains still other ancillary things, e.g., the zealous
heat of the one side and the cold assurance of the other, and why they!
hail the one party with joyful approval and are irreconcilably prejudiced
against the other.
But there is something which, in this provisional estimate, deter­
mines the standpoint from which it can be carried out with appropriate
thoroughness, and that is a comparison of the principlesg from which
a

Weltweisheit

h Beschaffenheit

, Bestimmung
GrUnden und Gegengriinden
, streitig; the first edition reads "strittig" (disputable, questionable).

d

f This plural pronoun has no plausible nearby referent; both Muller and Kemp Smith

g

translate it as "the world"; but probably its antecedent is supposed to be the "partici­
pants in this dispute" (who, Kant says, "have sooner taken one part than the other").

Principien
497

A465 / B 493

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

A466/ B 494

A4671 B 495

the two parties proceed. In the assertions of the antithesis,a one notes a
perfect uniformity in their manner of thought and complete unity in
their maxims, namely a principleb of pure empiricism, not only in the
explanation of appearances in the world, but also in the dissolution of
the transcendental ideas of the world-whole itself. Against this the as­
sertions of the thesis are grounded not only on empiricism within the
series of appearances but also on intellectualistic starting points,c and
their maxim is to that extent not simple. On the basis of their essential
distinguishing mark, however, I will call them the dogmatism of pure
reason.
Thus in determining the cosmological ideas of reason, the side of
dogmatism or the thesis exhibits:
First, a certain practical interest, in which every well-disposed per­
son, once he understands its true advantage to him, heartily shares.
That the world has a beginning, that my thinking self is of a simple and
therefore incorruptible nature, that this self is likewise free and elevated
above natural compulsion in its voluntary actions, and finally, that the
whole order of things constituting the world descends from an original
being, from which it borrows all its unity and purposive connect­
edness - these are so many cornerstones of morality and religion. The
antithesis robs us of all these supports, or at least seems to rob us of
them.68
Second, a speculative interest of reason is expressed on this side
too. For if one assumes and employs the transcendental ideas in such a
way, then one can grasp the whole chain of conditions fully a priori and
comprehend the derivation of the conditioned, starting with the uncon­
ditioned, which the antithesis cannot do; this gives it a bad recommen­
dation, since it can give no answers to questions about the conditions of
their synthesis that do not leave something out, and with its answers fur­
ther questions without any end are always left over. According to the an­
tithesis, one must ascend from a given beginning to a still higher one,
every part leads to a still smaller part, every event always has another
event above it as its cause, and the conditions of existence in general are
always supported again by others, without ever getting stability and sup­
port from a self-sufficient thing as an unconditioned original being.
Third, this side also has the merit of popularity, which certainly
constitutes no small part of what recommends it. The common undera the antithesis in each antinomy
b Principium
, intellektuelle Anfonge; d. A 8 S 3 / B 88 I , where those who hold that the essential object of
cognition is supersensuous (Plato is taken as the paradigtlI and contrasted with Epicurus,
just as is done here at A471 IB 500) are called "intellectualistic philosophers" or "intel­
lectualists" (Intellektualphilosophen, Intellektuellen).
�

498

Section III. On the interest of reason in these conflicts

standing does not find the least difficulty in the idea of an uncondi­
tioned beginning for every synthesis, since in any case it is more accus­
tomed to descending to consequences than to ascending to grounds;
and in the concept of something absolutely first (about whose possibil­
ity it does not bother itself) it finds both comfort and simultaneously a
firm point to which it may attach the reins guiding its steps, since oth­
erwise, always having one foot in the air, it can never take any delight
in the restless climb from the conditioned to the condition.
On the side of empiricism in determination of the cosmological
ideas, or the antithesis, there is first, no such practical interest from
pure principles a of reason as morality and religion carry with them.
Mere empiricism seems rather to take all power and influence away
from both. If there is no original being different from the world, if the
world is without a beginning and also without an author, if our will is
not free and our soul is of the same divisibility and corruptibility as matter, then moral ideas and principles lose all validity, and they collapse
along with the transcendental ideas that constitute their theoretical
support.
On the contrary, however, empiricism offers advantages to the spec­
ulative interests of reason, which are very attractive and far surpass any
that the dogmatic teacher of the ideas of reason might promise. For
with empiricism the understanding is at every time on its own proper
ground, namely the field solely of possible experiences, whose laws it
traces, and by means of which it can endlessly extend its secure and
comprehensibleb cognition. Here it can and should exhibit its object, in
itself as well as in its relations, to intuition, or at least in concepts an
image for which can be clearly and distinctly laid before it in similar
given intuitions. Not only is it unnecessary for the understanding to
abandon this chain of natural order so as to hang onto ideas with whose
objects it has no acquaintance because, as thought-entities, they can
never be given; but it is not even permitted to abandon its business, and,
under the pretext that this has been brought to an end, to pass over into
the territory of idealizing reason and transcendent concepts, where
there is no further need to make observations and to inquire according
to the laws of nature, but rather only to think and invent, certain that
it can never be refuted by facts of nature because it is not bound by their
testimony but may go right past them, or even subordinate them to a
higher viewpoint, namely that of pure reason.
Hence the empiricist will never allow any epoch of nature to be as­
sumed to be the absolutely first, or any boundary of his prospect to be

4

b

Principien
fassliche

'.

499

A468/ B 496

A469/ B 497

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

A47o /B 498

A 47I / B 499

regarded as the uttermost in its extent, ora that among the objects of
nature that he can resolve through observation and mathematics and
determine synthetically in intuition (the extended) there can be a tran­
sition to those which can never be exhibited in concreto either in sense
or imagination (the simple); nor will he admit that one can take as fun­
damental in nature itself, a faculty (freedom) that operates indepen­
dently of the laws of nature, and thereby restrict the business of the
understanding, which is to trace the origin of appearances guided by
necessary rules; nor, finally, will he concede that the cause of anything
should be sought outside nature (an original being), for we are ac­
quainted with nothing beyond nature, since it is nature alone that pro­
vides us with objects and instructs us as to their laws.
Of course, if the empirical philosopher with his antithesis had no
other intention than to strike down the impertinent curiosity and pre­
sumptuousness of those who so far mistake the true vocationb of reason
that they make most of insight and knowledge just where insight and
knowledge really cease, trying to pass off what one should base on prac­
tical interests as furthering speculative interests, in order, whenever
seems comfortable to them, to break off the thread of their physical in­
vestigations and, with a pretense of extending cognition, to attach it to
transcendental ideas, by means of which one really knowsc only that
one knows d nothing; if, I say, the empiricist were to content himself
with this, then his principle would be a maxim for moderating our
claims, for being modest in our assertions, and at the same time for the
greatest possible extension of our understanding through the teacher
really prescribed for us, namely experience. For in such a case, intellec­
tual presuppositions and faith on behalf of our practical concern
would not be taken from us; only one could not put them forward with
the title and pomp of science and rational insight, because real specula­
tive knowledge can encounter no object anywhere except that of expe­
rience, and if one transgresses its boundary, then the synthesis that
attempts cognitions which are new and independent of experience has
no substratum of intuition on which it could be exercised.
But if empiricism itself becomes dogmatic in regard to the ideas (as
frequently happens), and boldly denies whatever lies beyond the sphere
of its intuitive cognitions, then it itself makes the same mistake of im­
modesty, which is all the more blamable' here, because it causes an ir­
reparable disadvantage to the practical interests of reason.
a

b

oder; the first edition reads "nor" (noch), the same word that, in both editions, introduces
the last two main clauses of this sentence.

Bestimmung
, erkennt
d wisse
, tadelbar; in the first edition, this word is tadelhaft.
500

Section III. On the interest of reason in these conflicts

This is the opposition of Epicureanism* and Platonism.69
Each of the two says more than it knows, but in such a way that the
first encourages and furthers knowledge, though to the disadvantage of
the practical, the second provides principlesa which are indeed excellent for the practical, but in so doing allows reason, in regard to that of
which only a speculative knowledge is granted us, to indulge in ideal explanations of natural appearances, and to neglect the physical investigation of them.
Finally, as to the third moment that can be seen in the provisional
choice between the two conflicting parties, it is exceedingly strange that
empiricism is completely contrary to everything popular, although one
might have thought that the common understanding would eagerly take
up a proposal promising to satisfy it through nothing but cognitions of
experience and their rational connection, in place of transcendental
dogmatism, which compels it to ascend to concepts far surpassing the
insight and rational faculties even of those minds most practiced in
thinking. But just this is its motive. For then it finds itself in a state in
which even the most learned can take nothing away from it. If it understands little or nothing of these matters, neither can anyone else
boast that they understand much more; and even if it cannot speak
about them with as much scholastic correctness as others do, it can still
ratiocinateb infinitely more about them, because it is wandering among
* There is still a question, however, whether Epicurus ever presented these
principles as objective assertions. If they were perhaps nothing more than
maxims of the speculative employment of reason, then in them he would have
shown as genuine a philosophical spirit as any of the sages' of antiquity.d That
in the explanation of appearances one must go to work as though the field of
investigation were not cut off by any boundary or beginning of the world; that
one must assume the material of the world as it has to be if we are to be taught
about it by experience; that no other way of generating occurrences than their
determination through unalterable namral laws, and finally that no cause distinct from the world are to be employed: even now these are principles, very
correct but little observed, for extending speculative philosophy while finding
out the principles ' of morality independently of alien sources; if only those
who demand that we ignore those dogmatic propositions, as long as we are
concerned with mere speculation, might not also be accused of trying to deny
them.
a Prillcipiell

b verrzunJteln
Weltweisen
d In the first edition the sentence does not end here but is separated from what follows
C

by a colon.
e

Principien
501

A472 / B 500

A47 3 / B 501

A47 I iB499

A47 2 1 B500

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 502
A4 74

merea ideas, about which one can be at one's most eloquent just because
one knows nothing about them; whereas regarding inquiries into na­
ture, it would have to keep quiet and concede that it is ignorant.
Comfort and vanity are therefore already a strong recommendation for
these principles. Besides, even though for a philosopher it is very diffi­
cult to assume something as a principle without being able to give an
account of it, or even to assume concepts into whose objective reality
there can be no insight, there is nothing more usual for the common
understanding. It wants to have something from which it can proceed
with confidence. The difficulty of comprehending such a presupposi­
tion itself does not disturb it, because (in the case of one who does not
know what it means to comprehend) this never crosses its mind, and it
takes as known what has become familiar to it through repeated usage.
Finally, for the common understanding every speculative interest van­
ishes before practical interest, and it imagines itself to have insight and
knowledge into whatever its apprehensions or hopes impel it to assume
or believe. In this way empiricism is robbed completely of all popular­
ity by transcendentally idealizing reason; and for all the disadvantages
itb may contain regarding the supreme practical principles, we need
have no apprehension that it will ever pass beyond the boundary of the
schools, and acquire any considerable regard in the community or any
favor among the great multitude.
Human reason is by nature architectonic, i.e., it considers all cogni­
tions as belonging to a possible system, and hence it permits only such
principlesc as at least do not render an intended cognition incapable of
standing together with others in some system or other. But the propo­
sitions of the antithesis are of a kind that they do render the completion
of an edifice of cognitions entirely impossible. According to them, be­
yond every state of the world there is another still older one; within
every part there are always still more that are divisible; before every oc­
currence there was always another which was in turn generated by oth­
ers; and in existence in general everything is always only conditioned,
and no unconditioned or first existence is to be recognized. Thus since
the antithesis nowhere allows a first or a starting point that would serve
absolutely as the foundation for its building, a completed edifice of cog­
nition on such presuppositions is entirely impossible. Hence the archi­
tectonic interest of reason (which is demanded not by empirical unity
but by pure rational unity) carries with it a natural recommendation for
the assertions of the thesis.
" tauter
b sic; this pronoun, repeated in the next clause, refers grammatically to "transcendentally
idealizing reason"; but as Erdmann implies, the sense requires that it be er, referring to
"empiricism."

, Principien
502

Section IV On the transcendental problems of pure reason

But if a human being could renounce all interests, and, indifferent to
all consequences, consider the assertions of reason merely according to
their grounds, then, supposing that he knows no way of escaping from
the dilemma a except by confessing allegiance to one or the other of the
conflicting doctrines, such a person would be in a state of ceaseless vac­
illation. Today it would strike him as convincing that the human will is
free; tomorrow, when he considered the indissoluble chain of nature,
he would side with the view that freedom is nothing but self-deception,
and that everything is mere nature. But now if it came to be a matter
of doing or acting, then this play of merely speculative reason would
disappear like the phantom images b of a dream, and he would choose
his principlesc merely according to practical interest. But because mere
honesty requires that a reflective and inquiring being should devote
certain times solely to testing its own reason, withdrawing entirely
from all partiality and publicly communicating his remarks to others
for their judgment,d no one can be reproached for, still less restrained
from, letting the propositions and counter-propositions, terrorized by
no threats, come forward to defend themselves before a jury drawn
from their own estate (namely the estate of fallible e human beings).

The
Antinomy of Pure Reason
Fourth Section
The transcendental problems of pure reason,
insofar as they absolutely must be capable of a solution.
Wanting to solve all problems and answer all questions would be impu­
dent boasting and such extravagant self-conceit that one would instantly
forfeit all trust. Nevertheless, there are sciences whose nature entails
that every question occurring in them must absolutely be answerable
from what one knows, because the answer must arise from the same
source as the question; and there it is in no way allowed to plead un­
avoidable ignorance, but rather a solution can be demanded. One must
be able to know what is just or unjust in all possible cases in accordance
with a rule, because our obligations are at stake, and we cannot have any
obligation to do what we cannot know/ In the explanation of the apa

b
,
d
,

Gedriinge
Schattenbilder
Principien
anderen zur Beurtheilung
scbwacber

f In his copy of the first edition, Kant adds: "In the case of each antinomy, it must be

shown that if objects of the senses are assumed as things in themselves, no resolution of
this conflict would be possible. Consequently if the proposition were not proved above,
it could be inferred from this." (E CLXIX, p. 50; 2 3 :40)
503

A4 76/ B 504

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

A47 7 / B 505

A478 / B 506

A479/ B 507

pearances of nature, however, much must remain uncertain and many
questions insoluble, because what we know about nature is in many
cases far from sufficient for what we would explain. The question now
is whether there is any question in transcendental philosophy dealing
with an objecta placed before us by reason that is unanswerable by this
same pure reason, and whether one could have a right to avoid answer­
ing it decisively because one counts as absolutely uncertain (on the basis
of what we can knowl that of which we have enough of a concept of it
to be able to raise a question about it, but are so entirely lacking in
means or faculties that we can never give the answer.
Now I assert that among all speculative cognition, transcendental
philosophy has the special property that there is no question at all deal­
ing with an object given by pure reason that is insoluble by this very
same human reason; and that no plea of unavoidable ignorance and the
unfathomable depth of the problem can release us from the obligation
of answering it thoroughlyr and completely; for the very same concept
that puts us in a position to ask the question must also make us compe­
tent to answer it, since the object is not encountered at all outside the
concept (as it is in the case of justice and injustice).
In transcendental philosophy, however, there are no questions other
than the cosmological ones in regard to which one can rightfully de­
mand a sufficient answer concerning the constitution of the object itself;
the philosopher is not allowed to evade them by pleading their impene­
trable obscurity, and these questions can have to do only with cosmo­
logical ideas. For the object must be given empirically, and the question
concerns only its conformity with an idea. If the object is transcendental
and thus in itself unknown, e.g., whether the something whose appear­
ance (in ourselves) is thinking (the soul) is in itself a simple being,
whether there is a cause of all things taken together that is absolutely
necessary, etc., then we should seek an object for our idea, which we can
concede to be unknown to us, but not on that account impossible.* The
* To the question, "What kind of constitution does a transcendental object have?"
one cannot indeed give an answer saying what it is, but one can answer that
the question itself is nothing, because no object for the question is given.
Hence all questions of the transcendental doctrine of the soul are answerable
and actually answered; for they have to do with the transcendental subject of
all inner appearances, which is not itself an appearance and hence is not given
as an object, and regarding which none of the categories (at which the question
is really being aimed) encounter conditions of their application. Thus here is a
case where the common saying holds, that no answer is an answer, namely that
Object
erkennen
, grftndlich

a

b

504

Section IV. On the transcendental problems of pure reason

cosmological ideas alone have the peculiarity that they can presuppose
their object, and the empirical synthesis required for its concept, as
given; and the question that arises from them has to do only with the
progression of this synthesis, insofar as it is to contain an absolute totality, which, however, is no longer empirical, since it cannot be given in
any experience. Now since we are here talking about a thing only as an
object of a possible experience and not as a thing in itself, the answer to
the transcendent cosmological question cannot lie anywhere outside the
idea, for it does not have to do with any object in itself; and in regard to
possible experience, the question asks not about what can be given in
concreto in any experience, but rather about what lies in the idea which
the empirical synthesis is merely supposed to approximate: therefore,
this question must be able to be resolved from the idea alone; for this
idea is merely a creature of reason, which therefore cannot refuse the responsibility and pass it on to the unknown object.
It is not as extraordinary as it initially seems that a science can demand and expect clear and certain solutions to all the questions belonging within ita (quaestiones domesticae), even if up to this time they
still have not been found. Besides transcendental philosophy, there are
two pure sciences of reason, one with merely speculative, the other with
practical content: pure mathematics and pure morals. Has it ever
been proposed that because of our necessary ignorance of conditions it
is uncertain exactly what relation, in rational or irrational numbers, the
diameter of a circle bears to its circumference? Since it cannot be given
congruently to the former, but has not yet been found through the latter, it has been judged that at least the impossibility of such a solution
can be known b with certainty, and Lambert gave a proof of this. 70 In the
universal principlesc of ethics nothing can be uncertain, because the
propositions are either totally nugatory and empty, or else they have to
flow merely from our concepts of reason. On the other hand, in natural
scienced there are an infinity of conjectures in regard to which certainty
can never be expected, because natural appearances are objects that are
given to us independently of our concepts, to which, therefore, the key
lies not in us and in our pure thinking, but outside us, and for this reason in many cases it is not found; hence no certain account of these
a question about the constitution of this something, which cannot be thought
through any determinate predicate because it is posited entirely outside the
sphere of objects that can be given to us, is entirely nugatory and empty.

ihren Inbegriff
erkannt
, Principien
d Natnrkunde

a

b

505

A479 / B 50 7

A480/ B 508

A48 1 / B 509

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

A482 / B 5 1 0

B 5I I

matters can be expected. I do not include the questions of the tran­
scendental analytic here, because now we are dealing only with the cer­
tainty of judgments in regard to objects, and not in regard to the origin
of Our concepts themselves.
Thus we cannot evade the obligation of giving at least a critical res­
olution of the questions of reason before us by lamenting the narrow
limits of our reason and confessing, with the appearance of a modest
self-knowledge,a that it lies beyond our reason to settle whether the
world has existed from eternity or has a beginning, whether world­
space is filled to infinity with beings or is enclosed within certain
boundaries, whether there is anything simple in the world or everything
has to be divided infinitely, whether there is a generating and produc­
ing through freedom Or everything depends on the causal chain of the
natural order, and finally, whether there is any being entirely uncondi­
tioned and in itself necessary or whether the existence of everything is
conditioned and hence externally dependent and in itself contingent.
For each of these questions concerns an object that can be given
nowhere but in our thoughts, namely the absolutely unconditioned to­
tality of the synthesis of appearances. If we cannot say or settle anything
certain about these questions on the basis of our own concepts, then we
must not pass the blame on to the subject matter,b as hiding itself from
us; for such a subject matter (because it is encountered nowhere outside
our idea) cannot be given to us at all, but rather we must seek the cause
in our idea itself, as a problem permitting of no solution, about which,
however, we stubbornly insist on an actual object corresponding to it. A
clear presentation of the dialectic lying in our concept itself would soon
bring us to complete certainty about what we have to judge in regard to
such a question.
In response to your objection that these problems are uncertain one
can counterpose this question, to which, at least, you must give a clear
answer: Where do you get the ideas the solution to which involves you
in such difficulties? Is it perhaps appearances, whose explanation you
need here, and about which, owing to these ideas, you have to seek only
the principlesc or the rule of their exposition? Assume that nature were
completely exposed to you; that nothing were hidden from your senses
and to the consciousness of everything laid before your intuition: even
then you still could not, through any experience, cognize in concreto the
object of your ideas (for besides this complete intuition, a completed
synthesis and the consciousness of its absolute totality would be reSelbsterkenntnis
Sache
, Principien

a

b

506

Section IV On the transcendental problems of pure reason

quired, but that is not possible through any empirical cognition); hence
your question cannot in any way be necessarily poseda in the course of
explaining any experience that might come before you, and thus posed,
as it were, through the object itself. For the object can never come be­
fore you, because it cannot be given in any possible experience. With all
possible perceptions, you always remain caught up among conditions,
whether in space or in time, and you never get to the unconditioned, so
as to make out whether this unconditioned is to be posited in an ab­
solute beginning of the synthesis or in the absolute totality of the series
without a beginning. The whole,h in an empirical signification, is always
only comparative. The absolute whole of magnitude (the world-whole),
of division, of descent, of the conditions of existence in general, to­
gether with all the questions about whether these are to come about
through a finite or an endlessly continuing synthesis, has nothing to do
with any possible experience. For example, you will not be able to ex­
plain the appearance of a body the least bit better, or even any differ­
ently, whether you assume that it consists of simple parts or completely
of parts that are always composite; for no simple appearance can come
before you, and neither can any infinite composition. Appearances re­
quire to be explained only insofar as their conditions of explanation are
given in perception, but everything that can ever be given in it, taken
together in an absolute whole,c is not itself any perception.d But it is
really this whole' for which an explanation is being demanded in the
transcendental problems of reason.
Since, therefore, the solution to these problems can never occur in ex­
perience, you cannot say that it is uncertain what is to be ascribed to the
object regarding them. For your object is merely in your brain! and can­
not be given at all outside it; hence all you have to worry about is agree­
ing with yourself, and avoiding the amphiboly that would make your
idea into a putative representation of something given empirically, and
thus of an objectg to be cognized in accordance with the laws of experi­
ence. Thus the dogmatic solution is not merely uncertain, but impossi­
ble. The critical solution, however, which can be completely certain,
does not consider the question objectively at all, but instead asks about
the foundations of the cognition in which it is grounded.
a kann eure Frage keineswegs . . . aufgegeben sein
b All
, absoluten Ganzen
d
ist selbst eine Warnehmung ( " . . . is itself a perception"); but the sense seems to require keine rather than eine, and following Erdmann we have adopted this reading.
, All
f Gehirne
g Object
•

•

•

507

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

The
Antinomy of Pure Reason
Section Five
Skeptical representation of the cosmological questions
raised by all four transcendental ideas.

A486 / B 5 14

A 487 / B 5 I 5

We would gladly refrain from demanding to see our questions answered
dogmatically if we comprehended right from the start that however the
answer might come out, it would only increase our ignorance, remov­
ing one inconceivability only to replace it with another, taking us out of
one obscurity only to plunge us into a still greater one, and perhaps
even into contradictions. If our question is put merely in terms of affir­
mation or negation, then it is prudent to handle it by initially leaving
aside the supposed grounds for each side and first taking into account
what one would gain if the answer turned out on one side or on the op­
posite side. Now if it so happened that the result in both cases was
something quite empty of sense (nonsense),a then we would have good
grounds to summon our question itself to be critically examined and to
see whether it does not itself rest on a groundless presupposition and
play with an idea that better betrays its falsity in its application and con­
sequences than in its abstract representation. This is the great utility of
the skeptical way of treating the questions that pure reason puts to pure
reason; by means of it one can with little expense exempt oneself from
a great deal of dogmatic rubbish, and put in its place a sober critique,
which, as a true cathartic, will happily purge such delusions along with
the punditry b attendant on them.
Accordingly, if! could antecedently see about a cosmological idea that
whatever side of the unconditioned in the regressive synthesis of appear­
ances it might come down on, it would be either too big or too small
for every concept of the understanding, then I would comprehend
that since it has to do with an object of experience,?' which should con­
form to a possible concept of the understanding, this idea must be en­
tirely empty and without significance because the object does not fit it
no matter how I may accommodate the one to the other. And this is ac­
tually the case with all the world-concepts, which is why reason, as long
as it holds to them, is involved in an unavoidable antinomy. For assume:
First, that the world has no beginning; then it is too big for your
concept; for this concept, which consists in a successive regress, can
never reach the whole eternity that has elapsed. Suppose it has a be­
ginning, then once again it is too small for your concept of understanding in the necessary empirical regress. For since the beginning
a lauter Sinnleeres (Nonsens)
b Vielwisserei
508

Section V Skeptical representation of all cosmological questions

always presupposes a preceding time, it is still not unconditioned, and
the law of the empirical use of the understanding obliges you to ask for
a still higher temporal condition, and the world is obviously too small
for this law.
It is exactly the same with the two answers to the question about the
magnitude of the world in space. For if it is infinite and unbounded,
then it is too big for every possible empirical concept. If it is finite and
bounded, then you can still rightfully ask: What determines this bound­
ary? Empty space is not a correlate of things that subsists by itself, and
it cannot be a condition with which you can stop, still less an empirical
condition that constitutes a part of a possible experience. (For who can
have an experience of what is absolutely empty?) But for the absolute
totality of the empirical synthesis it is always demanded that the un­
conditioned be an empirical concept. Thus a bounded world is too
small for your concept.
Second, if every appearance in space (matter) consists of infinitely
many parts, then the regress of division is always too big for your con­
cept; and if the division of space should cease at any one member of
the division (the simple), then it is too small for the idea of the uncon­
ditioned. For this member always allows of still another regress to fur­
ther parts contained in it.
Third, if you assume that in everything that happens in the world
there is nothing but a sequence occurring according to laws of nature,
then the causality of the cause is always once again something that hap­
pens, and that necessitates your regress to still higher causes, and hence
the prolonging of the series of conditions a parte priori without cessa­
tion. Mere efficient a nature in the synthesis of world-events is thus too
big for all your concepts.
If you choose now and then to admit occurrences produced from
themselves, hence generated through freedom, then by an unavoid­
able law of nature the question "Why?" will pursue you, and require
you, in accord with the causal laws of experience, to go beyond this
point; then you will find that such a totality of connection is too small
for your necessary empirical concept.
Fourth: If you assume an absolutely necessary being (whether it be
the world itself, or something in the world, or the cause of the world),
then you must place it at a time infinitely far removed from every given
point in time, because otherwise it would be dependent on another and
an older existence. But then this existence is inaccessible and too big for
your empirical concept, and you could never arrive at it through any
regress, however far it might continue.
But if, in your opinion, everything that belongs to the world
a wirkende
509

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

A490 / B 5 1 8

(whether as conditioned or as condition) is contingent, then every ex­
istence given to you is too small for your concept. For this existence
compels you to look around for yet another existence on which this
one is dependent.
In all these cases, we have said that the world-idea is either too big
for the empirical regress, hence for every possible concept of the un­
derstanding, or else too small for it. But why haven't we expressed our­
selves in just the opposite way, and said that in the first case the
empirical concept is always too small for the idea, and in the second too
big for it - thus, as it were, holding the empirical regress responsible?
Why have we instead accused the cosmological idea of falling short or
exceeding its end, namely possible experience? The reason was this. It
is possible experience alone that can give our concepts reality; without
it, every concept is only an idea, without truth and reference to an ob­
ject. Hence the possible empirical concept was the standard by which it
had to be judged whether the idea is a mere idea and a thought-entity a
or instead encounters its object within the world. For one says that one
thing is too great or too small relative to another only when the former
thing is assumed to exist for the sake of the latter, and hence has to be
adapted to it. Among the conundrumsb of the ancient dialectical schools
was this question: I f a ball does not pass through a hole, should one say
that the ball is too big, or that the hole is too small? In this case, it is in­
different how you choose to express yourself; for you do not know
which of the two is there for the sake of the other. By contrast, you will
not say that the man is too tall for his clothing, but rather that the cloth­
ing is too short for the man.
Thus we have been brought at least to the well-grounded suspicion
that the cosmological ideas, and all the sophistical assertions about
them that have come into conflict with one another, are perhaps
grounded on an empty and merely imagined concept of the way the ob­
ject of these ideas is given to us; and this suspicion may already have put
us on the right track for exposing the semblance that has so long mis­
led us.
C

Gedankending
b Spielwerke

a

C

In his copy of the first edition, Kant writes: "In the cosmological ideas, the first two
propositions say too much for the opposition, the last two too little. The former say:
'Everything is either eternal in time or has a beginning,' while they should have said: 'or
it is not eternal and exists as thing in itself in no time at all.'
"In the latter too little is said. Hence both can be true: e.g., everything in the
world is either dependent or independent (everything necessary). The former is true
of phenomena, the latter of noumena outside the world." (E CLXX, pp. 50- 1 ;
2 3 :40 -1)
-

5 10

Section VI. Key to the solution of the cosmological dialectic

The
Antinomy of Pure Reason
Section Six
Transcendental idealism as the key to solving
the cosmological dialectic.
We have sufficiently proved in the Transcendental Aesthetic that every­
thing intuited in space or in time, hence all objects of an experience
possible for us, are nothing but appearances, i.e., mere representations,
which, as they are represented, as extended beings or series of alterations, have outside our thoughts no existence grounded in itself. This
doctrine I call transcendental idealism. * The realist, in the transcendental signification, makes these modifications of our sensibility into
things subsisting in themselves, and hence makes mere representations into things in themselves.
One would do us an injustice if one tried to ascribe to us that long­
decried empirical idealism that, while assuming the proper reality of
space, denies the existence of extended beings in it, or at least finds this
existence doubtful, and so in this respect admits no satisfactorily prov­
able distinction between dream and truth. As to the appearances of
inner sense in time, it finds no difficulty in them as real things; indeed,
it even asserts that this inner experience and it alone gives sufficient
proof of the real existence of their objectb (in itself) along with all this
time-determination.
Our transcendental idealism, on the contrary, allows that the objects
of outer intuition are real too, just as they are intuited in space, along
with all alterations in time, just as inner sense represents them. For
since space is already a form of that intuition that we call outer, and
without objects in it there would be no empirical representation at all,
we can and must assume extended beings in space as real; and it is precisely the same with time. Space itself, however, together with time,
and, with both, all appearances, are not things, but rather nothing but
representations, and they cannot exist at all outside our mind; and even
the inner and sensible intuition of our mind (as an object of conscious* <l have also occasionally called it formal idealism, in order to distinguish it
from material idealism, i.e., the common idealism that itself doubts or denies the existence of external things. In many cases it seems more advisable
to employ this rather than the expression given above, in order to avoid all
misinterpretation.>'
a Lehrbegriff
b Object

, This note was added in the second edition.

511

A491 / B 5 1 9

B 520

A492

B 519

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 52 I

A493

B 522

A494

ness), the determination of which through the succession of different
states is representeda in time, is not the real self as it exists in itself, or
the transcendental subject, but only an appearance of this to us un­
known being, which was given to sensibility. The existence of this inner
appearance, as a thing thus existing in itself, cannot be admitted, be­
cause its condition is time, which cannot be a determination of any
thing in itself. In space and time, however, the empirical truth of ap­
pearances is satisfactorily secured, and sufficiently distinguished from
its kinship with dreams, if both are correctly and thoroughly connected
up according to empirical laws in one experience.
Accordingly, the objects of experience are never given in them­
selves, but only in experience, and they do not exist at all outside it.
That there could be inhabitants of the moon, even though no human
being has ever perceived them, must of course be admitted; but this
means b only that in the possible progress of experience we could en­
counter them; for everything is actual that stands in one context with a
perception in accordance with the laws of the empirical progression.
Thus they are real when they stand in an empirical connection with my
real consciousness, although they are not therefore real in themselves,
i.e., outside this progress of experience.
Nothing is really given to us except perception and the empirical
progress from this perception to other possible perceptions. For in
themselves, appearances, as mere representations, are real only in per­
ception, which in fact is nothing but the reality of an empirical repre­
sentation, i.e., appearance. To call an appearance a real thing prior to
perception means[ either that in the continuation of experience we must
encounter such a perception, or it has no meaningd at all. For that it
should exist in itself without relation to our senses and possible experience, could of course b e said if w e were talking about a thing in itself.
But what we are talking about is merely an appearance in space and time,
neither of which is a determination of things in themselves, but only of
our sensibility; hence what is in them (appearances) are not something
in itself, but mere representations, which if they are not given in us (in
perception) are encountered nowhere at all.
The sensible faculty of intuition is really only a receptivity for being
affected in a certain way with representations, whose relation to one an­
other is a pure intuition of space and time (pure forms of our sensibil­
ity), which, insofar as they are connected and determinable in these
a vorgestellt wird; Kant's sentence contains an extra verb, ist; thus the sentence as written
doesn't parse, but it suggests that Kant had not decided whether to treat "is repre­
sented" as a passive verb or as an adjectival participle.

b bedeutet
, bedeutet
d Bedeutung
5 12

Section VI. Key to the solution of the cosmological dialectic

relations a (in space and time) according to laws of the unity of experi­
ence, are called objects. The non-sensible cause of these representa­
tions is entirely unknown to us, and therefore we cannot intuit it as an
object;b for such an object would have to be represented neither in
space nor in time (as mere conditions of our sensible representation),
without which conditions we cannot think any intuition. Meanwhile we
can call the merely intelligible cause of appearances in general the tran­
scendental object,' merely so that we may have something correspond­
ing to sensibility as a receptivity. To this transcendental objectd we can
ascribe the whole extent and connection of our possible perceptions,
and say that it is given in itself prior to all experience. But appearances
are, in accordance with it, given not in themselves but only in this ex­
perience, because they are mere representations, which signify a real
object only as perceptions, namely when this perception connects up
with all others in accordance with the rules of the unity of experience.
Thus one can say: The real things of past time are given in the tran­
scendental object of experience, but for me they are objects and real in
past time only insofar as I represent to myself that, in accordance with
empirical laws, or in other words, the course of the world, a regressive
series of possible perceptions (whether under the guidance of history or
in the footsteps of causes and effects) leads to a time-series that has
elapsed as the condition of the present time, which is then represented
as real only in connection with a possible experience and not in itself;
so that all those events which have elapsed from an inconceivable past
time prior to my own existence signify nothing but the possibility of
prolonging the chain of experience, starting with the present perception, upward to the conditions that determine it in time.
If, accordingly, I represent all together all existing objects of sense in
all time and all spaces, I do not posit them as being there in space and
time prior to experience, but rather this representation is nothing other
than the thought of a possible experience in its absolute completeness.
In it alone are those objects (which are nothing but mere representations) given. But to say that they exist prior to all my experience meanse
only that they are to be encountered in the part of experience to which
I, starting with the perception, must first of all progress. The cause of
the empirical conditions of this progress, the cause, therefore, of which
members of it I might encounter, and also the extent to which I may en­
counter them in the regress, is transcendental, and hence necessarily
Verbaltnisse
Object
Object
d Object
, bedeutet
a

b

C

513

B 523

A49 5

B 524
A496

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 525

A497

unknown to me. We, however, have nothing to do with that, but only
with the rule of the progress of experience, in which objects, namely ap­
pearances, are given. It is all the same to the outcome whether I say that
in the empirical progress in space I could encounter stars that are a hun­
dred times farther from me than the most distant ones I see, or whether
I say that perhaps they are there to be encountered in world-space even
if no human being has ever perceived them or ever will perceive them;
for if they were given as things in themselves, without any reference to
possible experience at all, then they would be nothing for me, hence
they would not be objects contained in the series of the empirical
regress. Only in another relation, when these same appearances are to
b e used on behalf o f the cosmological idea o f an absolute whole and
having to do with a question that goes beyond the bounds of possible
experience, is it important to distinguish between the ways one might
take the reality of objects of sense when thinking them, so as to prevent
a deceptive delusion that must inevitably arise if we misinterpret our
own concepts of experience.
The
Antinomy of Pure Reason
Section Seven
Critical decision of the cosmological conflict of reason
with itself.

B 526
A 49 8

The entire antinomy of pure reason rests on this dialectical argument:
If the conditioned is given, then the whole series of all conditions for it
is also given; now objects of the senses are given as conditioned; conse­
quently, etc. Through this syllogism, whose major premise seems so
natural and evident, a corresponding number of cosmological ideas are
introduced, in accordance with the difference of the conditions (in the
synthesis of appearances), insofar as they constitute a series, which pos­
tulate an absolute totality of these series and thereby put reason into an
unavoidable conflict with itself. But before we expose what is deceptive
about this sophistical argument, we have to put in place certain of the
concepts occurring in it, by correcting and determining them.
First, the following proposition is clear and undoubtedly certain: If
the conditioned is given, then through it a regress in the series of all
conditions for it is given to us as a problem;a for the concept of the
conditioned already entails that something is related to a condition, and
if this condition is once again conditioned, to a more remote condition,
and so through all the members of the series. This proposition is there­
fore analytic and beyond any fear of a transcendental criticism. It is a
a

uns .

.

.

lIufgegeben sei
5 14

Section VII. Critical decision of the cosmological conflict

logical postulate of reason to follow that connection of a concept with
its conditions through the understanding, and to continue it as far as
possible, which already attaches to the concept itself.
Further: If the conditioned as well as its condition are things in them­
selves, then when the first is given not only is the regress to the second
given as a problem, but the latter is thereby really already given along
with it; and, because this holds for all members of the series, then the
complete series of conditions, and hence the unconditioned is thereby
simultaneously given, or rather it is presupposed by the fact that the con­
ditioned, which is possible only through that series, is given. Here the
synthesis of the conditioned with its conditions is a synthesis of the mere
understanding, which represents things as they are without paying attention to whether and how we might achieve acquaintance a with them.
On the contrary, if I am dealing with appearances, which as mere repre­
sentations are not given at all if ! do not achieve acquaintance with them
(i.e. to them themselves, for they are nothing except empirical cognitions),b then I cannot say with the same meaningC that if the conditioned
is given, then all the conditions (as appearances) for it are also given; and
hence I can by no means infer the absolute totality of the series of these
conditions. For the appearances, in their apprehension, are themselves
nothing other than an empirical synthesis (in space and time) and thus
are given only in this synthesis. Now it does not follow at all that if the
conditioned (in appearance) is given, then the synthesis constituting its
empirical condition is thereby also given too and presupposed; on the
contrary, this synthesis takes place for the first time in the regress, and
never without it. But in such a case one can very well say that a regress
to the conditions, i.e., a continued empirical synthesis on this side is de­
manded or given as a problem,d and that there could not fail to be conditions given through this regressY
From this it is clear that the major premise of the cosmological syllo­
gism takes the conditioned in the transcendental signification of a pure
category, while the minor premise takes it in the empirical signification
of a concept of the understanding applied to mere appearances; consequently there is present in it that dialectical deception that is called a
sophisma figurae dictionis.e This deception is, however, not artificial, but
an entirely natural mistake of common reason. For through common
reason, when something is given as conditioned, we presuppose (in the
major premise) the conditions and their series as it were sight unseen,
a Kenntnis
b Kenntnisse
, Bedeutung
d auf
gegeben

, "sophism of a figure of speech," or fallacy of equivocation
515

B527
A499

B 528
A500

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 529
A 501

B 530
A 502

because this is nothing but the logical requirement of assuming com­
plete premises for a given conclusion, and no time-order is present in the
connection of the conditioned with its condition; both are presupposed
as given simultaneously. Further, it is likewise natural (in the minor
premise) to regard appearances as things in themselves and likewise as
objects given to the mere understanding, as was the case in the major
premise, where I abstracted from all conditions of intuition under which
alone objects can be given. But now in this we have overlooked a re­
markable difference between the concepts. The synthesis of the condi­
tioned with its condition and the whole series of the latter (in the major
premise) carries with it no limitation through time and no concept of
succession. The empirical synthesis, on the contrary, and the series of
conditions in appearance (which are subsumed in the minor premise), is
necessarily given successively and is given only in time, one member
after another; consequently here I could not presuppose the absolute
totality of synthesis and the series represented by it, as I could in the
previous case, because there all members o f the series are given in them­
selves (without time-condition), but here they are possible only through
the successive regress, which is given only through one's actually com­
pleting it.
When such a fallacy has been shown to ground the common argu­
ment (for the cosmological assertions), the demands of both disputing
parties could rightfully be dismissed as being based on no well­
grounded title. But that does not put an end to their quarrel to the ex­
tent of winning them over to the view that one or both of them is wrong
in what he actually asserts (in the conclusion), even if he does not know
how to construct sound arguments a for it. Nothing seems clearer than
that between the two, one of whom asserts that the world has a begin­
ning, and the other that it has no beginning but has existed from eter­
nity, one of them has to be right. But if this is so, then because there is
equal evidence b on both sides, it is impossible ever to ascertain which
side is right, and so the conflict drags on as before, even though the par­
ties have been directed by the court of reason to hold their peace. Thus
no means is left for ending the dispute in a well-grounded way and to
the satisfaction of both sides, unless through the fact that they can do
such a fine job of refuting each other they are finally won over to the
view that they are disputing about nothing, and that a certain transcendental illusion has portrayed a reality to them where none i s present.
This is the path on which we will now set forth in settling a dispute that
cannot be decided by a final judgment.
* * *
a Beweisgriinde
b Klarheit
5 16

Section VII. Critical decision of the cosmological conflict

Zeno the elearic, a subtle dialectician, was already severely censured
by Plato as a wanton sophist who, to show his art, would seek to prove
some proposition through plausible arguments and then immediately to
overthrow the same proposition through other arguments just as
strong.73 He asserted that God (presumably for him this was nothing
but the world) is neither finite nor infinite, is neither in motion nor at
rest, and is neither like nor unlike any other thing. To those who judged
him, it appeared that he wanted entirely to deny two mutually contra­
dictory propositions, which is absurd. But I do not find that this charge
can be justly lodged against him. I will throw more light on the first of
these propositions presently. As to the others, if by the word God he
understood the universe, then he must of course say that neither is it
persistingly present in its place (at rest) nor does it alter its place (move),
because all places are only in the universe, hence this universe itself is
in no place. If the world-whole includes in itself everything existing,
then it is neither like nor unlike any other thing, because there is no
other thing outside it, with which it might be compared. If two mutually opposed judgments presuppose an inadmissible condition, then despite their conflict (which is, however, not a real contradiction) both of
them collapse, because the condition collapses under which alone either
of them would be valid.
If someone said that every body either smells good or smells not
good, then there is a third possibility, namely that a body has no smell
(aroma) at all, and thus both conflicting propositions can be false. If I
say the body is either good-smelling or not good-smelling (vel suave­
olens vel non suaveolens), then both judgments are contradictorily op­
posed, and only the first is false, but its contradictory opposite, namely
that some bodies are not good-smelling, includes also those bodies that
have no smell at all. In the previous opposition (per disparata)a the
contingent condition of the concept of body (of smell) remained in the
case of the conflicting judgment, and hence it was not ruled out b by it;
hence the latter judgment was not the contradictory opposite of the
former.
Accordingly, if I say that as regards space either the world is infinite
or it is not infinite (non est infinitus), then if the first proposition is false,
its contradictory opposite, "the world is not infinite," must be true.
Through it I would rule out only an infinite world, without positing another one, namely a finite one. But if it is said that the world is either
infinite o r finite (not-infinite), then both propositions could be false.
For then I regard the world as determined in itself regarding its magnitude, since in the opposition I not only rule out its infinitude, and
a through different things
b aufgehoben
5 17

B 531

A 503

A 504/ B 5 3 2

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

A 505 / B 5 3 3

A 506/ B 5 34

with it, the whole separatea existence of the world, but I also add a de­
termination of the world, as a thing active in itself, which might like­
wise be false, if, namely, the world were not given at all as a thing in
itself, and hence, as regards its magnitude, neither as infinite nor as fi­
nite. Permit me to call such an opposition a dialectical opposition, but
the contradictory one an analytical opposition.b Thus two judgments
dialectically opposed to one another could both be false, because one
does not merely contradict the other, but says something more than is
required for a contradiction.
If one regards the two propositions, "The world is infinite in magni­
tude," "The world is finite in magnitude," as contradictory opposites,
then one assumes that the world (the whole series of appearances) is a
thing in itself. For the world remains, even though I may rule out the
infinite or finite regress in the series of its appearances. But if I take
away this presupposition, or rather this transcendental illusion, and
deny that i t is a thing in itself, then the contradictory conflict of the two
assertions is transformed into a merely dialectical conflict, and because
the world C does not exist at all (independently of the regressive series of
my representations), it exists neither as an in itself infinite whole nor
as an in itself finite whole. It is only in the empirical regress of the se­
ries of appearances, and by itself it is not to be met with at all. Hence if
itd is always conditioned, then it is never wholly given, and the world is
thus not an unconditioned whole, and thus does not exist as such a
whole, either with infinite or with finite magnitude.74
\Vhat has been said here about the first cosmological idea, namely
the absolute totality of magnitude in appearance, holds also for the oth­
ers. The series of appearances is to be encountered only in the regres­
sive synthesis itself, but is not encountered in itself in appearance, as a
thing on its own given prior to every regress. Hence I will have to say:
the multiplicity of parts in a given appearance is in itself neither finite
nor infinite, because appearance is nothing existing in itself, and the
parts are given for the very first time through the regress of the de­
composing synthesis, and in this regress, which is never given ab­
solutely wholly either as finite nor as infinite. The very same holds of
the series of causes ordered one above another, or of conditioned existence up to necessary existence, which can never be regarded in thema abgesondert
b

In the two italicized phrases, the term used is Opposition, not Kant's usual term

Entgegensetzung.

, In the first edition: " . . . and the world, because it . . .

"

d diese, whose referent, on grammatical grounds, could be either "world" or "series" (but
not "regress").

518

Section VII. Critical decision of the cosmological conflict

selves as either finite or infinite in their totality, because, as series of
subordinated representations, they exist only in the dynamical regress;
but prior to this regress, and as a series of things subsisting for them­
selves, they cannot exist at all in themselves.
Accordingly, the antinomy of pure reason in its cosmological ideas is
removed by showing that it is merely dialectical and a conflict due to an
illusion arising from the fact that one has applied the idea of absolute
totality, which is valid only as a condition of things in themselves, to ap­
pearances that exist only in representation, and that, if they constitute a
series, exist in the successive regress but otherwise do not exist at all.
But one can, on the contrary, draw from this antinomy a true utility, not
dogmatic but critical and doctrinal utility, namely that of thereby prov­
ing indirectly the transcendental ideality of appearances, if perhaps
someone did not have enough in the direct proof in the Transcendental
Aesthetic. The proof would consist in this dilemma. If the world is a
whole existing in itself, then it is either finite or infinite. Now the first
as well as the second alternative is false (according to the proofo offered
above for the antithesis on the one side and the thesis on the other).
Thus it is also false that the world (the sum total of all appearances) is
a whole existing in itself. From which i t follows that appearances in
general are nothing outside our representations, which is just what we
mean by their transcendental ideality.
This remark is of some importance. From it one sees that the above
proofs of the fourfold antinomy are not semblances but well grounded,
that is, at least on the presupposition that appearances, or a world of
sense comprehending all of them within itself, are things in themselves.
The conflict of the propositions drawn from it, however, uncovers a
falsehood lying in this presupposition and thereby brings us to a dis­
covery about the true constitution of things as objects of sense. Thus
the transcendental dialectic by no means provides support for skepti­
cism, though it does for the skeptical method, which can point to the
dialectic as an example of the great utility of letting the arguments of
reason confront one another in the most complete freedom; such argu­
ments, although they may not deliver what one was seeking, neverthe­
less will always deliver something useful and serviceable for the
correction of our judgments.b
a In the first edition: "proofs"
b

Notes in Kant's copy of the first edition: "In the first class of antinomical propositions
both are false, because they say more than is true, namely [that there is an] absolute to­
tality of appearances.
"In the second [class] both can be true, because they will say less than is required for
the opposition; [for] it can [happen] that intellectual [things] are posited in place of sen­
sibles." (E CLXXI, p. 5 1 ; 2 3 :4 1)

5 19

B 535

A 5 07

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

The
Antinomy of Pure Reason
Section Eight
The regulative principlea of pure reason in regard to the
cosmological ideas.

A 509 / B 5 3 7

Since through the cosmological principle of totality no maximum in the
series of conditions in a world of sense, as a thing in itself, is given, but
rather this maximum can merely be given as a problemb in the regress
of this series, the principle of pure reason we are thinking of retains
its genuine validity only in a corrected significance not indeed as an
axiom for thinking the totality in the objectd as real, but as a probleme
for the understanding, thus for the subject in initiating and continuing,
in accordance with the completeness of the idea, the regress in the se­
ries of conditions for a given conditioned. For in sensibility, i.e., in space
and time, every condition to which we can attain in the exposition of
given appearances is in turn conditioned, because these appearances are
not objects in themselves in which the absolutely unconditioned might
possibly occur, but only empirical representations, which must always
find in intuition their condition, which determines them as regards
space or time. Thus the principle of reason is only a rule, prescribing a
regress in the series o f conditions for given appearances, in which
regress it is never allowed to stop with an absolutely unconditioned.
Thus it is not a principle! of the possibility of experience and of the
empirical cognition of objects of sense, hence not a principle of the un­
derstanding, for every experience is enclosed within its boundaries (con­
forming to the intuition in which it is given); nor is it a constitutive
principleg of reason for extending the concept of the world of sense
beyond all possible experience; rather it is a principle of the greatest
possible continuation and extension of experience, in accordance with
which no empirical boundary would hold as an absolute boundary; thus
it is a principleh of reason which, as a rule, postulates what should be ef­
fectedi by us in the regress, but does not anticipate what is given in it­
self in the objectj prior to any regress. Hence I call it a regulative
a Princip
b aufgegeben
, Bedeutung
d
Object
, Problem
f Principium
g Princip
h Principium
; geschehen
j Object
520

Section VIII. The regulative principle of pure reason

principlea of reason, whereas the principle of the absolute totality of the
series of conditions, as given in itself in the objectb (in the appearances),
would be a constitutive cosmological principle, c the nullity of which
I have tried to show through just this distinction, thereby prevent­
ing - what would otherwise unavoidably happen (through a transcen­
dental subreption) - the ascription of objective reality to an idea that
merely serves as a rule.
Now in order to determine the sense of this rule of pure reason appropriately, it must first be noted that it cannot say what the object d
is, but only how the empirical regress is to b e instituted so as to attain to the complete concept of the object.' For if the former were the
case, then it would be a constitutive principle! the likes of which is
never possible on the basis of pure reason. Thus with it one can by no
means have the intention to say that the series of conditions for a given
conditioned is in itself finite or infinite; for in that way a mere idea of
the absolute totality, which is produced only in the idea itself, would
think an object that cannot be given in any experience, since an objective reality independent of empirical synthesis would be ascribed to a
series of appearances. Thus the idea of reason will only prescribe a rule
to the regressive synthesis in the series, a rule in accordance with which
it proceeds from the conditioned, by means of all the conditions subordinated one to another, to the unconditioned, even though the latter
will never be reached. For the absolutely unconditioned is not encountered in experience at all.
To this end, the first thing to do is to determine precisely the syn­
thesis of a series insofar as it is never complete. With this aim one usu­
ally employs two expressions, which are supposed to draw a distinction,
even though one does not know how to specify the ground of this dis­
tinction correctly. Mathematicians speak solely of a progressus in infinitum. g But those who study concepts (philosophers) want, in place of
this, to make the expression progressus in indefinitum h the only valid
one.75 Without stopping to examine the reservations to which this distinction has led, or to test whether their use has been good or fruitless,
I will seek to determine these concepts precisely in relation to my own
intentions.
One can rightly say of a straight line that it could be extended to ina Princip
b

Object

Princip
d Object
, Object
f Principium
,

g
h

progress to infinity
indefinite progress
521

A 5 IOI B 5 3 8

A5 I I I B 539

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch.

A 5 1 zl B 540

A 5 1 3 /B 541

II

finity, and here the distinction between the infinite and a progress of in­
determinate length (progressus in indefinitum) would be an empty sub­
tlety. For although when it is said, "Draw a line" it obviously sounds
more correct to add in indefinitum than if it were said in infinitum, be­
cause the first means a no more than "Extend it as far as you want," but
the second meansb "You ought never to stop extending it" (which is not
at all intended here); yet if we are talking only about what can be done,
then the first expression is entirely correct, for you could always make
it greater, to infinity. And this is also the situation in all cases where one
is speaking only of a forward progress,c i.e., of a progress from the con­
dition to the conditioned; this possible progress in the series of appear­
ances goes to infinity. From one pair of parents you could progress in a
descending line of generation without end, and you could also think
that it might actually progress that way in the world. For here reason
never needs an absolute totality in the series, because it is not presup­
posed as a condition as given (datum), but it is only added on as some­
thing conditioned, which is capable of being given (dabile), and this
without end.
It is entirely otherwise with the problem how far does the regress ex­
tend when it ascends from the given conditioned to its conditions in the
series: whether I can say here that there is a regress to infinity or only
a regress extending indetenninately far (in indefinitum), and whether
from human beings now living I can ascend to infinity in the series of
their ancestors, or whether it can be said only that as far as I have gone
back, there has never been an empirical ground for holding the series to
be bounded anywhere, so that for every forefather I am justified in seek­
ing, and at the same time bound to seek, still further for his ancestors,
though not to presuppose them?
To this I say: If the whole was given in empirical intuition, then the
regress in the series of its inner conditions goes to infinity. But if only
one member of the series is given, from which the regress to an absolute
totality is first of all to proceed, then only an indeterminate kind of
regress (in indefinitum) takes place. Thus of the division of matter (of a
body) that is given within certain boundaries, it must be said that it goes
to infinity. For this matter is given in empirical intuition as a whole, and
consequently with all its possible parts. Now since the condition of this
whole is its part, and the condition of this part is a part made of parts,
etc., and in this regress of decomposition an unconditioned (indivisible)
member of this series of conditions is never encountered, not only is
a bedeutet
b

C

bedeutet
Progressus

522

Section VIII. The regulative principle of pure reason

there nowhere an empirical ground to stop the division, but the further
members of the continuing division are themselves empirically given
prior to this ongoing division, i.e., the division goes to infinity. On the
contrary, the series of ancestors for a given human being is not given in
its absolute totality in any possible experience, but the regress goes
from each member of this generation to a higher one, so that no em­
pirical boundary is to be encountered that would exhibit one member
as absolutely unconditioned. But since the members that might supply
the conditions for it nevertheless do not already lie in the empirical in­
tuition of the whole prior to the regress, this regress does not go to in­
finity (by division of the given) but goes to an indeterminate distance,
searching for more members for the given, which are once again always
given only conditionally.
In neither of these two cases, that of the regressus in infinitum as well
as in that of the in indefinitum, is the series of conditions regarded as
being given as infinite in the object.a It is not things in themselves that
are given, but only appearances, which, as conditions of one another, are
given only in the regress itself. Thus the question is no longer how big
this series of conditions is in itself - whether it is finite or infinite - for
it is nothing in itself; rather, the question is how we are to institute the
empirical regress and how far we are to continue it. And then there is a
difference worth noting in regard to the rule to be followed in this
progress. If the whole has been empirically given, then it is possible to
go back to infinity in the series of its inner conditions. But if that whole
is not given, but rather is first to be given only through an empirical
regress, then I can say only that it is possible to progress to still higher
conditions in the series to infinity. In the first case I could say: There
are always more members there, and empirically given, than I reach
through the regress (of decomposition); but in the second case I can say
only: I can always go still further in the regress, because no member is
empirically given as absolutely unconditioned, and thus a higher member may be admitted as possible and hence the inquiry after it may be admitted as necessary. In the former case it was necessary to encounter
more members of the series, but in the latter case it is always necessary
to inquire after more of them, because no experience is bounded absolutely. For you have either no perception that absolutely bounds your
empirical regress, and then you must not hold your regress to be complete; or if you have such a perception bounding your series, then this
cannot be a part of your regressive series (because that which bounds
must be distinguished from that which is bounded by it), and so you
have to continue your regress further to this condition, and so on.
a

Object

523

A 5 14/ B 542

A 5 1 S / B S43

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

The following section will place these remarks in a suitable light by
giving them an application.
The Antinomy of Pure Reason
Section Nine
On the empirical use of the regulative principle a of reason,
in regard to all cosmological ideas.
Since, as we have repeatedly shown, there is just as little transcendental
use of pure concepts of understanding as there is of concepts of reason,
because the absolute totality of series of conditions in the world of sense
is based solely on a transcendental use of reason that demands this un­
conditioned completeness from what it presupposes is a thing in itself;
and since the world of sense, however, contains nothing like that com­
pleteness, there can never again be an issue about the absolute magni­
tude of the series in this world, whether it might be bounded or in itself
unbounded, but only about how far we should go back in the empirical
regress when we trace experience back to its conditions, so that, fol­
lowing the rule of reason, we do not stop with any answer to its ques­
tions except that which is appropriate to the object.
Thus the only thing left to us is the validity of the principleh of rea­
son as a rule for the continuation and magnitude of a possible experi­
ence, once its invalidity as a constitutive principle of appearances in
themselves has been adequately demonstrated. If we can keep the for­
mer in view and beyond doubt, then the conflict of reason with itself
will also be entirely at an end, since not only will the illusion that put
reason at odds with itself have been done away with through its critical
dissolution, but in place of it, that sense will have been uncovered in
which reason agrees with itself, and whose misinterpretation was the
sole cause of the conflict; and a principle that would otherwise be di­
alectical will be transformed into a doctrinal principle. In fact, if this
principle can be preserved in its subjective signification for suitably de­
termining the greatest possible use of the understanding in experience
in regard to its objects, then that would be just as if the principle were
(what it is impossible to get from pure reason) an axiom determining
objects in themselves a priori; for even this could have no greater influ­
ence on the extension and correction of our cognition in regard to ob­
jectsC of experience than by actively proving itself in the most extensive
use of our understanding in experience.
a Princip
b
,

Princip
Objecte
524

Section IX. On the empirical use of the regulative principle

I.
Resolution of the cosmological idea
of the totality of the composition of the appearances
of a world-whole.
Here, as well as in the case of the remaining cosmological questions, the
ground of the regulative principle of reason is the proposition that in
the empirical regress there can be encountered no experience of an ab­
solute boundary, and hence no experience of a condition as one that is
absolutely unconditioned empirically. The reason for this, however, is
that such an experience would have to contain in itself a bounding of ap­
pearance by nothing, or by the void, which the regress, carried on far
enough, would have to encounter by means of a perception - which is
impossible.
Now this proposition, which says only that in the empirical regress I
can always attain only to a condition that must itself in turn be regarded
as empirically conditioned, contains the rule in terminsb that however
far I may have come in the ascending series, I must always inquire after
a higher member of the series, whether or not this member may come
to be known to me through experience.
Now nothing further is required for the resolution of the first cos­
mological problem except to settle whether, in the regress to the un­
conditioned magnitude of the world-whole (in time and in space), this
never bounded ascent can be called a regress to infinity, or only an in­
determinately continued regress (in indefinitum).
The merely general representation of the series of all past states of
the world, as well as of the things that simultaneously exist in the
world's space, is nothing other than a possible empirical regress that I
think, though still indeterminately, and through which alone there can
arise the concept of such a series of conditions for a given perception.*
Now I always have the world-whole only in concept, but by no means
(as a whole) in intuition. Thus I cannot infer from its magnitude to the
magnitude of the regress, and determine the latter according to the for* This world-series' can thus be neither bigger nor smaller than the possible
empirical regress, on which alone its concept rests. And since this cannot yield
a determinate infinite, nor yet something determinately finite (something absolutely bounded), it is clear from this that we can assume the magnitude of
the world to be neither finite nor infinite, since the regress (through which
this magnitude is represented) admits of neither of the two.
a Princips
b in its terms
Weltreihe
C

525

A 5 I 8 / B 546

A F 9 / B 547

A 5 1 8 / B 546

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

A 520/ B 548

A 52 I / B 549

mer, but rather it has to be through the magnitude of the empirical
regress that I first make for myself a concept of the magnitude of the
world. About this regress, however, I never know anything more than
that from any given member of the series of conditions I must always
proceed empirically to a higher (more remote) member. Thus by that
means the magnitude of the whole of appearances is never determined
absolutely; hence also one cannot say that this regress goes to infinity,
because this would anticipate the members to which the regress has not
yet attained, and would represent their multiplicitya as so great that no
empirical synthesis can attain to it; consequently, it would detennine
(though only negatively) the magnitude of the world prior to the
regress, which is impossible. For the latter (in its totality) is not given
to me through any intuition, hence its magnitude is not given at all
prior to the regress. Accordingly, we can say nothing at all about the
magnitude of the world in itself, not even that in it there is the regressus
in infinitum,b but rather we must seek the concept of its magnitude only
according to the rule determining the empirical regress in it. But this
rule says nothing more than that however far we may have come in the
series of empirical conditions, we should never assume an absolute
boundary, but rather we should subordinate every appearance as condi­
tioned to another as its condition, and thus we must progress further to
this condition; this is a regressus in indefinitum,c which, because it deter­
mines no magnitude in the object,d can be distinguished clearly enough
from the regress in infinitum.
Accordingly, I cannot say the world is infinite in past time or in
space. For such a concept of magnitude, as a given infinity, is empirical,
hence it is absolutely impossible in regard to the world as an object of
sense. I will also not say that the regress from a given perception to
everything bounding it in a series, in space and in past time, goes to in­
finity; for this presupposes the infinite magnitude of the world; nor will
I say that it is finite; for an absolute boundary is likewise empirically
impossible. Accordingly, I will be able to say nothing about the whole
object of experience (the world of sense), but only something about the
rule in accord with which experience, suitably to its object, is to be in­
stituted and continued.
Thus to the cosmological question about the magnitude of the world,
the first and negative answer is: The world has no first beginning in
time and no outermost boundary in space.
For in the opposite case, it would be bounded by empty time on the
one side and by empty space on the other. Now since as appearance it
a Menge

b infinite regress
, indefinite regress

d Object
526

Section IX. On the empirical use of the regulative principle

cannot in itself be either of these, because appearance is not a thing in
itself, a perception of boundedness through absolutely empty time or
empty space would have to be possible, through which these world­
ends would have to be given in a possible experience. But such an ex­
perience, as completely empty of content, is impossible. Thus an abso­
lute boundary of the world is empirically impossible, and hence also
absolutely impossible.*
From this follows at the same time the affirmative answer: The
regress in the series of appearances in the world, as a determination of
the magnitude of the world, goes on in indefinitum, which is as much as
to say that the world of sense has no absolute magnitude, but the em­
pirical regress (through which alone it can be given on the side of its
conditions) has its rule, namely always to progress from each member
of the series, as a conditioned, to a still more remote member (whether
by means of one's own experience, or the guiding thread of history, or
the chain of effects and their causes), and nowhere to exceed the extension of the possible empirical use of one's understanding, since this extension is the sole and proper business of reason in its principles.a
What is not prescribed here is a determinate empirical regress that
continues in a certain kind of appearance without ever ceasing, e.g., that
from a living human being one must always ascend in the series of his
ancestors without ever expecting a first pair, or in the series of bodies in
the world without admitting an outermost sun; on the contrary, what is
required is only the progress from appearances to appearances, even if
they should not yield any actual perception (if this perception is too
weak in degree to become an experience for our consciousness), because
despite this they would still belong to possible experience.76
Every beginning is in time, and every boundary of the extended is in
space. Space and time, however, are only in the world of sense. Hence
appearances are in the world only conditionally, the world itself is nei­
ther conditioned nor bounded in an unconditional way.
Just for this reason, and since the world cannot be given as a whole,
and even the series of conditions for a given conditioned, as a world­
series, cannot be given as a whole, the concept of the magnitude of
* One will note that the proof is carried on here in an entirely different way
from the dogmatic one in the antithesis of the first antinomy. There, in accordance with the common and dogmatic way of representing it, we let the
world of sense count as a thing whose totality is given in itself prior to any
regress, and, if it did not occupy all space and all time, we denied it any determinate place in space and time. Hence the conclusion was different from
this one too: namely, the actual infinity of the world was inferred.
a Principien

527

A S 2 2 / B 550

AS 2 I / B 549

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II
A

5 2 3/ B 5 5 1

the world is given only through the regress, and not given prior to it in
a collective intuition. But the regress consists only in a determining of
the magnitude, and thus it does not give a determinate concept, a con­
cept of a magnitude that would be infinite in regard to a certain mea­
sure; thus it does not go to infinity (given, as it were), but goes only
indeterminately far, so as to give a magnitude (of experience) that first
becomes actual through this regress.
II.

Resolution of the cosmological idea
of the totality of division of a given whole
in intuition.
If I divide a whole that is given in intuition, then I go from a condi­
tioned to the conditions of its possibility. The division of the parts (sub­
divisio or decompositio) is a regress in the series of these conditions. The
absolute totality of this series would be given only when and if the
regress could attain to simple parts. But if each of the parts in a con­

A 5 24/ B 5 52

tinuously progressing decomposition is once again divisible, then the
division, i.e., the regress from the conditioned to its condition, goes in
infinitum;U for the conditions (the parts) are contained in the conditioned itself, and since this conditioned is given as a whole in an intu­
ition enclosed within its boundaries, the conditions are all given along
with it. The regress thus may not be called merely a regress in indefini­
tum, as only the previous cosmological idea allowed, where I was to
proceed from the conditioned to conditions outside it, which were not
given simultaneously with it, but were first added to it in the empirical
regress. Despite this, it is by no means permitted to say of such a whole,
which is divisible to infinity, that it consists of infinitely many parts.
For though all the parts are contained in the intuition of the whole,
the whole division is not contained in it; this division consists only
in the progressive decomposition, or in the regress itself, which first
makes the series actual. Now since this regress is infinite, all its mem­
bers (parts) to which it has attained are of course contained in the whole
as an aggregate, but the whole series of the division is not, since it
is infinite successively and never is as a whole; consequently, the re­
gress cannot exhibit any infinite multiplicityb or the taking together of
this multiplicity into one whole.
This general reminder is, first, very easily applied to space. Every space
intuited within its boundaries is such a whole, whose parts in every de­
composition are in turn spaces, and it is therefore divisible to infinity.
P

b

to infinity

Menge
528

Section IX. On the empirical use of the regulative principle

From this there also follows quite naturally the second application, to
an external appearance enclosed within its boundaries (a body). Its division is grounded on the divisibility of space, which constitutes the possibility of the body as an extended whole. The latter is thus divisible to
infinity, without, however, therefore consisting of infinitely many parts.
To be sure, it appears that since a body has to be represented as a sub­
stance in space, it is to be distinguished from a space as far as the law of
the divisibi]jty of space is concerned; for one can in any case concede
that the decomposition of the latter could never do away with all com­
position, since then every space, having nothing else that is self-subsis­
tent, would cease to be (which is impossible); yet it does not seem to be
compatible with the concept of a substance - which is really supposed
to be the subject of all composition, and has to remain in its elements
even if its connection in space, by which it constitutes a body, were re­
moved - that if all composition of matter were removed in thought,
then nothing at all would remain. Yet with that which is called sub­
stance in appearance things are not as they would be with a thing in it­
self which one thought through pure concepts of the understanding.
The former is not an absolute subject, but only a persisting image of
sensibility, and it is nothing but intuition, in which nothing unconditioned is to be encountered anywhere.
But now although this rule of progress to infinity applies without any
doubt to the subdivision of an appearance as a mere filling of space, it
cannot hold if we want to stretch it to cover the multiplicity of parts al­
ready detached with certainty in a given whole, constituting thereby a
quantum discretum.a,n To assume that in every whole that is articulated
into membersb (organized), every part is once again articulated, and
that in such a way, by dismantling the parts to infinity, one always en­
counters new complex partsC - in a word, to assume that the whole is ar­
ticulated to infinity - this is something that cannot be thought at all,
even though the parts of matter, reached by its decomposition to infin­
ity, could be articulated. For the infinity of the division of a given ap­
pearance in space is grounded solely on the fact that through this
infinity merely its divisibility, i.e., a multiplicity of parts, which is in it­
self absolutely indeterminate, is given, but the parts themselves are
given and determined only through the subdivision - in short, on the
fact that the whole is not in itself already divided up. Hence the division
can determine a multiplicity as far as one wants to proceed in the
regress of the division. In the case of an organic body articulated to infinity, on the contrary, the whole is represented through this very cona discrete quantity
b gegliedert
, Kunstteile
529

A525 1B 553

A

5 261 B 554

A5 2 7 /B555

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

cept as already divided up, and a multiplicity of parts, determinate in
itself but infinite, is encountered prior to every regress in the divi­
sion - through which one contradicts oneself, since this infinite devel­
opment is regarded as a series that is never to be completed (as infinite)
and yet as one that is completed when it is taken together. The infinite
division indicates only the appearance as quantum continuum,a and is in­
separable from the filling of space; for the ground of its infinite divisi­
bility lies precisely in that. But as soon as something is assumed as a
quantum discretum,b the multiplicity of units in it is determined; hence it
is always equal to a number. Thus only experience can settle how far the
organization in an articulated body may go; and even if it was certain to
attain to no inorganic parts, such parts must nevertheless at least lie
within a possible experience. But how far the transcendental division of
an appearance in general may reach is not a matter of experience at all,
but it is rather a principle< of reason never to take the empirical regress
in the composition of what is extended, in conformity with the nature
of this appearance, to be absolutely complete.
* * *

Concluding remark
on the resolution of the mathematical-transcendental
ideas, and preamble to the resolution of the
dynamic-transcendental ideas.78
When we represented the antinomy of pure reason in a table through
all the transcendental ideas, where we showed the ground of this con­
flict and the only means of removing it - which consisted in declaring
both of the opposed assertions to be false - we in all cases represented
the conditions for their conditioned as belonging to relations of space
and time, which is the usual presupposition of common human under­
standing, on which, therefore, the conflict entirely rested. In this re­
spect all dialectical representations of totality in the series of conditions
for a given conditioned were of the same kindd throughout. There was
always a series, in which the condition was connected with the condi­
tioned as a member of the series, and thereby was homogeneous, e
since the regress is never thought of as completed, or else, if this were
to happen, a member conditioned in itself would have to be falsely asa continuous quantity
b

discrete quantity

( Principium
d von gleicher Art
, gleichartig
530

Section IX. On the empirical use of the regulative principle
sumed to be a first, and hence unconditioned member. Thus it would
not always be the object,tT i.e., the conditioned, but the series of conditions for it, which was so considered merely in its magnitude; and then
the difficulty - which could not be removed by any compromise, but
only by completely cutting the knot - consisted in the fact that reason
made it either too long or too short for the understanding, so that the
understanding could never come out equal to reason's idea.
But in this we have overlooked an essential distinction governing the
objects/ i.e., among the concepts of the understanding which reason as­
pires to raise to ideas, namely, that according to our table of categories
two of them signifY mathematical, but the other two a dynamical syn­
thesis of appearances. Until now this was all right, since just as in the
general representation of all transcendental ideas we always stayed only
within appearance, so in the two mathematical-transcendental ideas
we had no object other than one in appearance. Now, however, that we
are progressing to dynamical concepts of the understanding, insofar as
they are to be suited to the idea of reason, this distinction comes to be
important, and opens up for us an entirely new prospect in regard to the
suit in which reason has become implicated; whereas up to now it has
been dismissed as based on false presuppositions on both sides, now
perhaps in the dynamical antinomy there is a presupposition that can
coexist with the pretensions of reason, and since the judge may make
good the defects in legal grounds that have been misconstrued on both
sides, the case can be mediated to the satisfaction of both parties, which
could not be done in the controversy about the mathematical antinomy.
The series of conditions are obviously all homogeneous to the extent
that one looks solely at how far they reach: whether they conform to
the idea, or are too big or too small for it. Yet the concept of under­
standing grounding these ideas contains either solely a synthesis of
homogeneous things (which is presupposed in the case of every mag­
nitude, in its composition as well as its division), or else a synthesis of
things not homogeneous, which must be at least admitted in the case
of the dynamical synthesis, in causal connection as well as in the con­
nection of the necessary with the contingent.
Hence it is that in the mathematical connection of series of appear­
ances, none other than a sensible condition can enter, i.e., only one
that is itself a part of the series; whereas the dynamic series of sensible
conditions, on the contrary, allows a further condition different in kind,
one that is not a part of the series but, as merely intelligible, lies outside the series; in this way reason can be given satisfaction and the unconditioned can be posited prior to appearances without confounding
Object
b Objecte

n

531

A 5291 B 557

A Bo/B 5 5 8

A 5 3 I I B 559

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

A 5 3 z 1 B 560

the series of appearances, which is always conditioned, and without any
violation of principles of the understanding.
Now by the fact that the dynamical ideas allow a condition of ap­
pearances outside the series of appearances, i.e., a condition that is not
appearance, something happens that is entirely different from the result
of the mathematical antinomy. In the latter it was the cause of the fact
that both dialectically opposed assertions had to be declared false. The
thoroughly conditioned character of what is in the dynamical series,
on the contrary, which is inseparable from them as appearances, is
connected with a condition that is empirically unconditioned, but also
nonsensible, which gives satisfaction to the understanding on one
side and to reason on the other,* and while the dialectical arguments
that seek unconditioned totality on the one side or the other collapse,
the rational propositions, on the contrary, taken in such a corrected sig­
nificance, may both be true; which could never have occurred with the
cosmological ideas dealing merely with mathematically unconditioned
unity, because with them there is no condition of the series of appear­
ances that is not itself also an appearance, constituting as such a further
member of the series.
III.

Resolution of the cosmological ideaa
of the totality of the derivation of occurrences in
the world
from their causes.
In respect of what happens, one can think of causality in only two ways:
either according to nature or from freedom. The first is the connec­
tion of a state with a preceding one in the world of sense upon which
that state follows according to a rule. Now since the causality of ap­
pearances rests on temporal conditions, and the preceding state, if it
always existed, could not have produced any effect that first arose in
time, the causality of the cause of what happens or arises has also
A 5 3 I/B 559

* For the understanding does not permit among appearances any condition
that is itself empirically unconditioned. But if an intelligible condition, which
therefore does not belong to the series of appearances as a member, may be
thought for a conditioned (in appearance), without thereby interrupting in the
least the series of empirical conditions, then such a condition could be admit­
ted as empirically unconditioned, in such a way that no violation of the em­
pirically continuous regress would occur anywhere.
a Ideen (plural); since the headings of the other three sections give this word in the sin­

gular, we do the same here.

532

Section IX. On the empirical use of the regulative principle

arisen, and according to the principle of understanding it III turn
needs a cause.a
By freedom in the cosmological sense, on the contrary, I understand
the faculty of beginning a state from itself, b the causality of which does
not in turn stand under another cause determining it in time in accordance with the law of nature. Freedom in this signification is a pure
transcendental idea, which, first, contains nothing borrowed from experience, and second, the object of which also cannot be given determinately in any experience, because it is a universal law - even of the
possibility of all experience - that everything that happens must have a
cause, and hence that the causality of the cause, as itself having happened or arisen, must in turn have a cause; through this law, then, the
entire field of experience, however far it may reach, is transformed into
the sum total of mere nature. But since in such a way no absolute totality of conditions in causal relationsc is forthcoming, reason creates the
idea of a spontaneity, which could start to act from itself, without needing to be preceded by any other cause that in turn determines it to action according to the law of causal connection.
It is especially noteworthy that it is this transcendental idea of free­
dom on which the practical concept of freedom is grounded, and the
former constitutes the real moment of the difficulties in the latter ,d
which have long surrounded the question of its possibility. Freedom in
the practical sense is the independence of the power of choice from
necessitation by impulses of sensibility. For a power of choice is sensible insofar as it is pathologically affected (through moving-causes of
sensibility); it is called an animal power of choice (arbitrium brutum) if
it can be pathologically necessitated. The human power of choice is
indeed an arbitrium sensitivum,e yet not brutum! but liberum,g because
sensibility does not render its action necessary, but in the human being
there is a faculty of determining oneself from oneself, independently of
necessitation by sensible impulses.79
It is easy to see that if all causality in the world of sense were mere
nature, then every occurrence would be determined in time by another
in accord with necessary laws, and hence - since appearances, insofar as
they determine the power of choice, would have to render every action
a Kant notes: "The connection of effects and causes is not at all suited to things outside
b

the world of sense; for how can God be a cause, be a being?" (E CLXXII, p. 5 1 ; 2 3 '41)

von selbst
, Knusalverhiiltnisse
d dieser, a feminine dative pronoun, which therefore agrees only with "freedom" in this
context; if the text were emended to read diesem, it would refer to "concept."
, sensible power of choice

f animal
g

free
533

A 5 3 3 ! B 56 I

A 534! B 562

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

A 5 3 5 / B 56 3

A 536/ B 5 64

necessary as their natural consequence - the abolition of transcendental
freedom would also simultaneously eliminate all practical freedom. For
the latter presupposes that although something has not happened, it
nevertheless ought to have happened, and its cause in appearance was
thus not so determining that there is not a causality in our power of
choice such that, independently of those natural causes and even op­
posed to their power and influence, it might produce something deter­
mined in the temporal order in accord with empirical laws, and hence
begin a series of occurrences entirely from itself.
Here, then, as is generally found in the conflicts of reason with itself
when it ventures beyond the boundaries of possible experience, the
problem is really not physiological but transcendental. Hence the
question of the possibility of freedom does indeed assail psychology, but
since it rests merely on dialectical arguments of pure reason, its solution
must be solely the business of transcendental philosophy. Now in ordera
to put transcendental philosophy, which cannot decline to provide a sat­
isfying answer here, in a position to give one, I must first seek, through
the following remark, to determine more closely its procedure in deal­
ing with this problem.
If appearances were things in themselves, and hence space and time
were the forms of things in themselves, then the conditions would al­
ways belong to one and the same series as the conditioned, and from
this there would also arise in the present case the antinomy common to
all transcendental ideas, that this series must unavoidably turn out to be
either too large or too small for the understanding. But the dynamical
concepts of reason, with which we are concerned in this and the fol­
lowing number, have the peculiarity that since they do not consider
their object as a magnitude but have to do only with its existence, one
can thus abstract from the magnitude of the series of conditions, and
with them it is merely a matter of the dynamical relation b of condition
to conditioned; thus the difficulty we encounter in the question about
nature and freedom is only whether freedom is possible anywhere at all,
and if it is, whether it can exist together with the universality of the nat­
ural law of causality, hence whether it is a correct disjunctive proposi­
tion that every effect in the world must arise either from nature or
freedom, or whether instead both, each in a different relation, might be
able to take place simultaneously in one and the same occurrence. The
correctness of the principle of the thoroughgoing connection of all oc­
currences in the world of sense according to invariable natural laws is
already confirmed as a principle of the transcendental analytic and will
suffer violation. Thus the only question is whether, despite this, in rea

b

Fifth edition: "And in order

Verhdltnis

.

.

.

"

534

Section IX. On the empirical use of the regulative principle

gard to the very same effect that is determined by nature, freedom
might not also take place, or is this entirely excluded through that invi­
olable rule? And here the common but deceptive presupposition of the
absolute reality of appearance immediately shows its disadvantageous
influence for confusing reason. For if appearances are things in them­
selves, then freedom cannot be saved. Then nature is the completely
determining cause, sufficient in itself, of every occurrence, and the con­
dition for an occurrence is always contained only in the series of ap­
pearances that, along with their effect, are necessary under the law of
nature. If, on the other hand, appearances do not count for any more
than they are in fact, namely, not for things in themselves but only for
mere representations connected in accordance with empirical laws,
then they themselves must have grounds that are not appearances. Such
an intelligible cause, however, will not be determined in its causality by
appearances, even though its effects appear and so can be determined
through other appearances. Thus the intelligible cause, with its causality, is outside the series; its effects, on the contrary, are encountered in
the series of empirical conditions. The effect can therefore be regarded
as free in regard to its intelligible cause, and yet simultaneously, in regard to appearances, as their result according to the necessity of nature;
this is a distinction which, if it is presented in general and entirely abstractly, must appear extremely subtle and obscure, but in its application
it will be enlightening. Here I have only wanted to note that since the
thoroughgoing connection of all appearances in one context of nature
is an inexorable law, it necessarily would have to bring down all freedom
if one were stubbornly to insist on the reality of appearances. Hence
even those who follow the common opinion about this matter have
never succeeded in uniting nature and freedom with one another.

The possibility of causality through freedom unified with
the universal law of natural necessity. 80
I call intelligible that in an object of sense which is not itself appearance.
Accordingly, if that which must be regarded as appearance in the world
of sense has in itself a faculty which is not an object of intuition through
which it can be the cause of appearances, then one can consider the
causality of this being in two aspects, as intelligible in its action as a
thing in itself, and as sensible in the effects of that action as an appear­
ance in the world of sense. Of the faculty of such a subject we would ac­
cordingly form an empirical and at the same time an intellectual concept
of its causality, both of which apply to one and the same effect.a Thinka Kant adds in his copy of the first edition: "Transcendental definitions: The causality of

representations of a being in respect of the objects of them is life. The determinability
of the power of representation to this causality is the faculty of desire. This power of

535

A S 3 7 / B S6S

A 5 3 8 / B S66

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

A 5 3 9/ B 567

A540/ B 568

ing of the faculty of an object of sense in this double aspect does not con­
tradict any of the concepts we have to fonn of appearances and of a pos­
sible experience. For since these appearances, because they are not
things in themselves, must be grounded in a transcendental object de­
termining them as mere representations, nothing hinders us from ascribing to this transcendental object, apart from the property through
which it appears, also another causality that is not appearance, even
though its effect is encountered in appearance. But every effective cause
must have a character, i.e., a law of its causality, without which it would
not be a cause at all. And then for a subject of the world of sense we
would have first an empirical character, through which its actions, as
appearances, would stand through and through in connection with other
appearances in accordance with constant natural laws, from which, as
their conditions, they could be derived; and thus, in combination with
these other appearances, they would constitute members of a single se­
ries of the natural order. Yet second, one would also have to aUow this
subject an intelligible character, through which it is indeed the cause
of those actions as appearances, but which does not stand under any con­
ditions of sensibility and is not itself appearance. The first one could call
the character of such a thing in appearance, the second its character as a
thing in itself.
Now this acting subject, in its intelligible character, would not stand
under any conditions of time, for time is only the condition of appear­
ances but not of things in themselves.8r In that subject no action would
arise or perish, hence it would not be subject to the law of everything
alterable in its time-determination that everything that happens must
find its cause in the appearances (of the previous state). In a word, its
causality, insofar as it is intellectual, would not stand in the series of em­
pirical conditions that makes the occurrence in the world of sense nec­
essary. This intelligible character could, of course, never be knowna
immediately, because we cannot perceive anything except insofar as it
appears, but it would have to be thought in conformity with the em­
pirical character, just as in general we must ground appearances in
thought through a transcendental object, even though we know noth­
ing about it as it is in itself.
In its empirical character, this subject, as appearance, would thus be
representation, if it is reason, hence is the determinability of its causality in respect of
objects, i.e., its faculty of desire [is] will. If pure reason has causality, then the will is a
pure will, and its causality is called freedom.
" [Now] we cannot cognize [a priorl1 any causes, nor in general any intuitions corre­
sponding to the categories, or relationships between them, but we must take all these
from experience. Hence whether freedom is possible cannot be settled." (E CLXXIII,
pp. 5 1-2; 2 3 :41)

a gekannt

536

Section IX. On the empirical use of the regulative principle

subject to the causal connection, in accordance with all the laws of de­
termination; and to that extent it would be nothing but a part of the
world of sense, whose effects, like those of any other appearance, would
flow inevitably from nature. Just as external appearances influence it, as
far as its empirical character, i.e., the law of its causality, is known
through experience, all its actions would have to admit of explanation
in accordance with natural laws, and all the requisites for a perfect and
necessary determination of them would have to be encountered in a
possible experience.
But in its intelligible character (even though we can have nothing
more than merely the general concept of it), this subject would nevertheless have to be declared free of all influences of sensibility and determination by appearances; and since, in it, insofar as it is a noumenon,
nothing happens, thus no alteration requiring a dynamical time-determination is demanded, and hence no connection with appearances as

A 541 / B 569

causes is encountered in its actions, this active being would to this extent

be independent and free of all the natural necessity present solely in the
world of sense. Of it one would say quite correctly that it begins its effects in the sensible world from itself, without its action beginning in it
itself; and this would hold without allowing effects in the world of sense
to begin from themselves, because in this world they are always determined beforehand by empirical conditions in the preceding time, but
only by means of the empirical character (which is a mere appearance of
the intelligible character), and they are possible only as a continuation of
the series of natural causes. Thus freedom and nature, each in its full significance, would both be found in the same actions, simultaneously and
without any contradiction, according to whether one compares them
with their intelligible or their sensible cause.
Clarification
of the cosmological idea of a freedom in combination with
the universal natural necessity. a
I have found it good first to sketch the silhouette of a solution to our

transcendental problem, so that one might better survey the course of
reason in solving it. Now we will set out separately the decisive mo-

a Kant's notes: "What speculative philosophy could not succeed at, bringing reason out
of the field of sensibility to something real outside it, practical reason is able to do,
namely, giving an existence that is not sensible, [and] through laws that are grounded
on reason. This is morality, if one admits it through freedom.
"Otherwise we would assume that there is no intuition at all without [the] senses and
hence also no things outside the objects of sense belonging to intuition." (E CLxxrv,
p. 5 2 ; 2 3 :41-2)
537

A 54z 1 B 570

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

A 543 1 B 57 I

A 5441 B 572

ments on which the solution really depends, and take each particular
moment into consideration.
The law of nature that everything that happens has a cause, that since
the causality of this cause, i.e., the action, precedes in time and in respect
of an effect that has arisen cannot have been always but must have hap­
pened, and so must also have had its cause among appearances, through
which it is determined, and consequently that all occurrences are empir­
ically determined in a natural order - this law, through which alone ap­
pearances can first constitute one nature and furnish objects of one
experience, is a law of the understanding, from which under no pretext
can any departure be allowed or any appearance be exempted; because
otherwise one would put this appearance outside of all possible experience, thereby distinguishing it from all objects of possible experience and
making it into a mere thought-entity and a figment of the brain.
But although it looks as if there is solely a chain of causes, permitting
no absolute totality at all in the regress to their conditions, this reser­
vation does not detain us at all; for it has already been removed in our
general judgment on the antinomy of reason occurring when reason
proceeds to the unconditioned in the series of appearances. If we would
give in to the deception of transcendental realism, then neither nature
nor freedom would be left. Here the question is only: If in the whole se­
ries of all occurrences one recognizes purelY' natural necessity, is it nev­
ertheless possible to regard the same occurrence, which on the one
hand is a mere effect of nature, as on the other hand an effect of free­
dom; or will a direct contradiction between these two kinds of causality
be found?
Among the causes in appearance there can surely be nothing that
could begin a series absolutely and from itself. Every action, as appear­
ance, insofar as it produces an occurrence, is itself an occurrence, or
event, which presupposes another state in which its cause is found; and
thus everything that happens is only a continuation of the series, and no
beginning that would take place from itself is possible in it. Thus in the
temporal succession all actions of natural causes are themselves in turn
effects, which likewise presuppose their causes in the time-series. An
original action, through which something happens that previously was
not, is not to be expected from the causal connection of appearances.
But then if the effects are appearances, is it also necessary that the
causality of their cause, which (namely, the cause) is also appearance,
must be solely empirical?82 Is it not rather possible that although for
every effect in appearance there is required a connectionb with its cause
in accordance with laws of empirical causality, this empirical causality
a tauter
b Verkniipfung
538

Section IX. On the empirical use of the regulative principle

itself, without the least interruption of its connectiona with natural
causes, could nevertheless be an effect of a causality that is not empiri­
cal, but rather intelligible, i.e., an original action of a cause in regard to
appearances, which to that extent is not appearance but in accordance
with this faculty intelligible, even though otherwise, as a link in the
chain of nature, it must be counted entirely as belonging to the world
of sense?
We need the principleb of the causality of appearances in order to be
able to seek for and specify the natural conditions, i.e., causes in ap­
pearance, for natural occurrences. If this is conceded, and not weakened
by any exceptions, then the understanding, which in its empirical use
sees nothing but nature in all events and is justified in doing so, has
everything it could demand, and physical explanations proceed on their
own course unhindered. Now this is not in the least impaired, supposing also that it is in any case merely invented, if one assumes that among
natural causes there are also some that have a faculty that is only intelligible, in that its determination to action never rests on empirical conditions but on mere grounds of the understanding, as long as the action
in the appearance of this cause accords with all the laws of empirical
causality. For in this way the acting subject, as causa phaenomenon,c
would have all its actions linked with inseparable dependence to the
natural chain of causes, and only the phaenomenon of this subject (with
all its causality in appearance) would contain certain conditions that, if
one would ascend from empirical objects to transcendental ones, would
have to be regarded as merely intelligible. For if we follow the rule of
nature only in that which might be the cause among appearances, then
we need not worry about what sort of ground is thought for these appearances and their connection in the transcendental subject, which is
empirically unknown to us. This intelligible ground does not touch the
empirical questions at all, but may have to do merely with thinking in
the pure understanding; and, although the effects of this thinking and
acting of the pure understanding are encountered among appearances,
these must nonetheless be able to be explained perfectly from their
causes in appearance, in accord with natural laws, by following its
merely empirical character as the supreme ground of explanation; and
the intelligible character, which is the transcendental cause of the former, is passed over as entirely unknown, except insofar as it is indicated
through the empirical character as only its sensible sign. Let us apply
this to experience. The human being is one of the appearances in the
world of sense, and to that extent also one of the natural causes whose
n Zusammenhang
b Satzes

, phenomenal cause
539

A 545 / B 573

A546 / B 574

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

A 547/ B 5 7 5

A 548 / B 5 76

causality must stand under empirical laws. As such he must accordingly
also have an empirical character, just like all other natural things. We
notice it through powers and faculties which it expresses in its effects.
In the case of lifeless nature and nature having merely animal life, we
find no ground for thinking of any faculty which is other than sensibly
conditioned. Yet the human being, who is otherwise acquainted with
the whole of nature solely through sense, knowso himself also through
pure apperception, and indeed in actions and inner determinations
which cannot be accounted at all amongb impressions of sense; he ob­
viously is in one part phenomenon, but in another part, namely in re­
gard to certain faculties, he is a merely intelligible object, because the
actions o f this object cannot at all b e ascribedc to the receptivity o f sen­
sibility. We call these faculties understanding and reason; chiefly the
latter is distinguished quite properly and preeminently from all empir­
ically conditioned powers, since it considers its objects merely ac­
cording to ideas and in accordance with them determines the under­
standing, which then makes an empirical use of its own concepts (even
the pure ones).
Now that this reason has causality,d or that we can at least represent
something of the sort in it, is clear from the imperatives that we pro­
pose e as rules to our powers of execution in everything practical. 83 The
ought expresses a species of necessity and a connection with grounds
which does not occur anywhere else in the whole of nature. In nature
the understanding can cognize only what exists, or has been, or will be.
lt is impossible that something in it ought to be other than what, in all
these time-relations/ it in fact is; indeed, the ought, if one has merely
the course of nature before one's eyes, has no significance whatever. We
cannot ask at all what ought to happen in nature, any more than we can
ask what properties a circle ought to have; but we must rather ask what
happens in nature, or what properties the circle has.
Now this "ought" expresses a possible action, the ground of which is
nothing other than a mere concept, whereas the ground of a merely
natural action must always be an appearance. Now of course the action
must be possible under natural conditions if the ought is directed to it;
but these natural conditions do not concern the determination of the
power of choice itself, but only its effect and result in appearance. Howa erkennt
b gar nicht zum . . . zdhlen kann
, gar nicht zur . . . gezdhlt werden kann
d Kant notes: "i.e., is the cause of actuality of its objects [Objectel. This causality is called
the will. But in transcendental philosophy one abstracts from the will." (E CLXXV; p.
5 2 ; 2 3 : 50)

, aufgeben
f Zeitverhdltnisse
540

Section IX. On the empirical use of the regulative principle

ever many natural grounds or sensible stimuli there may be that impel
me to will, they cannot produce the ought but only a willing that is yet
far from necessary but rather always conditioned, over against which
the ought that reason pronounces sets a measure and goal, indeed, a
prohibition and authorization.a Whether it is an object of mere sensi­
bility (the agreeable) or even of pure reason (the good), reason does not
give in to those grounds which are empirically given, and it does not
follow the order of things as they are presented in intuition, but with
complete spontaneity it makes its own order according to ideas, to
which it fits the empirical conditions and according to which it even de­
clares actions to be necessary that yet have not occurred and perhaps
will not occur, nevertheless presupposing of all such actions that reason
could have causality in relation to them; for without that, it would not
expect its ideas to have effects in experience.
Now let us stop at this point and assume it is at least possible that reason actually does have causality in regard to appearances: then even
though it is reason, it must nevertheless exhibit an empirical character,
because every cause presupposes a rule according to which certain appearances follow as effects, and every rule requires a uniformity in its
effects, grounding the concept of a cause (as a faculty), which, insofar as
it must come to light from mere appearances, we could call the empirical character, which is constant, while its effects appear in alterable
shapes, according to the differences among the conditions that accompany and in part limit it.
Thus every human being has an empirical character for his power of
choice, which is nothing other than a certain causality of his reason, in­
sofar as in its effects in appearance this reason exhibits a rule, in accor­
dance with which one could deriveb the rational grounds and the actions
themselves according to their kind and degree, and estimateC the sub­
jective principlesd of his power of choice. Because this empirical char­
acter itself must be drawn from appearances as effect, and from the rule
which experience provides, all the actions of the human being in ap­
pearance are determined in accord with the order of nature by his em­
pirical character and the other cooperating causes; and if we could
investigate all the appearances of his power of choice down to their
basis, then there would be no human action that we could not predict
with certainty, and recognize as necessary given its preceding conditions. Thus in regard to this empirical character there is no freedom,
and according to this character we can consider the human being solely
a Ansehen

b abnehmen
, beurtheilen
d Principien
541

A549 / B 577

A 5 sol B 5 78

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

A 55 I / B 579

A 5 5 2 I B 580
A 5 5 1 IB 579

by observing, and, as happens in anthropology, by trying to investigate
the moving causes of his actions physiologically.
But if we consider the very same actions in relation to reason, not, to
be sure, in relation to speculative reason, in order to explain them as
regards their origin, but insofar as reason is the cause of producing
them by themselves - in a word, if we compare them with reason in a
practical respect - then we find a rule and order that is entirely other
than the natural order. For perhaps everything that has happened in
the course of nature, and on empirical grounds inevitably had to hap­
pen, nevertheless ought not to have happened. At times, however, we
find, or at least believe we have found, that the ideas of reason have ac­
tually proved their causality in regard to the actions of human beings as
appearances, and that therefore these actions have occurred a not
through empirical causes, no, but because they were determined by
grounds of reason.
Suppose now that one could say reason has causality in regard to appearance; could reason's action then be called free even though in its
empirical character (in the mode of sense) b it is all precisely determined
and necessary? The empirical character is once again determined in the
intelligible character (in the mode of thought)/ We are not acquainted
with the latter, but it is indicated through appearances, which really give
only the mode of sense (the empirical character) for immediate cogni­
tion.* Now the action, insofar as it is to be attributed to the mode of
thought as its cause, nevertheless does not follow from it in accord with
empirical laws, i.e., in such a way that it is preceded by the conditions
of pure reason, but only their effects in the appearance of inner sense
precede it. Pure reason, as a merely intelligible faculty, is not subject to
the form of time, and hence not subject to the conditions of the tem­
poral sequence. The causality of reason in the intelligible character
does not arise or start working at a certain time in producing an effect.
For then it would itself be subject to the natural law of appearances, to
the extent that this law determines causal series in time, and its causal* The real morality of actions (their merit and guilt), even that of our own con­
duct, therefore remains entirely hidden from us. Our imputations can be re­
ferred only to the empirical character. How much of it is to be ascribed to
mere nature and innocent defects of temperament or to its happy constitution
(merita Jortunae)d this no one can discover,' and hence no one can judge it with
complete justice.
a geschehen

b Sinnesart
, DenkungSa17
d

to the merit of fortune

, ergrunden
542

Section IX. On the empirical use of the regulative principle

ity would then be nature and not freedom. Thus we could say that if
reason can have causality in regard to appearances, then it is a faculty
through which the sensible condition of an empirical series of effects
first begins. For the condition that lies in reason is not sensible and does
not itself begin. Accordingly, there takes place here what we did not
find in any empirical series: that the condition of a successive series of
occurrences could itself be empirically unconditioned. For here the
condition is outside the series of appearances (in the intelligible) and
hence not subject to any sensible condition or to any determination of
time through any passing cause.
Nevertheless, this very same cause in another relation also belongs to
the series of appearances. The human being himself is an appearance.
His power of choice has an empirical character, which is the (empirical)
cause of all his actions. There is not one of these conditions determin­
ing human beings according to this character which is not contained in
the series of natural effects and does not obey the laws of nature ac­
cording to which no empirically unconditioned causality is present
among the things that happen in time. Hence no given action (since it
can be perceived only as appearance) can begin absolutely from itself.
But o f reason one cannot say that before the state in which it determines the power of choice, another state precedes in which this state itself is determined. For since reason itself is not an appearance and is not
subject at all to any conditions of sensibility, no temporal sequence
takes place in it even as to its causality, and thus the dynamical law of
nature, which determines the temporal sequence according to rules,
cannot be applied to it.
Reason is thus the persisting condition of all voluntary actions under
which the human being appears. Even before it happens, every one of
these actions is determined beforehand in the empirical character of the
human being. In regard to the intelligible character, of which the em­
pirical one is only the sensible schema, no before or after applies, and
every action, irrespective of the temporal relation in which it stands to
other appearances, is the immediate effect of the intelligible character
of pure reason; reason therefore acts freely, without being determined
dynamically by external or internal grounds temporally preceding it in
the chain of natural causes, and this freedom of reason can not only be
regarded negatively, as independence from empirical conditions (for
then the faculty of reason would cease to be a cause of appearances), but
also indicated positively by a faculty of beginning a series of occurrences from itself, in such a way that in reason itself nothing begins, but
as the unconditioned condition of every voluntary action, it allows of no
condition prior to it in time, whereas its effect begins in the series of appearances, but can never constitute an absolutely first beginning in this
senes.
543

A 55 3 / B 58 1

A 5 54/ B 582

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

A 5 5 5 / B 583

In order to clarify the regulative principlea of reason through an ex­
ample of its empirical use - not in order to confirm it (for such proofs
are unworkable for transcendental propositions) - one may take a vol­
untary action, e.g. a malicious lie, through which a person b has brought
about a certain confusion in society; and one may first investigate its
moving causes, through which it arose, judging on that basis how the lie
and its consequences could bee imputed to the person. With this first in­
tent one goes into the sources of the person's empirical character, seek­
ing them in a bad upbringing, bad company, and also finding them in
the wickedness of a natural temperd insensitive to shame, partly in care­
lessness and thoughtlessness; in so doing one does not leave out of
account the occasioning causes. In all this one proceeds as with any in­
vestigation in the series of determining causes for a given natural effect.
Now even if one believes the action to be determined by these causes,
one nonetheless blames the agent, and not on account of his unhappy
natural temper, not on account of the circumstances influencing him,
not even on account of the life he has led previously; for one presup­
poses that it can be entirely set aside how that life was constituted, and
that the series of conditions that transpired might not have been, but
rather that this deed could be regarded as entirely unconditioned in re­
gard to the previous state, as though with that act the agent had started'
a series of consequences entirely from himself. This blame is grounded
on the law of reason, which regards reason as a cause that, regardless of
all the empirical conditions just named, could have and ought to have
determined the conduct of the person to be other than it is. And indeed
one regards the causality of reason not as a mere concurrence with
other causes, e but as complete in itself, even if sensuous incentives were
not for it but were indeed entirely against it; the action is ascribed to the
agent's intelligible character: now, in the moment when he lies, it is en­
tirely his fault; hence reason, regardless of all empirical conditions of
the deed, is fully free, and this deed is to be attributed entirely to its fail­
ure to actf
In this judgment of imputation, it is easy to see that one has the
thoughts that reason is not affected at all by that sensibility, that it does
a

b
C

Princip
Mensch
kiinne (singular present subjunctive, indicating that the lie is the subject); in the first edi­
tion, the text reads kiinnen (plural, indicating that the consequences as well are included
in the subject of the verb along with the lie).

d Naturells
, Konkurrenz. Although in modern German this means "competition" Kant used this
term as an equivalent of concursus; in a theological context, it means divine assistance.
f ihrer Unterlassung; "reason" is the only grammatically possible antecedent of the pos­
sessive pronoun.
544

Section IX. On the empirical use of the regulative principle

not alter (even if its appearances, namely the way in which it exhibits its
effects, do alter), that in it no state precedes that determines the following one, and hence that reason does not belong at all in the series of
sensible conditions which make appearances necessary in accordance
with natural laws. It, reason, is present to all the actions of human beings in all conditions of time, and is one and the same, but it is not itself in time, and never enters into any new state in which it previously
was not; in regard to a new state, reason is determining but not determinable. Therefore one cannot ask: Why has reason not determined
itself otherwise? But only: Why has it not determined appearances
otherwise through its causality? But no answer to this is possible. For
another intelligible character would have given another empirical one;
and if we say that regardless of the entire course of life he has led up to
that point, the agent could still have refrained fromo the lie, then this
signifies only that it stands immediately under the powerb of reason, and
in its causality reason is not subject to any conditions of appearance or
of the temporal series; the difference in time might be a chief difference
in appearances respecting their relations to one another, since these are
not things in themselves and hence not causes in themselves, but it
makes no difference to action in its relation to reason.
Thus in the judgment of free actions, in regard to their causality, we
can get only as far as the intelligible cause, but we cannot get beyond
it; we can knowc that actions could be free, i.e., that they could be determined independently of sensibility, and in that way that they could
be the sensibly unconditioned condition of appearances. But why the
intelligible character gives us exactly these appearances and this empirical character under the circumstances before us, to answer this surpasses every faculty of our reason, indeed it surpasses the authority of
our reason even to ask it; it is as if one were to ask why the transcendental object of our outer sensible intuition gives precisely only the intuition of space and not some other one. Yet the problem which we had
to solve does not obligate us to answer these questions, for it was only
this: Do freedom and natural necessity in one and the same action contradict each other? And this we have answered sufficiently when we
showed that since in freedom a relation is possible to conditions of a
kind entirely different from those in natural necessity, the law of the latter does not affect the former; hence each is independent of the other,
and can take place without being disturbed by the other.
* * *

a

b
r

unterlassen
Macht
erkennen
545

A 5 56/B 5 84

A 5 5 7 / B 585

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II
It should be noted that here we have not been trying to establish the

A 5 58/ B 586

reality of freedom, as a faculty that contains the causes of appearance
in our world of sense. For apart from the fact that this would not have
been any sort of transcendental investigation having to do merely with
concepts, it could not have succeeded, since from experience we can
never infer something that does not have to be thought in accord with
the laws of experience. Further, we have not even tried to prove the
possibility of freedom; for this would not have succeeded either, be­
cause from mere concepts a priori we cannot cognize anything about the
possibility of any real ground or any causality. Freedom is treated here
only as a transcendental idea, through which reason thinks of the series
of conditions in appearance starting absolutely through what is sensibly
unconditioned, but thereby involves itself in an antinomy following its
own laws, which it prescribes for the empirical use of the understand­
ing. [To show] that this antinomy rests on a mere illusion, and that na­
ture at least does not conflict with causality through freedom - that
was the one single thing we could accomplish, and it alone was our sole
concern.a
IV:

Solution of the cosmological idea
of the totality of dependence of appearances
regarding their existence in general.

A 56o/ B 588

In the preceding number we considered the changes in the world of
sense in their dynamical series, where each is subordinated to another
as its cause. Now this series of states serves only to lead us to an exis­
tence that could be the highest condition of everything alterable,
namely to the necessary being. Here we deal not with unconditioned
causality, but with the unconditioned existence of the substance itself.
Thus the series we have before us is really only a series of concepts and
not of intuitions, insofar as one intuition is the condition of another.
One easily sees, however, that since everything in the sum total of ap­
pearances is alterable, hence conditioned in its existence, there could
not be any unconditioned member anywhere in the series of dependent
existences whose existence would be absolutely necessary; and hence
that if appearances were things in themselves, and so just for this rea­
son their condition always belong to one and the same series of intuitions, then a necessary being could never occur as a condition of the
existence of appearances in the world of sense.
But the dynamic regress has in itself this peculiar feature, distina

Kant notes: "Morality is that which, if it is correct, positively presupposes freedom.
"If the former is true, then freedom is proved." (E CLXXVI, p. 5 2 ; 23 :42)
546

Section IX. On the empirical use of the regulative principle

guishing it from the mathematical one: that since the latter really has to
do only with the combination of parts into a whole, or with the disso­
lution of a whole into its parts, the conditions of this series always have
to be seen as parts of it, hence as being of the same lpnd, and conse­
quently as appearances, whereas in the former regress, which has to do
not with the possibility of an unconditioned whole or an unconditioned
part of a given whole but with the derivation of a state from its cause or
of the contingent existence of a substance itself from the necessary ex­
istence of one, the condition need not necessarily constitute one em­
pirical series along with the conditioned.
Therefore there remains only one way out of the apparent antinomy
lying before us: since, namely, both the conflicting propositions can be
true at the same time in a different relation in such a way that all things
in the world of sense are completely contingent, hence having always
only an empirically conditioned existence, there nevertheless occurs a
non-empirical condition of the entire series, i.e., an unconditionally
necessary being. For this, as an intelligible condition, would not belong
to the series as a member of it (not even as the supreme member) at all,
and would not make any member of the series unconditionally necessary, but it would leave the entire world of sense to the empirically conditioned existence which runs through all its members. Hence this way
of grounding an unconditioned existence would be distinguished from
the empirically unconditioned causality (of freedom) in the previous article in that in the case of freedom, the thing itself as cause (substantia
phaenomenon)a would nevertheless belong to the series of conditions,
and only its causality would be thought as intelligible, but here the
necessary being would have to be thought of as entirely outside the series of the world of sense (as an ens extramundanum)b and merely intelligible; this is the only way of preventing it from being subjected to the
law of the contingency and dependence of all appearances.84
The regulative principlec of reason in regard to this problem of
ours is therefore that everything in the world of sense has an empirically
conditioned existence, and there cannot be an unconditioned necessity
in it in regard to any of its properties, that there is no member of the
series such that one does not always expect an empirical condition for it
in a possible experience, and for which one must seek for such a condi­
tion as far as one can, and nothing justifies us in deriving any existence
from a condition outside the empirical series, or indeed in taking any­
thing in the series itself to be absolutely independent and self-sufficient;
nevertheless, this is not in any way to deny that the entire series could
4

b

phenomenal substance
a being outside the world

, Princip
547

A 56 1 / B 589

B 562 / B 590

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

AS63 / B S91

�5641 B 592

be grounded in some intelligible being (which is therefore free of every
empirical condition, containing, rather, the ground of the possibility of
all these appearances).
But here it is not at all the intenta to prove the unconditionally nec­
essary existence of any being, or even to ground the possibility of a
merely intelligible condition of existence in the world of sense on it;
rather, just as we limit reason so that it does not abandon the thread of
the empirical conditions, and stray into transcendent grounds of ex­
planation which do not admit of any exhibition in concreto, so on the
other side we limit the law of the merely empirical use of the under­
standing, so that it does not decide the possibility of things in general,
nor declare the intelligible, even though it is not to be used by us in ex­
plaining appearances, to be impossible. Thus it has been shown only
that the thoroughgoing contingency of all natural things and all of na­
ture's (empirical) conditions can very well coexist with the optionalb
presupposition of a necessary, even though merely intelligible condi­
tion, and thus that there is no true contradiction between these asser­
tions, hence they can both be true. Such an absolutely necessary being
of the understanding may always be impossible in itself, yet this can by
no means be inferred from the universal contingency and dependence
of everything belonging to the world of sense, nor can it be inferred
from the principle' that we should not stop with any individual member
of it and appeal to a cause outside the world. Reason goes its way in its
empirical use, and a special way in a transcendental use.
The world of sense contains nothing but appearances, but these are
mere representations, which are once again always sensibly condi­
tioned, and, since here we never have to do with things in themselves as
our objects, it is no wonder that we are never justified in making a leap
from one member of the empirical series, whatever it might be, outside
the connections of sensibility, just as if these members were things in
themselves existing outside their transcendental ground, which one
might leave behind in seeking the cause of their existence outside them­
selves; of course that would have to happen with contingent things, but
not with mere representations of things, whose contingency itself is
only a phenomenon, and can lead to no other regress but the one de­
termining phenomena, i.e., the one which is empirical. But to think of
an intelligible ground for appearances, i.e., for the world of sense, and
of appearances freed from the contingency of the world of sense, is op­
posed neither to the unlimited empirical regress in the series of appearances nor to their thoroughgoing contingency. But that is also the
a Meinung
b

willkiirlich
, Princip
548

Section IX. On the empirical use of the regulative principle
only thing we had to do to remove the apparent antinomy, and it could
be done only in this way. For if for every conditioned the condition is
always sensible (in its existence), and therefore something belonging to
the series, then the condition is itself once again conditioned (as the an­
tithesis of the fourth antinomy shows). Thus either reason, in demand­
ing the unconditioned, must remain in conflict with itself, or else this
unconditioned must be posited outside the series in the intelligible
realm, where necessity is neither demanded nor permitted by any em­
pirical condition, and thus in respect of appearances it is uncondition­
ally necessary.
The empirical use of reason (in regard to the conditions of existence
in the world of sense) is not affected by the admission of a merely in­
telligible being; rather it proceeds, according to the principle a of thor­
oughgoing contingency, from empirical conditions to higher ones,
which are likewise always empirical. But just as little does this regula­
tive principle exclude the assumption of an intelligible cause which is
not in the series, when it is a matter of the pure use of reason (in regard
to its ends). For here the intelligible cause signifies only the ground, for
us transcendental and unknown, of the possibility of the sensible series
in general, whose existence, independent of all conditions of the latter
and unconditionally necessary in regard to it, is not at all opposed to the
unbounded contingency of the former, and is therefore also not opposed to the regress, which is never ended, in the series of empirical
conditions.

Concluding remark
to the entire antinomy of pure reason.
As long as we, with our concepts of reason, have as our object merely
the totality of the conditions in the world of sense, and what service rea­
son can perform in respect of them, our ideas are transcendental but
still cosmological. But as soon as we posit the unconditioned (which is
what is really at issue) in that which lies outside the sensible world, and
hence in that which is outside all possible experience, then the ideas
come to be transcendent; they do not serve merely to complete the
empirical use of reason (which always remains an idea, never to be com­
pletely carried out, but nevertheless to be followed), rather they sepa­
rate themselves entirely from it and make themselves into objects whose
matter is not drawn from experience, and whose objective reality rests
not on the completion of the empirical series but on pure concepts a
priori. Such transcendent ideas have a merely intelligible object, which
a Princip
549

A 565 / B 593

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. II

A 566/ B 594

A 567 / B 595

one is of course allowed to admit as a transcendental object,a but about
which one knows nothing; but for the assumption of such an object, in
thinking it as a thing determinable by its distinguishing and inner predicates, we have on our side neither grounds of its possibility (since it is
independent of all concepts of experience) nor the least justification,
and so it is a mere thought-entity. Nevertheless, among the cosmolog­
ical ideas, the one occasioning the fourth antinomy presses us to ven­
ture so far as to take this step. For the existence of appearances, not
grounded in the least within itself but always conditioned, demands that
we look around us for something different from all appearances, hence
for an intelligible object, with which this contingency would stop. But
if we once take the liberty of assuming a reality subsisting by itselfb out­
side the entire field of sensibility, then appearances are regardedC only
as contingent ways intelligible objects are represented by beings who
are themselves intelligences; and because of this, nothing is left for us
but the analogy by which we utilize concepts of experience in making
some sort of concept of intelligible things, with which we have not the
least acquaintance as they are in themselves. Because we cannot be­
come acquainted with the contingent except through experience, but
are here concerned with things which are not to be objects of experi­
ence at all, we have to derive our acquaintance d with them from what is
necessary in itself, from pure concepts of things in generaLe Thus the
first step we take beyond the sensible world compels us, in acquiring
new knowledge! to begin with the investigation of the absolutely nec­
essary being, and to derive from the concepts of it the concepts of all
things insofar as they are merely intelligible; we will set about this at­
tempt in the following chapter.
a Object
b for sich
, Reading, with Erdmann, anzusehen sind for anzusehen.

d

Kenntnis

, Kant adds in his copy of the first edition: "Freedom makes for the greatest difficulty, be­
cause it simultaneously combines a being that belongs to the sensible world with the in­
tellectual according to a given law, and thereby also with God." (E CLXXVII, p. 52;
2 3 :42)

f Kenntnisse

550

The
Second Book of the Transcendental Dialectic
Chapter Three
The ideal ofpure reason 8s

Section One
The ideal in general.
We have seen above that no objects at all can be represented through
pure concepts of the understanding without any conditions of sensi­
bility, because the conditions for the objective reality of these concepts
are lacking, and nothing is encountered in them except the pure form
of thinking. Nevertheless they can be exhibited in concreto if one applies
them to appearances; for in the latter they have the proper material for
a concept of experience, which is nothing but a concept of the under­
standing in concreto. Ideas, however, are still more remote from objec­
tive reality than categories; for no appearance can be found in which
they may be represented in concreto. They contain a certain completeness that no possible empirical cognition ever achieves, and with them
reason has a systematic unity only in the sense that the empirically possible unity seeks to approach it without ever completely reaching it.
But something that seems to be even further removed from objective
reality than the idea is what I call the ideal, by which I understand the
idea not merely in concreto but in individuo, i.e., as an individual thing
which is determinable, or even determined, through the idea alone.
Humanity in its entire perfection contains not only the extension of
all those properties belonging essentially to this nature and constituting
our concept of it to the point of complete congruence with its ends,
which would be our idea of perfect humanity, but also everything be­
sides this concept that belongs to the thoroughgoing determination of
the idea; for out of each [pair of] opposed predicates only a single one
can be suited to the idea of the perfect human being. What is an ideal
to us, was to Plato an idea in the divine understanding,86 an individ­
ual object in that understanding's pure intuition, the most perfect thing
of each species of possible beings and the original ground of all its
copies in appearance.
551

A 5 68 / B 5 96

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A 5 69/ B 5 97

A 5 70/ B 5 98

Without venturing to climb as high as that, however, we have to
admit that human reason contains not only ideas but also ideals, which
do not, to be sure, have a creative power like the Platonic idea, but still
have practical power (as regulative principles)a grounding the possibil­
ity of the perfection of certain actions. Moral concepts are not entirely
pure concepts of reason, because they are grounded on something em­
pirical (pleasure or displeasure). But in regard to the principle b through
which reason places limits on a freedom which is in itself lawless, they
can nevertheless serve quite well (if one attends merely to their form) as
examples of pure concepts of reason. Virtue, and with it human wisdom
in its entire purity, are ideas. But the sage (of the Stoics) is an ideal, i.e.,
a human being who exists merely in thoughts, but who is fully congru­
ent with the idea of wisdom. Thus just as the idea gives the rule, so the
ideal in such a case serves as the original imageC for the thoroughgo­
ing determination of the copy; and we have in us no other standard for
our actions than the conduct of this divine human being, with which we
can compare ourselves, judgingd ourselves and thereby improving our­
selves, even though we can never reach the standard. These ideals, even
though one may never concede them objective reality (existence), are
nevertheless not to be regarded as mere figments of the brain; rather,
they provide an indispensable standard for reason, which needs the concept of that which is entirely complete in its kind, in order to assess and
measure the degree and the defects of what is incomplete. But to try to
realize the ideal in an example, i.e., in appearance, such as that of the
sage in a novel, is not feasible, and even has about it something non­
sensical and not very edifying, since the natural limits which constantly
impair the completeness in the idea render impossible every illusion in
such an attempt, and thereby render even what is good in the idea sus­
pect by making it similar to a mere fiction.
That is how it is with the ideal of reason, which always rests on deter­
minate concepts and must serve as a rule and an original image, whether
for following or for judging. It is entirely otherwise with the creatures of
imagination, of which no one can give an explanation or an intelligible
concept; they are, as it were, monograms, individual traits, though not
determined through any assignable rule, constituting more a wavering
sketch, as it were, which mediates between various appearances, than a
determinate image, such as what painters and physiognomists say they
have in their heads, and is supposed to be an incommunicable silhouette
of their products or even of their critical judgments. These images can,
a Principien
b

Princip
, Urbilde
d beurtheilen
552

Section II. On the transcendental ideal

though only improperly, be called ideals of sensibility because they are
supposed to be the unattainable model for possible empirical intuitions,
and yet at the same time they are not supposed to provide any rule capable of being explained or tested.
The aim of reason with its ideal is, on the contrary, a thoroughgoing
determination in accordance with a priori rules; hence it thinks for itself
an object that is to be thoroughly determinable in accordance with
principles, a even though the sufficient conditions for this are absent
from experience, and thus the concept itself is transcendent.b

A 57 1 / B 5 79

Chapter Three
Section Two
The transcendental ideal8 7

(Prototypon transcendentale)
Every concept, in regard to what is not contained in it, is indetermi­
nate, and stands under the principle of determinability: that of every
two contradictorily opposed predicates only one can apply to it, which
rests on the principle of contradiction C and hence is a merely logical
principle,d which abstracts from every content of cognition, and has in
view nothing but the logical form of cognition.
Every thing, however, as to its possibility, further stands under
the principle of thoroughgoing determination; according to which,
among all possible predicates of things, insofar as they are compared
with their opposites, one must apply to it.88 This does not rest merely
on the principle of contradiction, for besides considering every thing in
relation e to two contradictorily conflicting predicates, it considers every
thing further in relation! to the whole of possibility, as the sum total
of all predicates of things in general; and by presupposing that as a condition a priori, it represents every thing as deriving its own possibility

a Principien
b Kant adds: "Consequent way of thinking. We have proved all objects of experience only
as appearances. There must, therefore, be something actual besides the objects of expe­
rience. No speculative way of cognition can attain to determining this something, be­
cause the latter is a mere form of thoughts, which with us are sensible; and the existence
of that which we think through reason would not be able to be proved from mere con­
cepts. But freedom in the practical furnishes an actual law of causality, which is not em­
pirical, and therefore is the actuality which, concerning its quality, not only proves the
actuality of something extrasensible but also determines it. The [a final word appears to
be either 'unity' (Einheit) or 'insight' (Einsicht)] . . " (E CLXXVIII, p. 5 3 ; 2 3 :42)
.

, Satz des Widerspruchs
d Princip
Verhidtnis
f Verhdltnis
e

553

A 5 72 / B 600

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A573 / B 6OI

A574/ B 602

A572 / B 6oo

from the share it has in that whole of possibility. * The principle of thor­
oughgoing determination thus deals with the content and not merely
the logical form. It is the principle of the synthesis of all predicates
which are to make up the complete concept of a thing, and not merely
of the analytical representation, through one of two opposed predicates;
and it contains a transcendental presupposition, namely that of the material of all possibility, which is supposed to contain a priori the data for
the particular possibility of every thing.
The proposition Everything existing is thoroughly determined
signifies not only that of every given pair of opposed predicates, but also
of every pair of possible predicates, one of them must always apply to it;
through this proposition predicates are not merely compared logically
with one another, but the thing itself is compared transcendentally with
the sum total of all possible predicates. What it means is that in order to
cognize a thing completely one has to cognize everything possible and
determine the thing through it, whether affirmatively or negatively.
Thoroughgoing determination is consequently a concept that we can
never exhibit in concreto in its totality, and thus it is grounded on an idea
which has its seat solely in reason, which prescribes to the understand­
ing the rule of its complete use.
Now although this idea of the sum total of all possibility, insofar as
it grounds every thing as the condition of its thoroughgoing determi­
nation in regard to the predicates which may constitute the thing, is it­
self still indeterminate, and through it we think nothing beyond a sum
total of all possible predicates in general, we nevertheless find on closer
investigation that this idea, as an original concept, excludes a multiplic­
ity of predicates, which, as derived through others, are already given, Or
cannot coexist with one another; and that it refines itself to a concept
thoroughly determined a priori, and thereby becomes the concept of an
individual object that is thoroughly determined merely through the
idea, and then must be called an ideal of pure reason.
If we consider all possible predicates not merely logically but tran­
scendentally, i.e., as to their content which can be thought in them a
* Thus through this principle every thing is related to a common correlate,
namely the collective possibility, which, if it (i.e., the matter for all possible
predicates) were present in the idea of an individual thing, would prove an
affinity of everything possible through the identity of the ground of its thor­
oughgoing determination. The determinability of every single concept is
the universality (universalitas) of the principle of excluded middle between
two opposed predicates; but the determination of a thing is subordinated to
the allness (universitas) or the sum total of all possible predicates.
" Principium
5 54

Section II. On the transcendental ideal

priori, then we find that through some of them a being is represented,
and through others a mere non-being. Logical negation, which is in­
dicated solely by the little word "not," is never properly attached to a
concept, but rather only to its relationa to another concept in a judg­
ment, and therefore it is far from sufficient to designate a concept in
regard to its content. The expression "non-mortal" cannot at all give
the cognition that a mere non-being is represented in the object, but
leaves all content unaffected. A transcendental negation, on the con­
trary, signifies non-being in itself, and is opposed to transcendental
affirmation, which is a Something,b the concept of which in itself al­
ready expresses a being, and hence it is called reality (thinghood),c be­
cause through it alone, and only so far as it reaches, are objects
Something (things); the opposed negation, on the contrary, signifies a
mere lack, and where this alone is thought, the removal of every thing
is represented.
Now no one can think a negation determinately without grounding
it on the opposed affirmation. The person blind from birth cannot form
the least representation of darkness, because he has no representation
of light; the savage has no acquaintance with poverty, because he has
none with prosperity.* The ignorant person has no concept of his igno­
rance, because he has none of science, etc. All concepts of negations are
thus derivative, and the realities contain the data, the material, so to
speak, or the transcendental content, for the possibility and the thor­
oughgoing determination of all things.
Thus if the thoroughgoing determination in our reason is grounded
on a transcendental substratum, which contains as it were the entire
storehouse of material from which all possible predicates of things can
be taken, then this substratum is nothing other than the idea of an All
of reality (omnitudo realitatis). All true negations are then nothing but
limits, which they could not be called unless they were grounded in the
unlimited (the All).
* The observations and calculations of astronomers have taught us much that is
worthy of admiration, but most important, probably, is that they have exposed
for us the abyss of our ignorance, which without this infonnationd human
reason could never have imagined' to be so great; reflection on this ignorance
has to produce a great alteration in the determination of the final aims! of the
use of our reason.
a Verbdltnis

b Etwas (Kant's capitalization)
Sacbbeit
d Kenntnisse
vorstellen
f Endabsichten
C

e

555

A575 / B 603

A 5761B 604

A 575/ B 603

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A 577/B 605

Through this possession of all reality, however, there is also repre­
sented the concept of a thing in itself which is thoroughly determined,
and the concept of an ens realissimuma is the concept of an individual
being, because of all possible opposed predicates, one, namely that
which belongs absolutely to being, is encountered in its determination.
Thus it is a transcendental ideal which is the ground of the thorough­
going determination that is necessarily encountered in everything exist­
ing, and which constitutes the supreme and complete material condition
of its possibility, to which all thinking of objects in general must, as re­
gards the content of that thinking, be traced back. It is, however, also
the one single genuine ideal of which human reason is capable, because
only in this one single case is an - in itself universal - concept of one
thing thoroughly determined through itself, and cognized as the repre­
sentation of an individual.
The logical determination of a concept through reason rests on a dis­
junctive syllogism, in which the major premise contains a logical division
(the division of the sphere of a general concept), the minor premise restricts this sphere to one part, and the conclusion determines the con­
cept through this part. The general concept of a reality in general cannot
be divided up a priori, because apart from experience one is acquainted
with no determinate species of reality that would be contained under
that genus. Thus the transcendental major premise for the thoroughgo­
ing determination of all things is none other than the representation of
the sum total of all reality, a concept that comprehends all predicates as
regards their transcendental content not merely under itself, but within
itself; and the thoroughgoing determination of every thing rests on the
limitation of this All of reality, in that some of it is ascribed to the thing
and the rest excluded from it, which agrees with the "either/or" of the
disjunctive major premise and the determination of the object through
one of the members of this division in the minor premise.b The use of
reason through which it grounds its determination of all things in the
transcendental ideal is, accordingly, analogous to its procedure in dis­
junctive syllogisms; that was the proposition on which I above89
grounded the systematic division of all transcendental ideas, according
to which they were generated parallel and corresponding to the three
kinds of syllogisms.

a "most real being"; Kant declines the Latin phrase in the genitive.
b Kant adds in his copy of the first edition: "the principle [Princip] of determination
says only that if a concept of a thing is to be determined, it could be determined
only through one of the two: A or non-A. The principle [Satz] of thoroughgoing
determination says that every thing (as existing, i.e., in respect of everything
possible) is determined in respect of all possible predicates." (E CLXXIX, p. 5 3 ;
2 3 :42)
556

Section II. On the transcendental ideal

It is self-evident that with this aim - namely, solely that of represent­
ing the necessary thoroughgoing determination of things - reason does
not presuppose the existence of a being conforming to the ideal, but
only the idea of such a being, in order to derive from an unconditioned
totality of thoroughgoing determination the conditioned totality, i.e.,
that of the limited. For reason the ideal is thus the original image (prototypon) of all things, which all together, as defective copies (ectypa), take
from it the matter for their possibility, and yet although they approach
more or less nearly to it, they always fall infinitely short of reaching it.
Thus all the possibility of things (as regards the synthesis of the man­
ifold of their content) is regarded as derivative, and only that which in­
cludes all reality in it is regarded as original. For all negations (which
are the sole predicates through which everything else is to be distin­
guished from the most real being) are mere limitations of a greater and
finally of the highest reality; hence they presuppose it, and as regards
their content they are merely derived from it. All manifoldness of things
is only so many different ways of limiting the concept of the highest re­
ality, which is their common substratum, just as all figures are possible
only as different ways of limiting infinite space. Hence the object of rea­
son's ideal, which is to be found only in reason, is also called the origi­
nal being (ens originarium); because it has nothing above itself it is
called the highest being (ens summum), and because everything else, as
conditioned, stands under it, it is called the being of all beings (ens entium). Yet all of this does not signify the objective relation of an actual
object to other things, but only that of an idea to concepts, and as to
the existence of a being of such preeminent excellence it leaves us in
complete ignorance.
Because one also cannot say that an original being consists in many
derivative beings, since each of the latter presupposes the former and so
cannot constitute it, the ideal of the original being must also be thought
of as simple.
The derivation of all other possibility from this original being, strictly
speaking, also cannot be regarded as a limitation of its highest reality
and as a division, as it were, of it; for then the original being would be
regarded as a mere aggregate of derivative beings, which, according to
the above, is impossible, even though we represented it in such a way at
the beginning in our first crude outline.a Rather, the highest reality
would ground the possibility of all things as a ground and not as a sum
total; and the manifoldness of the former rests not on the limitation of
the original being itself, but on its complete consequences; to which our
whole sensibility, including all reality in appearance, would then belong,
which cannot belong to the idea of a highest being as an ingredient.
a

Schattenrifl
557

A 5 78 / B 606

A 5791 B 607

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A 5801 B 608

A s 8 r / B 609

As82 / B 6ro

Now if we pursue this idea of ours so far as to hypostatize it, then we
will be able to determine the original being through the mere concept
of the highest reality as a being that is singular,a simple, all-sufficient,
eternal, etc., in a word, we will be able to determine it in its uncondi­
tioned completeness through all predications.b The concept of such a
being is that of God thought of in a transcendental sense, and thus the
ideal of pure reason is the object of a transcendental theology, just as I
have introduced it above.90
Meanwhile this use of the transcendental idea would already be over­
stepping the boundaries of its vocationC and its permissibility. For on it,
as the concept of all reality, reason only grounded the thoroughgoing
determination of things in general, without demanding that this reality
should be given objectively, and itself constitute a thing. This latter is a
mere fiction, through which we encompass and realize the manifold of
our idea in an ideal, as a particular being; for this we have no warrant,
not even for directly assuming the possibility of such a hypothesis, just
as none of the consequences flowing from such an ideal have any bear­
ing, nor even the least influence, on the thoroughgoing determination
of things in general, on behalf of which alone the idea was necessary.
It is not enough to describe the procedure of our reason and its di­
alectic; one must also seek to discover its sources, so as to be able to ex­
plain this illusion itself, as a phenomenon of the understanding; for the
ideal we are talking about is grounded on a natural and not a merely ar­
bitrary idea. Therefore I ask: How does reason come to regard all the
possibility of things as derived from a single possibility, namely that of
the highest reality, and even to presuppose these possibilities as con­
tained in a particular original being?
The answer suggests itself on the basis of the discussions of the Tran­
scendental Analytic themselves. The possibility of objects of sense is a
relationd of these objects to our thought, in which something (namely,
the empirical form) can be thought a priori, but what constitutes the ma­
terial, the reality in appearance (corresponding to sensation) has to be
given; without that nothing at all could be thought and hence no possi­
bility could be represented.91 Now an object of sense can be thoroughly
determined only if it is compared with all the predicates of appearance
and is represented through them either affirmatively or negatively. But
because that which constitutes the thing itself (in appearance), namely
the real, has to be given, without which it could not be thought at all, but
that in which the real in all appearances is given is the one all-encoma

einig
b Priidicamente, a term that (at A 82 / B ro8) Kant seems to identify with the categories.
, Bestimmung
d Verhiiltnis
558

Section III. On the proofs of the existence of a highest being

passing experience, the material for the possibility of all objects of sense
has to be presupposed as given in one sum total; and all possibility of em­
pirical objects, their difference from one another and their thoroughgo­
ing determination, can rest only on the limitation of this sum total. Now
in fact no other objects except those of sense can be given to us, and they
can be given nowhere except in the context of a possible experience; con­
sequently, nothing is an object for us unless it presupposes the sum total
of all empirical reality as condition of its possibility.92 In accordance with
a natural illusion, we regard as a principle that must hold of all things in
general that which properly holds only of those which are given as ob­
jects of our senses. Consequently, through the omission of this limitation
we will take the empirical principle a of our concepts of the possibility of
things as appearances to be a transcendental principle b of the possibility
of things in general.
That we subsequently hypostatize this idea of the sum total of all re­
ality, however, comes about because we dialectically transform the dis­
tributive unity of the use of the understanding in experience, into the
collective unity of a whole of experience; and from this whole of ap­
pearance we think up an individual thing containing in itself all empirical reality,93 which then - by means of the transcendental subreption
we have already thought - is confused with the concept of a thing that
stands at the summit of the possibility of all things, providing the real
conditions for their thoroughgoing determination.*
Chapter Three
Section Three
The grounds of proof of speculative reason for
inferring the existence of a highest being.
In spite of its urgent need to presuppose something that the under­
standing could take as the complete ground for the thoroughgoing de­
termination of its concepts, reason notices the ideal and merely fictive
* This ideal of the supremely real being, even though it is a mere representation,
is first realized, i.e., made into an object,' then hypostatized, and finally, as we
will presently allege, through a natural progress of reason in the completion of
unity, it is even personified;94 for the regulative unity of experience rests not
on appearances themselves (of sensibility alone), but on the connection of its
manifold by understanding (in one apperception); hence the unity of the
highest reality and the thoroughgoing determinability (possibility) of all things
seems to lie in a highest understanding, hence in an intelligence.
a Princip
b
,

Princip
Object
559

A 583 / B 661

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A S84/ B 6 1 2

character of such a presupposition much too easily to allow itself to be
persuaded by this alone straightway to assume a mere creature o f its own
thinking to be an actual being, were it not urged from another source to
seek somewhere for a resting place in the regress from the conditioned,
which is given, to the unconditioned, which in itself and as regards its
mere concept is not indeed actually given, but which alone can complete
series of conditions carried out to their grounds. Now this is the natural
course taken by every human reason, even the most common, although
not everyone perseveres in it. It a begins not with concepts, but with
common experience, and thus grounds itself on something existing. But
this footingh gives way unless it rests on the immovable rock of the ab­
solutely necessary. But this itself floats without a support if there is still
only empty space outside it and under it, unless it itself fills everything,
so that no room is left over for any further Why? i.e., unless it is infi­
nite in its reality.
If something, no matter what, exists, then it must also be conceded
that something exists necessarily. For the contingent exists only under
the condition of something else as its cause, and from this the same in­
ference holds further all the way to a cause not existing contingently
and therefore necessarily without condition. That is the argument on
which reason grounds its progress to the original being.95
Now reason looks around for the concept of a being suited for such
a privileged existence, as the absolute necessity, yet not in order to infer
its existence a priori from its concept (for if it were confident of that,
then it might inquire only among mere concepts, and would not find it
necessary to take a given existence as its ground), but rather only in
order to find among all the concepts of possible things that one that has
nothing within itself conflicting with absolute necessity. For in accor­
dance with the first inference, reason takes it as already settled that
something or other has to exist with absolute necessity. If it can now do
away with everything that is not compatible with this necessity, except
for one, then this is the absolutely necessary being, whether one can
comprehend its necessity, i.e., derive it from its concept alone, or not.
Now that the concept of which contains within itself the "Because" to
every "Why?" - that which is in no part or respect defective, that which
is in all ways sufficient as a condition - seems to be the being suited to
absolute necessity just because by itself possessing all the conditions for
everything possible, it itself needs no condition, and is indeed not even
susceptible of one; consequently, it satisfies the concept of uncondi­
tioned necessity on at least one point, in which no other concept can
-

AS8S / B 6 1 3

a

Sie, whose referent could grammatically be "reason" (or "every human reason"), but not
"the natural course."

b Boden
. .

560

Section III. On the proofs of the existence of a highest being

equal it, since every other concept is defective and in need of completion, not showing in itself any such mark of its independence of all further conditions. It is true that from this it still cannot be concluded with
certainty that what does not contain within itself the highest and in
every respect complete condition must therefore be conditioned in its
existence; but then it does not have in itself that single earmark of unconditioned existence which gives reason the power to cognize any
being as unconditioned through a concept a priori.
Thus among all the concepts of possible things the concept of a being
having the highest reality would be best suited to the concept of an un­
conditionally necessary being, and even if it does not fully satisfy this
concept, we still have no other choice, but see ourselves compelled to
hold to it, because we must not just throw the existence of a necessary
being to the winds; yet if we concede this existence, then in the entire
field of possibility we cannot find anything that could make a more
well-grounded claim to such a privilege in existence.96
This, therefore, is how the natural course of human reason is consti­
tuted. First it convinces itself of the existence of some necessary being.
In this it recognizes an unconditioned existence. Now it seeks for the
concept of something independent of all conditions, and finds it in that
which is the sufficient condition for everything else, i.e., in that which
contains all reality. The All without limits, however, is absolute unity,
and carries with it the concept of one single being, namely the highest
being; and thus reason infers that the highest being, as the original
ground of all things, exists in an absolutely necessary way.
It cannot be disputed that this concept has a certain cogency a if it is
a matter of making decisions, that is, if the existence of some necessary
being is already conceded, and one agrees that one must take sides on
where one is to place it; for then one can make no more suitable choice
than - or rather, one has no other choice, but is compelled - to vote for
the absolute unity of complete reality as the original source of possibil­
ity. But if nothing impels us to come to a decision, and we would rather
let this entire matter be tabled until we are compelled to give our ap­
proval by the full weight of grounds of proof, i.e., if it is merely a mat­
ter of estimating how much we know about this problem and what we
merely flatter ourselves that we know - then the above inference does
not appear to be in anything like the same advantageous shape and
needs some special favor to make up for the defects in its rightful
claims.
For if we let everything stand just as it is here, namely: first, that from
any given existence (in any case merely my own) there is a valid inference to the existence o f an unconditionally necessary being; second,
a Griindlichkeit
561

A S86/ B 6I4

A 587 / B 6 1 5

A S8 8 / B 6 I 6

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A S89/ B 6 1 7

A S 90 / B 6 I 8

that I have to regard a being that contains all reality, hence all condi­
tions, as absolutely unconditioned, and consequently have found in it
the concept of the thing which is suited for absolute necessity; then
from this it still cannot be inferred that therefore the concept of a lim­
ited being, which does not have the highest reality, contradicts absolute
necessity. For even if in its concept I do not find the unconditioned
which the All of conditions already carries with it, still it cannot be con­
cluded just from this that its existence must be conditioned; just as I
cannot say in a hypothetical syllogism: �ere a certain condition (here,
namely, completeness according to concepts) is not, there too the con­
ditioned thing is not. Rather we are still at liberty to count all the re­
maining limited beings equally as absolutely necessary, even though we
cannot infer their necessity from the universal concept we have of them.
Looked at in this way, however, this argument has not produced for us
even the least concept of the properties of a necessary being, and has in
fact not achieved anything at all.
Nevertheless there remains to this argument a certain importance
and high regard of which it cannot straightway be divested simply on
account of this objective insufficiency. For suppose there were obliga­
tions that were entirely correct in the idea of reason but would have no
real application to us, i.e., would be without any incentives, if a highest
being were not presupposed who could give effect and emphasis to the
practical laws; then we would also have an obligation to follow those
concepts, that even though they may not be objectively sufficient, are
still preponderant in accordance with the measure of our reason, and in
comparison with which we recognize nothing better or more convinc­
ing. The duty to choose would here tip the indecisiveness of specula­
tion out of balance through a practical addition; indeed, reason, as the
most circumspect judge, could not find any justification for itself if,
under the pressure of urgent causes though with defec�ive insight, its
judgment were not to follow these grounds, than which we at least
know none better.
This argument, although it is in fact transcendental, since it rests on
the inner insufficiency of the contingent, is yet so simple and natural
that it is suited to the commonest human understanding as soon as the
latter is once led to it. One sees things alter, arise, and perish; therefore
they, or at least their state, must have a cause. About every cause, however, that may be given in experience, the same thing may once again
be asked. Now where could we more appropriately locate the supreme
causality than right where the highest causality is, i.e., in that being,
originally containing within itself what is sufficient for the possible ef­
fect, whose concept also comes about very easily through the single trait
of an all-encompassing perfection. This highest cause we then take to
be absolutely necessary, because we find it absolutely necessary to as562

Section III. On the proofs of the existence of a highest being

cend to it and no ground for going still further beyond it. Therefore
even through the blindest polytheism in all peoples we see shimmering
a few sparks of monotheism, to which they have been led not by reflec­
tion and deep speculation, but only in accordance with a natural course
of common understanding becoming gradually more intelligible.
There are only three kinds of proof for the existence of
God possible from speculative reason.
All paths on which one may set forth with this aim either begin from
determinate experience and the special constitution of our world of
sense known a through it, and ascend from that by means of laws of
causality to the highest cause outside the world; or else they are empir­
ically grounded on an experience that is only indeterminate, i.e., on
some existence; or, finally, they abstract from all experience and infer
the existence of a highest cause entirely a priori from mere concepts.
The first proof is the physico-theological, the second the cosmological, and the third the ontological proof. There are no more of them,
and there also cannot be any more.
r will establish that reason accomplishes just as little on the one path
(the empirical) as on the other (the transcendental), and that it spreads
its wings in vain when seeking to rise above the world of sense through
the mere might of speculation. As to the order in which these species of
proof have to be presented for examination, however, it will be just the
reverse of that taken by reason in gradually unfolding itself, and in
which we have first placed them. For it will be shown that although ex­
perience has given the occasion for them, it is nevertheless merely the
transcendental concept of reason that it has set forth for itself that di­
rects these strivings and holds up the target in all such attempts. Thus
I will begin by examining the transcendental proof, and later see what
the addition of the empirical can do to increase the force of its proof.
Chapter Three
Section Four
On the impossibility of an ontological proof of
God's existence.97
From the foregoing one easily sees that the concept of an absolutely
necessary being is a pure concept of reason, i.e., a mere idea, the objec­
tive reality of which is far from being proved by the fact that reason
needs it, since this only points to a certain though unattainable com­
pleteness, and properly serves more to set boundaries to the undera erkannt
563

A 59 I / B 619

A 592 / B 620

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A 593 / B 62 l

A 594/ B 62 2

standing than to extend it toward new objects. But here we find some­
thing strange and paradoxical, that the inference from a given existence
in general to some absolutely necessary being seems to be both urgent
and correct, and yet nevertheless in framing a concept of such a neces­
sity, we have all the conditions of the understanding entirely against us.
In all ages one has talked about the absolutely necessary being, but
has taken trouble not so much to understand whether and how one
could so much as think of a thing of this kind as rather to prove its ex­
istence. Now a nominal definitiona of this concept is quite easy, namely
that it is something whose non-being is impossible; but through this
one becomes no wiser in regard to the conditions that make it neces­
saryb to regard the non-being of a thing as absolutely unthinkable, and
that are really what one wants to know, namely whether or not through
this concept we are thinking anything at all. For by means of the word
unconditional to reject all the conditions that the understanding al­
ways needs in order to regard something as necessary, is far from
enough to make intelligible to myself whether through a concept of an
unconditionally necessary being I am still thinking something or per­
haps nothing at all.
Still more: one believed one could explain this concept, which was
ventured upon merely haphazardly, and that one has finally come to
take quite for granted through a multiplicity of examples, so that all fur­
ther demands concerning its intelligibility appeared entirely unneces­
sary. Every proposition of geometry, e.g., "a triangle has three angles,"
is absolutely necessary, and in this way one talked about an object lying
entirely outside the sphere of our understanding as if one understood
quite well what one meant by this concept.
All the alleged examples are without exception taken only from judg­
ments, but not from things and their existence.' The unconditioned
necessity of judgments, however, is not an absolute necessity of things.d
For the absolute necessity of the judgment is only a conditioned necessity of the thing, e or o f the predicate in the judgment. The above
proposition does not say that three angles are absolutely necessary, but
rather that under the condition that a triangle exists (is given), three an-

a Namenerklarung
h unmiiglich (impossible); the sense, however, seems to require notwendig.
, Kant's note in his copy of the first edition: "'I am': is this an analytic or a synthetic judg­
ment? 'A, an object [Object) in general, exists' is always a synthetic judgment and can­

d

not be reached a priori: 'I am' is therefore not a cognition of the subject but merely the
consciousness of the representation of an object [Object) in general." (E CLXXX, p. 53;
2 3 :42-3)

Sachen
, Sache
564

Section IV Impossibility of an ontological proof

gles also exist (in it) necessarily. Nevertheless the illusion of this logical
necessity has proved so powerful that when one has made a concept a
priori of a thing that was set up so that its existence was comprehended
within the range of its meaning, one believed one could infer with cer­
tainty that because existence necessarily pertains to the object" of this
concept, i.e., under the condition that I posit this thing as given (exist­
ing), its existence can also be posited necessarily (according to the rule
of identity), and this being itself, therefore, is necessarily, because its ex­
istence is thought along with a concept assumed arbitrarily and under
the condition that I posit its object.
If I cancel the predicate in an identical judgment and keep the sub­
ject, then a contradiction arises; hence I say that the former necessarily
pertains to the latter. But if I cancel the subject together with the pred­
icate, then no contradiction arises; for there is no longer anything that
could be contradicted. To posit a triangle and cancel its three angles is
contradictory; but to cancel the triangle together with its three angles
is not a contradiction. It is exactly the same with the concept of an absolutely necessary being. If you cancel its existence, then you cancel the
thing itself with all its predicates; where then is the contradiction supposed to come from? Outside it there is nothing that would contradict
it, for the thing is not supposed to be externally necessary; and nothing
internally either, for by cancelling the thing itself, you have at the same
time cancelled everything internal. God is omnipotent; that is a necessary judgment. Omnipotence cannot be cancelled if you posit a divinity, i.e., an infinite being, which is identical with that concept. But if you
say, God is not, then neither omnipotence nor any other of his predicates is given; for they are all cancelled together with the subject, and
in this thought not the least contradiction shows itself.
Thus you have seen that if I cancel the predicate of a judgment to­
gether with the subject, an internal contradiction can never arise, what­
ever the predicate might be. Now no escape is left to you except to say:
there are subjects that cannot be cancelled at all and thus have to re­
main. But that would be the same as saying that there are absolutely
necessary subjects - just the presupposition whose correctness I have
doubted, and the possibility of which you wanted to show me. For I can­
not form the least concept of a thing that, if all its predicates were cancelled, would leave behind a contradiction, and without a contradiction,
I have through mere pure concepts a priori no mark of impossibility.
Against all these general inferences (which no human being can
refuse to draw) you challenge me with one case that you set up as a
proof through the fact that there is one and indeed only this one con­
cept where the non-being or the cancelling of its object is contradictory
a

Object
565

A 595 / B 62 3

A596 / B 624

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A 5971 B 62 5

A 5 98/ B 626

A 5 96/ B 624

within itself, and this is the concept of a most real being. It has, you say,
all reality, and you are justified in assuming such a being as possible (to
which I have consented up to this point, even though a non-contradic­
tory concept falls far short of proving the possibility of its object).* Now
existence is also comprehended under all reality: thus existence lies in
the concept of something possible. If this thing is cancelled, then the in­
ternal possibility of the thing is cancelled, which is contradictory.
I answer: You have already committed a contradiction when you have
brought the concept of its existence, under whatever disguised name,
into the concept of a thing which you would think merely in terms of
its possibility. If one allows you to do that, then you have won the illu­
sion of a victory, but in fact you have said nothing; for you have com­
mitted a mere tautology. I ask you: is the proposition, This or that
thing (which I have conceded to you as possible, whatever it may be)
exists - is this proposition, I say, an analytic or a synthetic proposition?
If it is the former, then with existence you add nothing to your thought
of the thing; but then either the thought that is in you must be the
thing itself, or else you have presupposed an existence as belonging to
possibility, and then inferred that existence on this pretext from its
inner possibility, which is nothing but a miserable tautology. The word
"reality," which sounds different from "existence" in the concept of the
predicate, does not settle it. For if you call all positing (leaving inde­
terminate what you posit) "reality," then you have already posited the
thing with all its predicates in the concept of the subject and assumed
it to be actual, and you only repeat that in the predicate. If you con­
cede, on the contrary, as in all fairness you must, that every existential
proposition is synthetic, then how would you assert that the predicate
of existence may not be cancelled without contradiction? - since this
privilege pertains only in the analytic propositions, as resting on its
very character.
I would have hoped to annihilate this over-subtle argumentation
*

The concept is always possible if it does not contradict itself. That is the log­
ical mark of possibility, and thereby the object of the concept is distinguished
from the nihil negativum! Yet it can nonetheless be an empty concept, if the
objective reality of the synthesis through which the concept is generated has
not been established in particular; but as was shown above,98 this always rests
on principlesb of possible experience and not on the principles of analysis (on
the principlec of contradiction). This is a warning not to infer immediately
from the possibility of the concept (logical possibility) to the possibility of the
thing (real possibility).

a negative nothing
h Principien

, Satz
566

Section IV Impossibility of an ontological proof

without any digressions through a precise determination of the concept
of existence, if I had not found that the illusion consisting in the confu­
sion of a logical predicate with a real one (i.e., the determination of a
thing) nearly precludes all instruction. Anything one likes can serve as
a logical predicate, even the subject can be predicated of itself; for
logic abstracts from every content. But the determination is a predi­
cate, which goes beyond the concept of the subject and enlarges it.
Thus it must not be included in it already.
Being is obviously not a real predicate, i.e., a concept of something
that could add to the concept of a thing. It is merely the positing" of a
thing or of certain determinations in themselves. In the logical use it is
merely the copula of a judgment. The proposition God is omnipotent
contains two concepts that have their objects:b God and omnipotence;
the little word "is" is not a predicate in it, but only that which posits the
predicate in relation to the subject. Now if ! take the subject (God) together with all his predicates (among which omnipotence belongs), and
say God is, or there is a God, then I add no new predicate toC the concept of God, but only posit the subject in itself with all its predicates,
and indeed posit the object in relation to my concept. Both must contain exactly the same, and hence when I think this object as given absolutely (through the expression, "it is"), nothing is thereby added to
the concept, which expresses merely its possibility. Thus the actual contains nothing more than the merely possible. A hundred actual dollars
do not contain the least bit more than a hundred possible ones. For
since the latter signifies the concept and the former its object and its
positingf in itself, then, in case the former contained more than the latter, my concept would not express the entire object and thus would not
be the suitable concept of it. But in my financial condition there is more
with a hundred actual dollars than with the mere concept of them (i.e.,
their possibility). For with actuality the object is not merely included in
my concept analytically, but adds synthetically to my concept (which is
a determination of my state); yet the hundred dollars themselves that I
am thinking of are not in the least increased through this being outside
my concept.
Thus when I think a thing, through whichever and however many
predicates I like (even in its thoroughgoing determination), not the
least bit gets added to the thing when I posit in addition that this thing
is. For otherwise what would exist would not be the same as what I had
thought in my concept, but more than that, and I could not say that the
a Position
b

Objecte
,. setze . . . zu, which could also be translated: "posit . . . [in relation] to."
d Position
567

A 5991 B 627

A6oo/ B 628

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A601 / B 629

A 602 / B 630

very object of my concept exists. Even if I think in a thing every reality
except one, then the missing reality does not get added when I say the
thing exists, but it exists encumbered with just the same defect as I have
thought in it; otherwise something other than what I thought would
exist. Now if I think of a being as the highest reality (without defect),
the question still remains whether it exists or not. For although noth­
ing at all is missing in my concept of the possible real content of a thing
in general, something is still missing in the relation to my entire state
of thinking, namely that the cognition of this objece should also be
possible a posteriori. And here the cause of the predominant difficulty
shows itself. If the issue were an object of sense, then I could not con­
fuse the existence of the thing with the mere concept of the thing. For
through its concept, the object would be thought only as in agreement
with the universal conditions of a possible empirical cognition in gen­
eral, but through its existence it would be thought as contained in the
context of the entirety of experience; thus through connection with the
content of the entire experience the concept of the object is not in the
least increased, but our thinking receives more through it, namely a
possible perception. If, on the contrary, we tried to think existence
through the pure category alone, then it is no wonder that we cannot
assign any mark distinguishing it from mere possibility.
Thus whatever and however much our concept of an object may con­
tain, we have to go out beyond it in order to provide it with existence.
With objects of sense this happens through the connection with some
perception of mine in accordance with empirical laws; but for objects b
of pure thinking there is no means whatever for cognizing their exis­
tence, because it would have to be cognized entirely a priori, but our
consciousness of all existence (whether immediately through perception
or through inferences connecting something with perception) belongs
entirely and without exception to the unity of experience, and though
an existence outside this field cannot be declared absolutely impossible,
it is a presupposition that we cannot justify through anything.
The concept of a highest being is a very useful idea in many respects;
but just because it is merely an idea, it is entirely incapable all by itself
of extending our cognition in regard to what exists. It is not even able
to do so much as to instruct us in regard to the possibility of anything
more. The analytic mark of possibility, which consists in the fact that
mere positingsC (realities) do not generate a contradiction, of course,
cannot be denied of this concept; since,d however, the connection of all
a Object
b Objecte
, Positionen
d do; the first edition reads weil (because).
568

Section V. Impossibility of a cosmological proof

real properties in a thing is a synthesis about whose possibility we can­
not judge a priori because the realities are not given to us specifi­
cally - and even if this were to happen no judgment at all could take
place because the mark of possibility of synthetic cognitions always has
to be sought only in experience, to which, however, the object of an idea
can never belong - the famous Leibniz was far from having achieved
what he flattered himself he had done, namely, gaining insight a priori
into the possibility of such a sublime ideal being.99
Thus the famous ontological (Cartesian) prooflOo of the existence of
a highest being from concepts is only so much trouble and labor lost,
and a human being can no more become richer in insight from mere
ideas than a merchant could in resources if he wanted to improve his fi­
nancial state by adding a few zeros to his cash balance.
Chapter Three
Section Five
On the impossibility of a cosmological proof of
God's existence. 101
It was entirely unnatural, and a mere novelty of scholastic wit, to want
to take an idea contrived quite arbitrarily and extract from it the exis­
tence of the corresponding object itself. In fact one would never have
tried this path if it had not been preceded by a need of our reason to as­
sume for existence in general a basis in something necessary (with
which one could stop the ascent), and if - since this necessity has to be
unconditioned and certain a priori - reason were not compelled to seek
a concept that, if possible, was sufficient to meet this demand by pro­
viding an existence that is supposed to be cognized fully a priori. It was
believed that this had been found in the idea of a most real being, and
this was therefore used only to provide more determinate acquaintance
with something of which one was already convinced or persuaded on
other grounds that it must exist, namely, the necessary being. Mean­
while this natural course of reason was concealed, and instead of end­
ing with this concept one sought to begin with it in order to derive the
necessity of the existence from it, which, however, this concept was fit
only to augment.a From this arose the unfortunate ontological proof,
which brings no satisfaction either to the natural and healthy understanding or to scholastically correct examination.
The cosmological proof, which we will now investigate, retains the
connection of absolute necessity with the highest reality, but instead of
inferring as in the previous argument from the highest reality to neces­
sity of existence, it rather infers from the previously given uncondia

•

•

•

die er doch nur zu erganzen bestimmt war.
569

A603 / B 63 I

A604/ B 6 3 2

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A60S / B 63 3

A 606 / B 634

A60S / B 633

tioned necessity of some being or other to the unbounded reality of this
being, thus setting everything on the track of a species of inference that,
whether reasonable or sophisticaV is at least natural, and has been the
most persuasive one not only for the common but also for the specula­
tive understanding; it is also the one that visibly draws the outlinesb for
all the proofs of natural theology, outlines which have always been fol­
lowed and will be followed further, however one might try to embellish
and disguise them with so much foliage and scrollwork. This proof,
which Leibniz also called the proof a contingentia mundi,c we will now
place before our eyes and subject to examination. 102
It goes as follows: If something exists, then an absolutely necessary
being also has to exist. Now I myself, at least, exist; therefore, an ab­
solutely necessary being exists. The minor premise contains an experience, the major premise an inference from an experience in general to
the existence of something necessary. * Thus the proof really starts from
experience, so it is not carried out entirely a priori or ontologically; and
because the object of all possible experience is called "world," it is
therefore termed the cosmological proof. Since it also abstracts from
every particular property of objects of experience through which this
world might differ from any other possible world, it is already distin­
guished by this terminology from the physico-theological proof, which
uses observations about the particular constitution of this sensible
world of ours for its grounds of proof.
Now the proof further infers: The necessary being can be deter­
mined only in one single way, i.e., in regard to all possible predicates, it
can be determined by only one of them, so consequently it must be
thoroughly determined through its concept. Now only one single con­
cept of a thing is possible that thoroughly determines the thing a priori,
namely that of an ens realissimum: d Thus the concept of the most real
being is the only single one through which a necessary being can be
thought, i.e., there necessarily exists a highest being.
In this cosmological argument so many sophistical principles come
together that speculative reason seems to have summoned up all its di* This inference is too well known for it to be necessary to expound it in detail
here. It rests on the allegedly transcendental natural law of causality that
everything contingent must have a cause, which, if it in turn is contingent,
must likewise have its cause, until the series of causes subordinated one to an­
other has to end with an absolutely necessary cause, without which it would
have no completeness.
a ob verniinftigen oder verniinftelnden

b

Grnndlinien

, from the contingency of the world
d "most real being"; Kant declines this phrase in the genitive.

570

Section V Impossibility of a cosmological proof

alectical art so as to produce the greatest possible transcendental illu­
sion. We will put off examining it for a while, so as in the meantime to
make plain only one ruse through which it sets up an old argument in
disguised form as a new one, and appeals to the agreement of two wit­
nesses, namely a pure rational witness and another with empirical cre­
dentials, where only the first is there all alone, merely altering his
clothing and voice so as to be taken for a second. In order to ground
itself securely, this proof gets a footing in experience, and thereby gives
itself the reputation that it is distinct from the ontological proof, which
puts its whole trust solely in pure concepts a priori. But the cosmolog­
ical proof avails itself of this experience only to make a single step,
namely to the existence of a necessary being in general. What this
being might have in the way of properties, the empirical ground of
proof cannot teach; rather, here reason says farewell to it entirely and
turns its inquiry back to mere concepts: namely, to what kinds of properties in general an absolutely necessary being would have to have, i.e.,
which among all possible things contains within itself the required
conditions (requisita) for an absolute necessity. ra 3 Now reason believes
it meets with these requisites solely and uniquely in the concept of a
most real being, and so it infers: that is the absolutely necessary being.
But it is clear that here one presupposes that the concept of a being of
the highest reality completely suffices for the concept of an absolute
necessity in existence, i.e., that from the former the latter may be inferred - a proposition the ontological proof asserted, which one thus
assumes in the cosmological proof and takes as one's ground, although
one had wanted to avoid it. For absolute necessity is an existence from
mere concepts. Now if I say: the concept of the ens realissimuma is a
concept, and indeed the one single concept, that fits necessary existence and is adequate to it, then I must admit that the latter could be
concluded from it. Thus it is really only the ontological proof from
mere concepts that contains all the force of proof in the so-called
cosmological proof; and the supposed experience is quite superfluous - perhaps leading us only to the concept of a necessary being, but
not so as to establish this concept in any determinate thing. For as soon
as we have this intention, we have to abandon all experience at once
and seek among pure concepts for the one that might contain the conditions for the possibility of an absolutely necessary being. But if there
is insight into the possibility of such a being in such a way, then its existence is established too; for then what is meant is: among all possibles
there is one that carries absolute necessity with it, i .e., this being exists
with absolute necessity. I04
All semblances in inferring are most easily discovered if one puts
a "most real being"; again Kant declines it in the genitive.
571

A 607 / B 63 5

A608/ B 63C

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A609 / B 63 7

A6IOiB 638

them before one's eyes in a scholastically correct way. Here is such a
presentation.
If the proposition is correct: "Every absolutely necessary being is at
the same time the most real being" (which is the nervus probandill of the
cosmological proof), then like any affirmative judgment, it must be
convertible per accidens, thus: "Some most real beings are at the same
time absolutely necessary beings." But now one ens realissimum does not
differ the least bit from another, and thus what holds of some beings
contained under this concept holds also of all. Hence I will also be able
(in this case) to convert the propositionb absolutely, i.e., " Every most
real being is a necessary being." Now because this proposition is deter­
mined merely from its concepts a priori, the mere concept of the most
real being must also carry with it the absolute necessity of this
being - which is just what the ontological proof asserts and the cosmo­
logical proof does not want to recognize, despite the fact that it underlies its inferences, though in a covert way.
Thus the second way that speculative reason takes in order to prove
the existence of the highest being is not only deceptive like the first, but
it even has this further blamable feature in it, that it commits an igno­
ratio elenchi, c promising to put us on a new footpath, but after a little di­
gression bringing us once again back to the old one, which for its sake
we had left behind.
A short time agoI05 I said that in this cosmological argument an en­
tire nest of dialectical presumptions is hidden, which transcendental
criticism can easily discover and destroy. I will now only cite them, leav­
ing it to the reader to investigate further their deceptive principles and
remove them.
There is, for example: I) The transcendental principle of inferring
from the contingent to a cause, which has significance only in the world
of sense, but which outside it does not even have a sense. For the merely
intellectual concept of the contingent cannot produce any synthetic
proposition, such as that of causality, and the principle of causality has
no significance at all and no mark of its use except in the world of sense;
here, however, it is supposed to serve precisely to get beyond the world
of sense. 2) The inference from the impossibility of an infinite series of
causes given one upon another to a first cause, which the principlesd of
the use of reason itself cannot justify our inferring within experience,
still less our extending this principle to somewhere beyond it (into
which the causal chain cannot be extended at all). 3) The false selfa nerve of what is to be proved

b ich's added in the second edition.
, refutation by ignorance
d

Principien
572

Section V. Impossibility of a cosmological proof

satisfaction reason finds in regard to the completion of this series by the
fact that one finally does away with every condition - without which,
however, there can be no concept of any necessity - and then since one
cannot comprehend anything further, one assumes this to be the com­
pletion of one's concept. 4) The confusion of the logical possibility of a
concept of all reality united (without internal contradiction) with its
transcendental possibility, which requires a principle a of the feasibility
of such a synthesis, but which once again can apply only to the field of
possible experiences, etc.
The artifice of the cosmological proof is aimed merely at evading a
proof of the existence of a necessary being a priori through mere con­
cepts, which would have to be carried out ontologically, for which,
however, we feel ourselves entirely incapable. In this respect, on the
ground of an actual existence (an experience in general), we infer, as
best we can, some absolutely necessary condition of that existence.
Then we have no necessity of explaining the possibility of this condition. For, if it has been proved that it exists, then the question of its
possibility is quite unnecessary. Now if we want to determine this necessary being more closely as to its constitution, then we do not seek
what would suffice to comprehend from its concept the necessity of its
existence; for if we could do that, then we would not have had the need
of any empirical presupposition; no, we seek only the negative condition (conditio sine qua non) without which a being would not be absolutely necessary. Now that might very well get by in any other
species of inference from a given consequence to its ground; but here,
unfortunately, it so happens that the condition that one demands for
absolute necessity can be encountered only in a single being, which
therefore must contain everything in its concept that is required for
absolute necessity, and thus makes possible an inference a priori to that;
i.e., I have to be able to infer conversely that whatever thing this concept (of the highest reality) pertains to, that thing is absolutely necessary; and if I cannot so infer (as I must admit, if I want to avoid the
ontological proof), then I have come to grief on my new path, and find
myself once again right back where I started. The concept of the highest being satisfies all questions a priori that can be posed about the
inner determinations of a thing, and it is therefore an ideal without
equal, because the universal concept at the same time distinguishesb it
as one individual among all possible things. But it does not deal at all
satisfactorily with the question about its own existence, though that is
really all that was at issue; and to those who assume the existence of a
necessary being, and would only know which among all things had to
a Principium
b auszeichnet
573

A 6 I I / B 639

A6I 2 / B 640

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A613/B 64 1

A614/ B 642

be regarded as such a thing, one could not answer: This thing here is
the necessary being.
It may well be allowed to assume the existence of a being of the
highest sufficiency as the cause of all possible effects, in order to facili­
tate reason's search for the unity of its grounds of explanation. Yet to go
so far as to say, Such a being exists necessarily, is no longer the mod­
est expression of an allowable hypothesis, but rather the impudent pre­
sumption of an apodictic certainty; for if one proposes to cognize
something as absolutely necessary, then that cognition must also carry
absolute necessity with it.
The entire problem of the transcendental ideal comes to this: either
to find a concept for the absolute necessity or to find the absolute ne­
cessity for the concept of some thing. If one can do the first, then one
must be able to do the other too; for reason cognizes as absolutely nec­
essary only what is necessary from its concept. But both entirely transcend all the utmost efforts to satisfy our understanding on this point,
but also all attempts to make it content with its incapacity.
The unconditioned necessity, which we need so indispensably as the
ultimate sustainer of all things, is for human reason the true abyss. Even
eternity - however awful the sublimity with which a HallerI 06 might
portray it - does not make such a dizzying impression on the mind; for
eternity only lacks the duration of things, but it does not sustain that
duration. One cannot resist the thought of it, but one also cannot bear
it that a being that we represent to ourselves as the highest among
all possible beings might, as it were, say to itself: "I am from eternity to
eternity, outside me is nothing except what is something merely
through my will; but whence then am I?" Here everything gives way
beneath us, and the greatest perfection as well as the smallest, hovers
without support before speculative reason, for which it would cost
nothing to let the one as much as the other disappear without the least
obstacle.
Many forces of nature that express their existence only through cer­
tain effects remain inscrutable for us, for we cannot trace them far
enough through observation. The transcendental objecta lying at the
ground of appearances, and with it the ground why our sensibility has
it rather than another supreme condition - these are and remain in­
scrutable for us, even though the thing itselfb is given, only we have no
insight into it. An ideal of pure reason, however, cannot be called in­
scrutable, because it has to display no further credentials for its reality
than the need of reason to complete all synthetic unity by means of it.
Since it is not even given as a thinkable object, it is also not inscrutable
a Object
b Sache selbst
574

Section V. Impossibility of a cosmological proof

as such an object; rather, as a mere idea it must find both its seat and its
solution in the nature of reason, and so it can be investigated;a for rea­
son consists just in the fact that we can give an account of all our con­
cepts, opinions and assertions, either on objective grounds or, if they
are a mere illusion, on subjective ones.
Discovery and explanation of the dialectical illusion in all
transcendental proofs of the existence of a necessary being.
Both the proofs previously cited were attempted transcendentally, i.e.,
independently of empirical principles.b For although the cosmological
proof is grounded on an experience in general, it is not carried out on
the basis of any particular constitution of experience, but of pure prin­
ciples of reason C in relation to an existence given through empirical
consciousness in general; and even this introduction is an occasion for
basing itself on entirely pure concepts. Now what in these transcendental proofs is the cause of the dialectical but natural illusion that connects the concepts of necessity and highest reality and that realizes and
hypostatizes that which can be only an idea? What causes it to be unavoidable to assume something among existing things to be in itself
necessary, and yet at the same time to shrink back from the existence of
such a being as an abyss? And how is one to bring reason to an understanding of itself over this matter, so that from a vacillating state of different approval it may achieve one of calm insight?
There is something exceedingly remarkable in the fact that when one
presupposes something existing, one can find no way around the con­
clusion that something also exists necessarily. It is on this entirely nat­
ural (though not for this reason secure) inference that the cosmological
argument rested. On the contrary, if I assume the concept of anything
I like, then I find that its existence can never be represented by me as
absolutely necessary, and that whatever may exist, nothing hinders me
from thinking its non-being; hence although for the existing in general
I must assume something necessary, I cannot think any single thing itself as necessary in itself. That means: in going back to the conditions
of existing I can never complete the existing without assuming a necessary being,d but I can never begin with this being.
If I must think something necessary for existing things in general but
am not warranted in thinking any thing in itself as necessary, then it fol­
lows unavoidably from this that necessity and contingency do not pererforscht; cf. unerforschlich (inscrutable).
Principien
, Vernunftprincipien
a

b

d

In the first edition: " . . . without necessarily assuming a being . . .

575

"

A6r S / B 643

A6r6 / B 644

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A 6 I 7 / B 645

A6IS/ B 646

tain to or concern the things themselves, because otherwise a contradic­
tion would occur; hence neither of these two principles is objective, but
they can in any case be only subjective principleso of reason, namely, on
the one side, for everything given as existing to seek something that is
necessary, i.e., never to stop anywhere except with an a priori complete
explanation, but on the other side also never to hope for this completion,
i.e., never to assume anything empirical as unconditioned, thereby ex­
empting oneself from its further derivation. In such a significance both
principles can very well coexist with one another, as merely heuristic and
regulative, taking care of nothing but the formal interest of reason. For
the one says that you should philosophize about nature as if there were
a necessarily first ground for everything belonging to existence, solely in
order to bring systematic unity into your cognition by inquiring after
such an idea, namely an imagined first ground; but the other warns you
not to assume any single determination dealing with the existence of
things as such a first ground, i.e., as absolutely necessary, but always to
hold the way open to further derivation and hence always to treat it as
still conditioned. But if everything perceived in things by usb has to be
considered as necessarily conditioned, then no thing (which may be
given empirically) can be regarded as absolutely necessary.
From this, however, it follows that you would have to assume the ab­
solutely necessary being as outside the world, because it is supposed
to serve only as a principle' of the greatest possible unity of appear­
ances, as their supreme ground; and you can never reach it within the
world, because the second rule bids you at every time to regard all em­
pirical causes of unity as derivative.
The philosophers of antiquity regardd every form of nature as con­
tingent, but the matter, in accordance with the judgment of common
reason, as original and necessary. But if they had considered the matter
not as a substratum respective to appearances but in itself as to its ex­
istence, then the idea of absolute necessity would have disappeared at
once. For there is nothing that binds reason absolutely to this existence;
on the contrary, it can, at any time and without conflict, give such a
thing up in thoughts; but it is in thoughts alone that absolute necessity
lies. Hence a certain regulative principle e must be the ground of this
persuasion. In fact extension and impenetrability (which together con­
stitute the concept of matter) is also the highest empirical principle! of
" Principien
b von uns; the first edition reads "vor uns" (before us).
, Princip
d

The first edition reads "regarded."

, Princip
f Principium
5 76

Section V. Impossibility of a cosmological proof

the unity of appearances, and has, insofar as it is empirically uncondi­
tioned, in itself the properties of a regulative principle.a Nevertheless,
since each determination of matter that constitutes what is real in it,
hence impenetrability too, is an effect (action) that must have its cause,
and hence is always derivative, matter is not suited to the idea of a nec­
essary being as the principleb of all derivative unity, because each of its
real properties as derivative is only conditionally necessary and hence
can in itself be cancelled; but then the entire existence of matter would
be cancelled; but if this did not happen, we would have reached the
highest ground of unity empirically, which is forbidden by the second
regulative principle;c thus it follows that matter, and in general every­
thing belonging to the world, is not suited to the idea of a necessary
original being as a mere principled of the greatest empirical unity, but
this must be posited outside the world, since then we can always be con­
fident of deriving the appearances of the world and their existence from
others, as though there were no necessary being, and nevertheless we
can strive ceaselessly toward completeness in this derivation, as though
such a being were presupposed as a highest ground.
The ideal of the highest being is, according to these considerations,
nothing other than a regulative principle' of reason, to regard all
combination in the world as if it arose from an all-sufficient necessary
cause, so as to ground on that cause the rule of a unity that is system­
atic and necessary according to universal laws; but it is not an assertion
of an existence that is necessary in itself. But at the same time it is un­
avoidable, by means of a transcendental subreption, to represent this
formal principle! to oneself as constitutive, and to think of this unity
hypostatically. For, just as with space, since it originally makes possible
all forms which are merely limitations of it, even though it is only a
principleg of sensibility, it is necessarily held to be a Something subsist­
ing in itself with absolute necessity and an a priori object given in itself,
so it also comes about entirely naturally that since the systematic unity
of nature cannot be set up as a principle h of the empirical use of reason
except on the basis of the idea of a most real being as the supreme cause,
this idea is thereby represented as an actual object, and this object again,
because it is the supreme condition, is represented as necessary, so that

a Princip
h

Princip
, Princip
d Princip
Princip
f Princip
g Principium
h Princip
e

577

A619/ B 647

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A620 / B 648

a regulative principlea is transformed into a constitutive one; this sub­
stitution reveals itself by the fact that if I now consider this supreme
being, which was absolutely (unconditionally) necessary respective to
the world, as a thing for itself, no concept is susceptible of this neces­
sity; and thus it must have been encountered in my reason only as a for­
mal condition of thought, and not as a material and hypostatic condi­
tion of existence.

Chapter Three
Section Six
On the impossibility of a physico-theological proofI07

A62 I / B 649

If, then, neither the concept of things in general nor the experience of
any existence in general can achieve what is required, then one means
is still left: to see whether a determinate experience, that of the things
in the present world, their constitution and order, yields a ground of
proof that could help us to acquire a certain conviction of the existence
of a highest being. Such a proof we would call the physico-theologi­
cal proof. 108 If this too should be impossible, then no satisfactory proof
from speculative reason for the existence of a being that corresponds to
our transcendental ideas is possible at all.
From all the above remarks one will soon see that to this inquiry a
quite easy, concise, and conclusive reply can be expected. For how can
any experience be given that is supposed to be adequate to an idea? For
what is special about an idea is just that no experience can ever be con­
gruent to it. The transcendental idea of a necessary all-sufficient origi­
nal being is so overwhelmingly great, so sublimely high above every­
thing empirical, which is at all times conditioned, that partly one can
never even procure enough material in experience to fill such a concept,
and partly if one searches for the unconditioned among conditioned
things, then one will seek forever and always in vain, since no law of any
empirical synthesis will ever give an example of such a thing, or even
the least guidance in looking for it.
If the highest being were to stand in the chain of these conditions,
then it would be a member of their series, and like the lower members,
of which this is presupposed, a further investigation for a still higher
ground would be required for it. If, on the contrary, one would separate
it from this chain, and, as a merely intelligible being, not include it
within the series of natural causes, then what bridge can reason build so
as to reach it? For all laws of transition from effects to causes, indeed,
all synthesis and extension of our cognition in general, are directedb to
a Princip

b gestellt

578

Section VI. Impossibility of physico-theologial proof

nothing other than possible experience, and hence merely to objects of
the world of sense, and they can have a significance only in regard to
them.
The present world discloses to us such an immeasurable showplace of
manifoldness, order, purposiveness, and beauty, whether one pursues
these in the infinity of space or in the unlimited division of it, 109 that in
accordance with even the knowledgea about it that our weak under­
standing can acquire, all speech concerning so many and such unfath­
omable wonders must lose its power to express, all numbers their power
to measure, and even our thoughts lack boundaries, so that our judg­
ment upon the whole must resolve itself into a speechless, but nonethe­
less eloquent, astonishment. I I O Everywhere we see a chain of effects and
causes, of ends and means, regularity in coming to be and perishing,
and because nothing has entered by itselfb into the state in which it
finds itself, this state always refers further to another thing as its cause,
which makes necessary just the same further inquiry, so that in such a
way the entire wholec would have to sink into the abyss of nothingness
if one did not assume something subsisting for itself originally and in­
dependently outside this infinite contingency, which supports it and at
the same time, as the cause of its existence, secures its continuation.
This highest cause (in regard to all things of the world) - how great
should one think it is? We are not acquainted with the world in its
whole content, still less do we know how to estimate its magnitude by
comparison with everything possible. But since in respect to causality
we need an ultimate and supreme being, what hinders us from at the
same time positing in it a degree of perfection exceeding everything
else that is possible? This we can easily effect, though to be sure only
through the fragile outline of an abstract concept, if we represent all
possible perfection united in it as a single substance - which concept is
favorable to our reason in its parsimony of principles,d not subject to
any contradictions, and even salutary for the extension of the use of our
reason within experience, through the guidance such an idea gives to
order and purposiveness, but is nowhere contrary to experience in any
decisive way.
This proof always deserves to be named with respect. It is the oldest,
clearest and the most appropriate to common human reason. It enlivens
the study of nature, just as it gets its existence from this study and
through it receives ever renewed force. It brings in ends and aims where
they would not have been discovered by our observation itself, and exKenntnisse
von selbst
das ganze All
d Principien
a

b

C

5 79

A62 2 / B 6S0

A62 3 / B 65I

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A624/ B 65 2

A625 / B 653

tends our information about nature through the guiding thread of a
particular unity whose principle a is outside nature. But this acquain­
tance also reacts upon its cause, namely the idea that occasioned it, and
increases the belief in a highest author to the point where it becomes an
irresistible conviction.
Thus it would be not only discomfiting but also quite pointless to try
to remove anything from the reputation of this proof. Reason, cease­
lessly elevated by the powerful though only empirical proofs that are al­
ways growing in its hands, cannot be so suppressed through any doubt
drawn from subtle and abstract speculation that it is not torn at once
out of every brooding indecision, just as from a dream, by throwing a
glance on the wonders of nature and the majesty of the world's archi­
tecture,b by which it elevates itself from magnitude to magnitude up to
the highest of all, rising from the conditioned to the condition, up to
the supreme and unconditioned author.
But although we have nothing to object against the rationality and
utility of this procedure, but rather recommend and encourage it, we
cannot on that account approve of the claims that this kind of proof may
make to apodictic certainty and to having no need for approval based
on any special favor or need of outside support; it can in no way harm
the good cause to tone down the dogmatic language of a scornful
sophist'" to the tone of moderation and modesty of a belief that is suffi­
cient to comfort us, although not to command unconditional submission. Accordingly, I assert that the physico-theological proof can never
establish the existence of a highest being alone, but must always leave it
up to the ontological proof (to which it serves only as an introduction)
in order to make good this lack; thus the latter still contains the only
possible argument!I I (insofar as there is a merely speculative proof at
all), which no human reason can bypass.
The chief moments of the physico-theological proof we are thinking
of are the following: I ) Everywhere in the world there are clear signs of
an order according to determinate aim, carried out with great wisdom,
and in a whole of indescribable manifoldness in content as well as of un­
bounded magnitude in scope. 2 ) This purposive order is quite foreign
to the things of the world, and pertains to them only contingently, i.e.,
the natures of different things could not by themselvese agree in so
many united means to determinate final aims, were they not quite prop­
erly chosen for and predisposed to it through a principle! of rational
a Princip

b Weltbau
fremden
d Vernunftlers
, von selbst
f Princip
C

5 80

Section VI. Impossibility of physico-theologial proof

order grounded on ideas. 3) Thus there exists a sublime and wise cause
(or several), which must be the cause of the world not merely as an all­
powerful nature working blindly through fecundity, but as an intelli­
gence, through freedom. 4) The unity of this cause may be inferred
from the unity of the reciprocal relation of the parts of the world as
members of an artful structure, inferred with certainty wherever our
observation reaches, but beyond that with probability in accordance
with all principles of analogy.
Without quibbling with natural reason about the inference it draws
from the analogy between natural products and those of human art,
when it does violence to nature and constrains it not to proceed in ac­
cordance with its own ends but to bend to ours (the similarity of na­
ture's ends to houses, ships, and clocks), just such a causality, namely
understanding and will, is made a ground, when it derives the inner
possibility of freely working nature (which makes all art, and perhaps
even reason itself, possible) from another though superhuman art,
which sort of inference perhaps might not stand up to the sharpest tran­
scendental critique - one must nevertheless admit that once we are sup­
posed to name a cause, we could not proceed more securely than by
analogy with such purposive productions,a which are the only ones
where we are fully acquainted with the causes and the way they act.
Reason would not be able to justifyb to itself an attempt to pass over
from a causality with which it is acquainted to obscure and unprovable
grounds of explanation, with which it is not acquainted.
According to this inference, the purposiveness and well-adaptedness
of so many natural arrangements would have to prove merely the contingency of the form, but not of the matter, i.e., of substance, in the
world; for the latter would further require that it be able to be proved
that the things of the world would in themselves be unsuited for such
an order and harmony according to universal laws if they were not in
their substance the product of a highest wisdom; but entirely different
grounds of proof from those provided by the analogy with human art
would be required for this. Thus the proof could at most establish a
highest architect of the world, who would always be limited by the
suitability of the material on which he works, but not a creator of the
world, to whose idea everything is subject, which is far from sufficient
for the great aim that one has in view, namely that of proving an a11sufficient original being. If we wanted to prove the contingency of matter itself, then we would have to take refuge in a transcendental argument, which, however, is exactly what was supposed to be avoided here.
The inference thus goes from the thoroughgoing order and purpoa Erzeugungen
b verantworten
581

A6261 B 654

A62 7 I B 655

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A628/ B 6 5 6

A629 / B 6 5 7

siveness that is to be observed in the world, as a thoroughly contingent
arrangement, to the existence of a cause proportioned to it. The con­
cept of this cause, however, has to give us something quite determinate
to cognize about it, and thus it cannot be anything other than that of a
being that possesses all power, wisdom, etc., in a word, all perfection, as
an all-sufficient being. For the predicates very great, or "astonishing"
or "immeasurable power" and "excellence" do not give any determinate
concept at all, and really say nothing about what the thing in itself is,
but are rather only relative representations, through which the observer
(of the world) compares the magnitude of the object with himself and
his power to grasp it, and they turn out to be terms of equally high
praise whether one increases the magnitude of the object or makes the
observing subject smaller in relation to it. Where it is a question of
the magnitude (perfection) of a thing in general, there is no determinate
concept except that which comprehends the whole of possible perfec­
tion, and only the All (ornnitudo) of reality is thoroughly determinate in
its concept.
Now I will not hope that anyone presumes to have insight into the
relation of the magnitude of the world as he has observed it (in its scope
as well as its content) to omnipotence, or the world-order to highest
wisdom, or the unity of the world to the absolute unity of its author, etc.
Thus physico-theology cannot give any determinate concept of the
supreme cause of the world, and hence it cannot be sufficient for a prin­
ciplea of theology, which is supposed to constitute in turn the founda­
tion of religion.
The step to absolute totality is utterly impossible on the empirical
path. But it is nevertheless made in the physico-theological proof. SO
what means are employed to get across such a wide gulf?
Mter one has gotten as far as admiring the magnitude of the wisdom,
power, etc. of the world's author, and cannot get any farther, then one
suddenly leaves this argument carried out on empirical grounds of
proof and goes back to the contingency that was inferred right at the
beginning from the world's order and purposiveness. Now one pro­
ceeds from this contingency alone, solely through transcendental con­
cepts, to the existence of something absolutely necessary, and then from
the concept of the absolute necessity of the first cause to its thoroughly
determinate or determining concept, namely that of an all-encompass­
ing reality. Thus the physico-theological proof, stymied in its under­
taking, suddenly jumps over to the cosmological proof, and since this is
only a concealed ontological proof, it really carries through its aim
merely through pure reason, even though at the beginning this denied
a Princip
5 82

Section VII. Critique of all speculative theology

all kinship with it and had proposed to base everything on evident
proofs from experience.
Thus the physico-theologians have no cause at all to be so coy when
it comes to the transcendental kind of proof and to look down on it with
the self-conceit of clearsighted students of nature looking down on the
webs spun by gloomy quibblers. a For if they would only examine them­
selves, they would find that after they have made a certain amount of
progress on the territory of nature and experience and seen themselves
just as far removed as ever from the object with which their reason
seems to confront them/ they suddenly leave this territory and pass
over into the realm of mere possibilities, where on the wings of ideas
they hope to approach that which has eluded all their empirical inquiries. After they finally suppose they have got firm footing through
such a mighty leap, then they extend the now determinate concept
(without knowing how they have come to be in possession of it) over
the entire field of creation, and they elucidate the ideal, which was
merely the product of pure reason - though shabbily enough and in a
way far beneath the dignity of its object - through experience, though
without being willing to concede that they have achieved their acquaintance with it, or their presupposition of it, while they were on a
different footpath from that of experience.
Accordingly, the physico-theological proof of the existence of a sin­
gle original being as the highest being is grounded on the cosmologi­
cal, and the latter on the ontological; and since besides these three paths
no more are open to speculative reason, the ontological proof from
pure concepts of reason is the only possible one - if even one proof of
a proposition elevated so sublimely above all empirical use of the un­
derstanding is possible at all.
Chapter Three
Section Seven
Critique of all theology from speculative principlesc
of reason. I I 2
I f by "theology" I understand the cognition o f the original being, then
it is either from pure reason (theologia rationalis) or from revelation (rev­
elata). Now the first of these thinks its object either merely through
pure reason, by means of sheer transcendental concepts (as an ens orig­
inarium, realissimum, ens entium)d and is called transcendental theology,
jinsterer Grobler
der ihrer Vernunft entgegen scheint
, Principien
d original being, most real being, being of beings
a

b

•

•

.

583

A630/ B 658

A 63 I / B 659

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A 6 3 z 1 B 660

A 6 3 3 / B 66 I

A632 / B 660

or else through a concept which it borrows from nature (the nature of
our soul) as the highest intelligence, and would have to be called nat­
ural theology. Someone who admits only a transcendental theology
would be called a deist; but if he also accepts a a natural theology, he
would be called a theist. The former concedes that we can in any case
cognize the existence of an original being through mere reason, but our
concept of it is merely transcendental - namely, only that of a being
having all reality, but it cannot be determined more closely. The second
asserts that reason is in a position to determine the object more closely
by analogy with nature - namely as a being containing the original
ground of all other things within itself through understanding and free­
dom. The deist represents this being merely as a cause of the world
(whether through the necessity of its nature or through freedom re­
mains undecided), the theist as an author of the world.
Transcendental theology either thinks that the existence of an origi­
nal being is to be derived from an experience in general (without more
closely determining anything about the world to which this experi­
ence belongs), and is called cosmotheology; or it believes that it can
cognize that existence through mere concepts, without the aid of even
the least experience, and is called ontotheology.
Natural theology infers the properties and the existence of an au­
thor of the world from the constitution, the order and unity, that are
found in this world, in which two kinds of causality and its rules have to
be assumed, namely nature and freedom. Hence it ascends from this
world to the highest intelligence, either as the principleb of all natural
or of all moral order and perfection. In the first case it is called
physico-theology, in the latter moral theology.*
Since one is accustomed to understanding by the concept of God not
some blindly working eternal nature as the root of things, but rather a
highest being which is supposed to be the author of things through un­
derstanding and freedom - and since this concept alone interests
us - one could, strictly speaking, refuse all belief in God to the deist,
and leave him solely with the assertion of an original being or a highest
cause. However, since no one should be charged with wanting to deny
something just because he does not have the confidence to assert it, it
* Not theological morals; for that contains moral laws that presuppose the ex­
istence of a highest governor of the world, whereas moral theology, on the
contrary, is a conviction of the existence of a highest being which grounds it­
self on moral laws.c
a annimmt
b

Princip

, In the first edition: " . . . which is grounded on moral laws."
5 84

Section VII. Critique of all speculative theology

is gentler and fairer to say that the deist believes in a God, but the the­
ist in a living God (summa intelligentia). a Now we want to seek out the
possible sources of all these attempts of reason.
Here I content myself with defining theoretical cognition as that
through which I cognize what exists, and practical cognition as that
through which I represent what ought to exist. According to this, the
theoretical use of reason is that through which I cognize a priori (as nec­
essary) that something is; but the practical use is that through which it
is cognized a priori what ought to happen. Now if it is indubitably cer­
tain, but only conditionally, that something either is or that it should
happen, then either a certain determinate condition can be absolutely
necessary for it, or it can be presupposed as only optionalb and contin­
gent. In the first case the condition is postulated (per thesin),c in the sec­
ond it is supposed (per hypothesin).d Since there are practical laws that
are absolutely necessary (the moral laws), then if these necessarily presuppose any existence as the condition of the possibility of their binding force, this existence has to be postulated, because the conditioned
from which the inference to this determinate condition proceeds is itself cognized a priori as absolutely necessary. In the future we will show
about the moral laws that they not only presuppose the existence of a
highest being, but also, since in a different respect they are absolutely
necessary, they postulate this existence rightfully but, of course, only
practically; for now we will set aside this kind of inference. I I 3
Since if it is merely a matter of what exists (not of what ought to be),
the conditioned that is given to us in experience is also always thought of
as contingent, then the condition that belongs to it cannot be cognized
from this as absolutely necessary, but serves only as a relatively neces­
sary - Or rather as a required but in itself and a priori arbitrary - presup­
position for the rational cognition of the conditioned. If, therefore, the
absolute necessity of a thing is to be cognized in theoretical cognition,
then this could happen only from concepts a priori, but never as a cause
in relation to an existence that is given through experience.
A theoretical cognition is speculative if it pertains to an object or
concepts of an object to which one cannot attain in any experience. It is
opposed to the cognition of nature, which pertains to no objects, or
their predicates, except those that can b e given in a possible experience.
The principle of inferring from what happens (the empirically con­
tingent) as effect to a cause, is a principle< of the cognition of nature,
a "highest intelligence"; Kant declines the Latin phrase in the accusative.

b beliebig
, by thesis
by hypothesis

d

, Princip
585

A634/ B 662

A 6 3 S / B 66 3

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

but not of speculative cognition. For if one abstracts from it as a prin­
ciple that contains the condition of possible experience in general, and,
leaving out everything empirical, wants to assert it of the contingent in
general, then not the least justification is left over for any synthetic
proposition from which it can be discerned how I can go from what ex­
ists to something entirely different (called its cause); indeed, in such a
speculative use the concept of a cause, like that of the contingent, loses
all the significance that is made comprehensible by its objective reality

in concreto.
Now if one infers from the existence of things in the world to their
cause, this does not belong to the natural but to the speculative use of
reason; for the former does not relate the things themselves (sub­
stances) to any cause, but relates to a cause only what happens, thus
their states, as empirically contingent; that the substance itself (the
matter) is contingent as to its existence would have to be a merely specA63 6 / B 664 ulative cognition of reason. But if it were only a matter of the form of
the world, the way it is combined and the changes of combination, yet
I wanted to infer from this to a cause that is entirely distinct from the
world, then this once again would be a judgment of merely speculative
reason, because the object here is not any object a of a possible experi­
ence. But then the principle of causality, which holds only within llie
field of possible experience and outside it is without any use or indeed
without any meaning,b would be completely diverted from its vocation.
Now I assert that all attempts of a merely speculative use of reason in
regard to theology are entirely fruitless and by their internal constitu­
tion null and nugatory, but that the principlesc of reason's natural use
do not lead at all to any theology; and consequently, if one did not
ground it on moral laws or use them as guides, there could be no the­
ology of reason at all. For all synthetic principles of understanding are
of immanent use; but for the cognition of a highest being a transcen­
dent use of them would be required, for which our understanding is not
equipped at all. If the empirically valid law of causality is to lead to an
original being, then this would have to belong to the causal chain in ob­
jects of experience; but then it, like all appearances, would have to be
A637 1 B 66S conditioned. But even if one were allowed to leap over the boundary of
experience by means of the dynamical law of the relation of effects to
their causes, what concept can this procedure obtain for us? Far from
any concept of a highest being, because for us experience never offers
us the greatest of all possible effects (such as would bear witness to this
as its cause). If, merely so that nothing empty is left in our reason, we
a Object
b Bedeutung
, Principien
586

Section VII. Critique of all speculative theology

are allowed to make good this lack of complete determination by means
of a mere idea of the highest perfection and original necessity, then we
could be permitted this only by special favor, but it cannot be demanded
by the right of an irresistible proof. Thus the physico-theological proof
could perhaps lend support to other proofs (if there were any), by con­
necting speculation with intuition; but by itselfa it is more a preparation
of the understanding for theological cognition, providing it with a
straight and natural direction toward such cognition; it cannot com­
plete the business alone.' '4
Thus from this one can very well see that transcendental questions
admit only of transcendental answers, i.e., answers from pureb a priori
concepts, without the least empirical admixture. But here the question
is obviously synthetic and demands an extension of our cognition be­
yond all the boundaries of experience, namely to the existence of a
being that is supposed to correspond to our mere idea, to which no experience can ever be equal. Now, according to the proofs we have given
above, all synthetic cognition a priori is possible only by the fact that it
expresses the formal conditions of a possible experience, and all principles are therefore only of immanent validity, i.e., they are related solely
to objects of empirical cognition, or appearances. Thus through transcendental procedures aiming at a theology of mere speculative reason
nothing is accomplished.
But if one would rather call all the above proofs of the Analytic into
doubt than be robbed of the persuasion that these grounds of proof that
have been used for so long are of great weight, even then one cannot
refuse to satisfy me when I demand that one should at least explain how,
and by means of what illumination, one is justified in confidently soar­
ing above all possible experience through the power of mere ideas. New
proofs, or improved reworkings of old ones, I would beg to be spared.
For there is not much to choose here, since all merely speculative
proofs finally amount to one single proof, namely the ontological, and
I need not fear being overburdened by the fertility of the dogmatic
champion of reason freed from sense; though without thinking myself
very combative I will not refuse the challenge of discovering the fallacy
in every such attempt of this kind, and so frustrate its pretensions; yet
in this way the hope for better luck on the part of those who have become accustomed to dogmatic persuasion will never be fully done away
with, and so I confine myself to one single fair demand: that one should
provide a general justification, based on the nature of human understanding, together with all remaining sources of cognition, for making
a start at extending one's cognition entirely a priori and stretching it
a

b

for sich selbst
tauter
587

A 63 8 / B 666

A639/ B 667

r
Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A640/ B 668

A 641 / B 669

even to where no possible experience and hence no means suffices to se­
cure objective reality for any of the concepts we have thought out.
However the understanding may have obtained these concepts, the ex­
istence of their object cannot be found in them analytically, just because
the cognition of the existence of the object a consists precisely in posit­
ing this existence in itself outside the thought. But it is entirely im­
possible to go from a concept by itself out beyond it and, without
following its empirical connection (which, however, will at every time
provide only appearances), to attain to the discovery of new objects and
transcendent b beings.
But even though reason in its merely speculative use is far from ade­
quate for such a great aim as this - namely, attaining to the existence of
a supreme being - it still has in them a very great utility, that of COfrecting the cognition of this being by making it agree with itself and
with every intelligible aim, and by purifYing it of everything that might
be incompatible with the concept of an original being, and of all ad­
mixture of empirical limitations.
Accordingly, despite all of its inadequacies, transcendental theology
retains an important negative use, and is a constant censor of our reason
when it has to do merely with pure ideas, which for this very reason
admit of no standard but the transcendental one. For if in some other,
perhaps practical relation, the presupposition of a highest and all-suffi­
cient being, as supreme intelligence, were to assert its validity without
any objection, then it would be of the greatest importance to determine
this concept precisely on its transcendental side, as the concept of a nec­
essary and most real being, to get rid of what is incompatible with the
highest reality, what belongs to mere appearance (anthropomorphism,
broadly understood), and at the same time to get out of the way all op­
posed assertions, whether they be atheistic, deistic or anthropomor­
phic; all this is very easy to do in such a critical treatment, since the same
grounds for considering human reason incapable of asserting the existence of such a being, when laid before our eyes, also suffice to prove the
unsuitabilityc of all counter-assertions. For where, by pure speculation of
reason, will anyone acquire the insight that there is no highest being as
the original ground of everything? Or that none of the properties apply
to it that we represent, in accordance with their consequences, as ana­
logical with the dynamic realities of a thinking being? Or that, in the lat­
ter case, they have to be subject to all the limitations inevitably imposed
by sensibility on the intelligences with which experience acquaints us?d
a
b
,
d

Object
iiberschwenglicher
Untauglichkeit

Kant's sentence encompasses all three disjuncts and ends with a period.

588

Section VII. Critique of all speculative theology

Thus the highest being remains for the merely speculative use of rea­
son a mere but nevertheless faultless ideal, a concept which concludes
and crowns the whole of human cognition, whose objective reality can­
not of course be proved on this path, but also cannot be refuted; and if
there should be a moral theology that can make good this lack, then
transcendental theology, up to now only problematic, will prove to be
indispensable through determining its concept and by ceaselessly cen­
soring a reason that is deceived often enough by sensibility and does not
always agree with its own ideas. Necessity, infinity, unity, existence out­
side the world (not as soul of the world), eternity without all conditions
of time, omnipresence without all conditions of space, omnipotence,
etc.: these are purely transcendental predicates, and hence a purified
concept of them, which every theology needs so very badly, can be
drawn only from transcendental theology.a
a In his copy of the first edition, Kant adds: "Whether, if there is no demonstration of the

existence of God, there is not at least a great probability. This is not at all worthy of the
object [Objects] also not possible on this path. Probability in the absolutely necessary is
contradictory.
"All necessity of a thing as hypothesis is subjective, namely a need of reason of [our]
speculation." ( E CLXXXI , p. 54; 2 3 '43)

5 89

A642 / B 670

Appendix
to the Transcendental Dialectic

On the regulative use of the ideas
of pure reason. I I S

A 643 / B 67 1

The outcome of all dialectical attempts o f pure reason not only con­
firms what we have already proved in the Transcendental Analytic,
namely that all the inferences that would carry us out beyond the field
of possible experience are deceptive and groundless, but it also simulta­
neously teaches us this particular lesson: that human reason has a nat­
ural propensity to overstep all these boundaries, and that transcendental
ideas are just as natural to it as the categories are to the understanding,
although with this difference, that just as the categories lead to truth,
i.e., to the agreement of our concepts with their objects,a the ideas ef­
fect a mere, but irresistible, illusion, deception by which one can hardly
resist even through the most acute criticism.
Everything grounded in the nature of our powers must be purposive
and consistent with their correct use, if only we can guard against a certain misunderstanding and find out their proper direction. Thus the
transcendental ideas too will presumably have a good and consequently
immanent use, even though, if their significance is misunderstood and
they are taken for concepts of real things, they can be transcendent in
their application and for that very reason deceptive. For in regard to
the whole of possible experience, it is not the idea itself but only its use
that can be either extravagant (transcendent) or indigenous (imma­
nent), according to whether one directs them straightway to a supposed
object corresponding to them, or only to the use of the understanding
in general regarding the objects with which it has to do; and all errors
of subreption are always to be ascribed to a defect in judgment, never
to understanding or to reason.
Reason never relates directly to an object, but solely to the under­
standing and by means of it to reason's own empirical use, hence it does
not create any concepts (of objects) b but only orders them and gives
a Objecte
b Objecte
590

Section VII. Critique of all speculative theology

them that unity which they can have in their greatest possible extension,
i.e., in relation to the totality of series; the understanding does not look
to this totality at all, but only to the connection through which series
of conditions always come about according to concepts. Thus reason
really has as object only the understanding and its purposive application, and just as the understanding unites the manifold into an object"
through concepts, so reason on its side unites the manifold of concepts
through ideas by positing a certain collective unity as the goal of the understanding's actions, which are otherwise concerned only with distributive unity.
Accordingly, I assert: the transcendental ideas are never of constitu­
tive use, so that the concepts of certain objects would thereby be given,
and in case one so understands them, they are merely sophistical (dia­
lectical) concepts. On the contrary, however, they have an excellent and
indispensably necessary regulative use, namely that of directing the un­
derstanding to a certain goal respecting which the lines of direction of
all its rules converge at one point, which, although it is only an idea
(focus imaginarius) - i.e., a point from which the concepts of the under­
standing do not really proceed, since it lies entirely outside the bounds
of possible experience - nonetheless still serves to obtain for these con­
cepts the greatest unity alongside the greatest extension. Now of course
it is from this that there arises the deception, as if these lines of direc­
tion were shot out b from an object lying outside the field of possible
empirical cognition (just as objectsC are seen behind the surface of a
mirror); yet this illusion (which can be prevented from deceiving) is
nevertheless indispensably necessary if besides the objects before our
eyes we want to see those that lie far in the background, i.e., when, in
our case, the understanding wants to go beyond every given experience
(beyond this part of the whole of possible experience), and hence wants
to take the measure of its greatest possible and uttermost extension.
If we survey the cognitions of our understanding in their entire
range, then we find that what reason quite uniquely prescribes and
seeks to bring about concerning it is the systematic in cognition, i.e.,
its interconnection based on one principle.d This unity of reason always
presupposes an idea, namely that of the form of a whole of cognition,
which precedes the determinate cognition of the parts and contains the
conditions for determining a priori the place of each part and its relaa Object

b The text reads "ausgeschlossen . . . waren" (were excluded). Editors have amended the text
at this point in various ways. We follow Erdmann, substituting "ausgeschossen . . . waren";
a different but also eligible possibility is "aus geschlossen" (inferred from).
, Objecte
d Zusammenhang aus einem Princip
591

A 644/ B 672

A64S / B 673

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A 6 46 / B 674

A647 / B 675

tion to the others. Accordingly, this idea postulates complete unity of
the understanding's cognition, through which this cognition comes to
be not merely a contingent aggregate but a system interconnected in
accordance with necessary laws. One cannot properly say that this idea
is the concept of an object, a but only that of the thoroughgoing unity
of these concepts, insofar as the idea serves the understanding as a rule.
Such concepts of reason are not created by nature, rather we question
nature according to these ideas, and we take our cognition to be defective as long as it is not adequate to them. Admittedly, it is hard to find
pure earth, pure water, pure air, etc. Nevertheless, concepts of them
are required (though as far as their complete purity is concerned, have
their origin only in reason) in order appropriately to determine the
share that each of these natural causes has in appearance; thus one re­
ducesb all materials to earths (mere weight, as it were), to salts and com­
bustibles (as force), and finally to water and air as vehicles (machines, as
it were, by means of which the aforementioned operate), in order to ex­
plain the chemical effects of materials in accordance with the idea of a
mechanism. For even though it is not actually expressed this way, it is
still very easy to discover the influence of reason on the classifications
of students of nature.
If reason is the faculty of deriving the particular from the universal,
then: Either the universal is in itself certain and given, and only judg­
ment is required for subsuming, and the particular is necessarily deter­
mined through it This I call the "apodictic" use of reason. Or the universal is
assumed only problematically, and it is a mere idea, the particular
being certain while the universality of the rule for this consequent is
still a problem; then several particular cases, which are all certain, are
tested by the rule, to see if they flow from it, and in the case in which it
seems that all the particular cases cited follow from it, then the univer­
sality of the rule is inferred, including all subsequent cases, even those
that are not given in themselves. This I will call the "hypothetical" use
of reason.
The hypothetical use of reason, on the basis of ideas as problematic
concepts, is not properly constitutive, that is, not such that if one
judges in all strictness the truth of the universal rule assumed as a hy­
pothesis thereby follows; for how is one to know all possible conse­
quences, which would prove the universality of the assumed principle if
they followed from it? Rather, this use of reason is only regulative,
bringing unity into particular cognitions as far as possible and thereby
approximating the rule to universality.
The hypothetical use of reason is therefore directed at the systema Object
b

bringt

.

.

.

auf
592

Section VII. Critique of all speculative theology

atic unity of the understanding's cognitions, which, however, is the
touchstone of truth for its rules. Conversely, systematic unity (as
mere idea) is only a projected unity, which one must regard not as
given in itself, but only as a problem;a this unity, however, helps to find
a principleb for the manifold and particular uses of the understanding,
thereby guiding it even in those cases that are not given and making it
coherently connected.c
From this, however, one sees only that systematic unity or the unity
of reason of the manifold of the understanding's cognition is a logical
principle,d in order, where the understanding alone does not attain to
rules, to help it through ideas, simultaneously creating unanimity
among its various rules under one principle< (the systematic), and
thereby interconnection, as far as this can be done. But whether the
constitution of objects or the nature of the understanding that cognizes
them as such are in themselves determined to systematic unity, and
whether one could in a certain measure postulate this a priori without
taking into account such an interest of reason, and therefore say that all
possible cognitions of the understanding (including empirical ones)
have the unity of reason, and stand under common principles! from
which they could be derived despite their variety: that would be a transcendental principle of reason, which would make systematic unity not
merely something subjectively and logically necessary, as method, but
objectively necessary.
We will illustrate this through one case in which reason is used.
Among the different kinds of unity according to concepts of the under­
standing belongs the causality of a substance, which is called "power."g
At first glance the various appearances of one and the same substance
show such diversity that one must assume almost as many powers as
there are effects, as in the human mind there are sensation, consciousness, imagination, memory, wit, the power to distinguish, pleasure, desire, etc. Initially a logical maxim bids us to reduce this apparent variety
as far as possible by discovering hidden identity through comparison,
and seeing if imagination combined with consciousness may not be
memory, wit, the power to distinguish, or perhaps even understanding
and reason. The idea of a fundamental power though logic does not
at all ascertain whether there is such a thing - is at least the problemh
-

a Problem

b Princip
, zusammenhiingend
d Princip
, Princip
f Principien
g Kraft
h Problem

593

A648 / B 676

A649/ B 67 7

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A6so/ B 678

A6S I / B 679

set by a systematic representation of the manifoldness of powers. The
logical principle of reason demands this unity as far as it is possible to
bring it about, and the more appearances of this power and that power
are found to be identical, the more probable it becomes that they are
nothing but various expressions of one and the same power, which can
be called (comparatively) their fundamental power. One proceeds in
just the same way with the rest of the powers.
These comparatively fundamental powers must once again be com­
pared with one another, so as to discover their unanimity and thereby
bring them close to a single radical, i.e., absolutely fundamental, power.
But this unity of reason is merely hypothetical. One asserts not that
such a power must in fact be found, but rather that one must seek it for
the benefit of reason, namely for setting up certain principles b for the
many rules with which experience may furnish us, and that where it can
be done, one must in such a way bring systematic unity into cognition.
But if one attends to the transcendental use of the understanding, it
is evident that this idea of a fundamental power in general does not
functionc merely as a problemd for hypothetical use, but pretends to ob­
jective reality, so that the systematic unity of a substance's many powers
are postulated and an apodictic principlee of reason is erected. For even
without our having attempted to find the unanimity among the many
powers, or indeed even when all such attempts to discover it have failed,
we nevertheless presuppose that such a thing will be found; and it is not
only, as in the case cited, on account of the unity of substance that rea­
son presupposes systematic unity among manifold powers, but rather
reason does so even where many powers, though to a certain degree of
the same kind, are found, as with matter in general, where particular
natural laws stand under more general ones; and the parsimony of prin­
ciplesfis not merely a principle of economy for reason, but becomes an
inner law of its nature.
In fact it cannot even be seen how there could be a logical principleg
of rational unity among rules unless a transcendental principleh is pre­
supposed, through which such a systematic unity, as pertaining to the
object i itself, is assumed a priori as necessary. For by what warrant can
reason in its logical use claim to treat the manifoldness of the powers
a Princip

b Principien
nicht . . . bestimmt sei
d Problem
Princip
f Principien
g Princip
h Princip
i Object
C

C

594

Section VII. Critique of all speculative theology

which nature gives to our cognition as merely a concealed unity, and to
derive them as far as it is able from some fundamental power, when rea­
son is free to admit that it is just as possible that all powers are differ­
ent in kind, and that its derivation of them from a systematic unity is
not in conformity with nature? For then reason would proceed directly
contrary to its vocation, since it would set as its goal an idea that en­
tirely contradicts the arrangement of nature. Nor can one say that ita
has previously gleanedb this unity from the contingent constitution of
nature in accordance with its principlesc of reason. For the law of rea­
son to seek unity is necessary, since without it we would have no reason,
and without that, no coherentd use of the understanding, and, lacking
that, no sufficient mark of empirical truth; thus in regard to the latter
we simply have to presuppose the systematic unity of nature as objec­
tively valid and necessary.
We also find this transcendental presupposition hidden in an ad­
mirable way in the principles of the philosophers, although they have
not always recognized it or admitted it to themselves. That all the man­
ifoldness of individual things does not exclude the identity of species;
that the several species must be treated only as various determinations
of fewer genera, and the latter of still higher families,' etc.; that therefore a certain systematic unity of all possible empirical concepts must be
sought insofar as they can be derived from higher and more general
ones: this is a scholastic rule or logical principle! without which there
could be no use of reason, because we can infer from the universal to
the particular only on the ground of the universal properties of things
under which the particular properties stand.
But that such unanimity is to be encountered even in nature is some­
thing the philosophers presuppose in the familiar scholastic rule that
one should not multiply beginnings (principles)': without necessity (entia
praeter necessitatem non esse multiplicanda).h It is thereby said that the na­
ture of things themselves offers material for the unity of reason, and the
apparently infinite variety should not restrain us from conjecturing be­
hind it a unity of fundamental properties, from which their manifold­
ness can be derived only through repeated determination. This unity,
although it is a mere idea, has been pursued so eagerly in all ages that
more often there has been cause to moderate than to encourage the dea

b

.

I.e., reason

abgenommen
, Principien
d zusammenhangende
, Geschlechter
f Princip
g Principien
h

Entities are not to be multiplied without necessity.,,6
595

A6S2 / B 680

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II.

A 65 3 i B 68 1

A6S4/ B 682

Div. II. Bk.

II. Ch. III

sire for it. The analysts had already done much when they were able to
reduce all salts to two main genera, acidic and alkaline, but they even
attempted to regard this distinction as merely a variety or varied expression o f one and the same fundamental material. They sought to get
the several species of earths (the material of stone and even of metal)
gradually down to three, and finally to two; still not satisfied, they could
not dismiss from their thought the conjecture that behind these vari­
eties there is a single genus or even indeed a common principle a for
both earths and salts. One might have believed that this is merely a de­
vice of reason for achieving economy, for saving as much trouble as pos­
sible, and a hypothetical attempt that, if it succeeds, will through this
unity give probability to the grounds of explanation it presupposed. Yet
such a selfish aim can easily be distinguished from the idea, in accor­
dance with which everyone presupposes that this unity of reason con­
forms to nature itself; and here reason does not beg but commands,
though without being able to determine the bounds of this unity.
If among the appearances offering themselves to us there were such
a great variety - I will not say of form (for they might be similar to one
another in that) but of content, i.e., regarding the manifoldness of ex­
isting beings - that even the most acute human understanding, through
comparison of one with another, could not detect the least similarity (a
case which can at least be thought), then the logical law of genera would
not obtain at all, no concept of a genus, nor any other universal con­
cept, indeed no understanding at all would obtain, since it is the under­
standing that has to do with such concepts. The logical principleb of
genera therefore presupposes a transcendental one if it is to be applied
to nature (by which I here understand only objects that are given to us).
According to that principle, sameness of kind is necessarily presupposed
in the manifold of a possible experience (even though we cannot deter­
mine its degree a priori), because without it no empirical concepts and
hence no experience would be possible.
To the logical principle r of genera which postulates identity there is
opposed another, namely that of species, which needs manifoldness
and variety in things despite their agreement under the same genus, and
prescribes to the understanding that it be no less attentive to variety
than to agreement. This principle (of discrimination, or of the faculty
of distinguishing) severely limits the rashness of the first principle (of
wit);"7 and here reason shows two interests that conflict with each
other: on the one side, an interest in the domain (universality) in regard
to genera, on the other an interest in content (determinacy) in respect
Princip
b Princip

P

, Princip

596

Section VII. Critique of all speculative theology

of the manifoldness of species; for in the first case the understanding
thinks much under its concepts, while in the second it thinks all the
more in them. This expresses itself in the very different ways of thinking among students of nature; some of whom (who are chiefly speculative) are hostile to differences in kind, while others (chiefly empirical
minds) constantly seek to split nature into so much manifoldness that
one would almost have to give up the hope of judging its appearances
according to general principles.a
This latter way of thinking is also obviously grounded on a logical
principleb that has as its aim the systematic completeness of all cogni­
tions, if, starting with the genus, I descend to whatever manifold may be
contained under it, and thus in this way seek to secure extension for the
system, just as in the first case I seek to secure simplicity by ascending
to the genus. For from the sphere of the concept signifying a genus it
can no more be seen how far its division will go than it can be seen from
space how far division will go in the matter that fills it. Hence every
genus requires different species, and these subspecies, and since none
of the latter once again is ever without a sphere, (a domain as a conceptus
communis),' reason demands in its entire extension that no species be re­
garded as in itself the lowest; for since each species is always a concept
that contains within itself only what is common to different things, this
concept cannot be thoroughly determined, hence it cannot be related to
an individual, consequently, it must at every time contain other concepts, i.e., subspecies, under itself. This law of specification could be expressed thus: entium varietates non temere esse minuendas. d
But it is easy to see that even this logical law would be without sense
or application if it were not grounded on a transcendental law of spec­
ification, which plainly does not demand an actual infinity in regard to
the varieties of things that can become our objects - for the logical
principle asserting the indeterminacy of the logical sphere in regard
to possible division would give no occasion for that; but it does impose
on the understanding the demand to seek under every species that
comes before us for subspecies, and for every variety smaller varieties.
For if there were no lower concepts, then there would also be no higher
ones. Now the understanding cognizes everything only through con­
cepts; consequently, however far it goes in its divisions, it never coga

b

Principien
Princip

,. common concept
d "The varieties of entities are not to be diminished rashly." Clearly this is Kant's attempt
to formulate a counter-principle to the principle of parsimony or "law of genera": entia
praeter necessitatem non esse multiplicanda (Entities are not to be multiplied without ne­
cessity). See A6SZ / B 680 and endnote r r6.

, Princip
597

A6S 5 I B 683

A6S6 / B 684

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A6S7 / B 68S

A6S8 / B 686

nizes through mere intuition but always yet again through lower con­
cepts. The cognition of appearances in their thoroughgoing determi­
nacy (which is possible only through understanding) demands a cease­
lessly continuing specification of its concepts, and a progress to the
varieties that always still remain, from which abstraction is made in the
concept of the species and even more in that of the genus.
Also this law of specification cannot be borrowed from experience;
for experience can make no such extensive disclosures. Empirical spec­
ification soon stops in distinguishing the manifold, unless through the
already preceding transcendental law of specification as a principlea of
reason it is led to seek such disclosures and to keep on assuming them
even when they do not immediately reveal themselves to the senses.
That there are absorbent earths of different species (chalky earths and
muriatic earths) needed for its discovery a foregoing rule of reason that
made it a task for the understanding to seek for varieties, by presuppos­
ing nature to be so abundant that it presumes them. For we have an un­
derstanding only under the presupposition of varieties in nature, just as
we have one only under the condition that nature's objectsb have in
themselves a sameness of kind, because it is just the manifoldness of
what can be grasped together under a concept that constitutes use of
this concept and the business of the understanding.
Reason thus prepares the field for the understanding: 1 . by a princi­
ple< of sameness of kind in the manifold under higher genera, 2 . by a
principle of the variety of what is same in kind under lower species; and
in order to complete the systematic unity it adds 3 . still another law of
the affinity of all concepts, which offers a continuous transition from
every species to every other through a graduated increase of varieties.
We can call these the principlesd of the homogeneity, specification
and continuity of forms. The last arises by uniting the first two, ac­
cording as one has completed the systematic connection in the idea by
ascending to higher genera, as well as descending to lower species; for
then all manifolds are akin e one to another, because they are all collec­
tively descended/ through every degree of extended determination,
from a single highest genus.
Systematic unity under the three logical principlesg can be made pal­
pableh in the following way. One can regard every concept as a point,
Princip
Objecte
, Princip
d Principien
verwandt
f abstammen
g Principien
b sinnlich
a

b

e

598

Section VII. Critique of all speculative theology

which, as the standpoint of an observer, has its horizon, i.e., a multi­
plicity of things that can be represented and surveyed, as it were, from
it. Within this horizon a multiplicity of points must be able to be given
to infinity, each of which in turn has its narrower field of view; i.e.,
every species contains subspecies in accordance with the principle a of
specification, and the logical horizon consists only of smaller horizons
(subspecies), but not of points that have no domain (individuals). But
different horizons, i.e., genera, which are determined from just as
many concepts, one can think as drawn out into a common horizon,
which one can survey collectively from its middle point, which is the
higher genus, until finally the highest genus is the universal and true
horizon, determined from the standpoint of the highest concept and
comprehending all manifoldness, as genera, species, and subspecies,
under itself.
The law of homogeneity leads me to this highest standpoint, while
the law of specification leads to all the lower ones and their greatest
possible variety. Since, however, in such a way nothing in the entire do­
main of all possible concepts is empty, and outside it nothing can be en­
countered, there arises from the presupposition of that universal field of
view and its thoroughgoing division the principle: non datur vacuum for­
marum,b i.e., there are no different original and primary genera, which
would be, as it were, isolated and separated from one another (by an
empty intervening space), but rather all the manifold genera are only
partitioningsC of a single supreme and universal genus; and from this
principle its immediate consequence: datur continuum formarum,d i.e., all
varieties of species bound one another and permit no transition to one
another by a leap, but only through every smaller degree of distinction,
so that from each one can reach another; in a word, there are no species
or subspecies that are proximate (in the concept of reason), but inter­
vening species are always possible, whose difference from the first and
second species is smaller than their difference from each other.
The first law, therefore, guards against excess in the manifold variety
of original genera, and recommends sameness of kind; the second, on
the contrary, limits in turn this inclination to unanimity, and demands
that one distinguish subspecies before one turns to the individuals with
one's universal concepts. The third law unites the first two, prescribing
even in the case of the highest manifoldness a sameness of kind through
the graduated transition from one species e to others, which shows a
a Princip
b There is no vacuum of forms.
, Abteilungen
d There is a continuum of forms.
, Species

599

A6S9/ B 687

A66o/ B 688

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A66r / B 689

A 662 / B 690

kind of affinity a of various branches, insofar as they have all sprouted
from one stem.
This logical law of the continuum specierum (formarum logicarum) b
presupposes, however, a transcendental law (lex continui in natura),c
without which the use of the understanding through the former pre­
scription would only mislead, since the prescription would perhaps take
a path directly opposed to nature. This law must therefore rest on pure
transcendental and not empirical grounds. For in the latter case it
would come later than the systems; but it really first produced what is
systematic in the cognition of nature. Behind these laws there is also
nothing like a hidden intention to initiate probes, as mere experiments,
though plainly this interconnection, where it applies, gives us a power­
ful reason to take as well grounded the unity that is hypothetically
thought-out, and thus it has its utility in this respect; rather, one can see
clearly that the laws judge the parsimony of fundamental causes, the
manifoldness of effects, and the consequent affinityd of the members of
nature in themselves reasonably and in conformity with nature, and
these principles therefore carry their recommendation directly in them­
selves, e and not merely as methodological devices.
But it is easy to see that this continuity of forms is a mere idea, for
which a corresponding object can by no means be displayed in experi­
ence, not only because the species! in nature are really partitioned and
therefore in themselves have to constitute a quantum discretum, g and if
the graduated progress in their affinity h were continuous, they would
also have to contain a true infinity of intermediate members between
any two given species, which is impossible; but also because we could
make no determinate empirical use at all of this law, since through it
there is indicated not the least mark of that affinity, or how and how far
we are to seek the degrees of its variety; rather, we are given nothing
more than a general indication that we are to seek for it.
If we transpose the principlesi we have adduced, so as to put them in
an order which accords with their experiential use, then the princi­
plesi of systematic unity would stand something like this: manifolda Verwandtschaft
b

"continuum of species (oflogical forms)"; Kant declines the entire phrase in the genitive.
, law of the continuum in nature

d Verwandtschaft
, bei sich
f Species
g

h
i

J

discrete quantum

Verwandtschaft
Principien
Principien

600

Section VII. Critique of all speculative theology
ness, affinity, a unity, each taken, however, as ideab in the highest de­
gree of their completeness. Reason presupposes those cognitions of the
understanding which are first applied to experience, and seeks the unity
of these cognitions in accordance with ideas that go much further than
experience can reach. The affinity C of the manifold, without detriment
to its variety, under a principled of unity, concerns not merely the
things, but even more the mere properties and powers of things. Hence
if, e.g., the course of the planets is given to us as circular through a (still
not fully corrected) experience, and we find variations, then we suppose
these variations to consist in an orbit that can deviate from the circle
through each of an infinity of intermediate degrees according to con­
stant laws; i.e., we suppose that the movements of the planets that are
not a circle will more or less approximate to its properties, and then we
come upon the ellipse. The comets show an even greater variety in their
paths, since (as far as observation reaches) they do not ever return in a
circle; yet we guess at a parabolic course for them, since it is still akin'
to the ellipse and, if the major axis of the latter is very long, it cannot
be distinguished from it in all our observations. Thus under the guidance of those principles f we come to a unity of genera in the forms of
these paths, but thereby also further to unity in the cause of all the laws
of this motion (gravitation); from there we extend our conquests, seeking to explain all variations and apparent deviations from those rules on
the basis of the same principle;g finally we even add on more than experience can ever confirm, namely in accordance with the rules of affinity,h even conceiving hyperbolical paths for comets in which these
bodies leave our solar system entirely and, going from sun to sun, unite
in their course the most remote parts of a world system, which for us is
unbounded yet connected through one and the same moving force.i
What is strange about these principles,i and what alone concerns us,
is this: that they seem to be transcendental, and even though they con­
tain mere ideas to be followed in the empirical use of reason, which
reason can follow only asymptotically, as it were, i.e., merely by apa Verwandtschaft
b

jede derselben aber als Ideen
Kant's pronoun and noun do not agree in number; with
Erdmann, we read Idee (singular).
Verwandtschaft
d Principien
, verwandt
f Principien
g Princip
h Verwandtschaft
i
Kraft
j Principien
.

.

.

,

601

A 663 / B 69 1

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A664/ B 692

A 66S ! B 693

proximation, without ever reaching them, yet these principles,a as syn­
thetic propositions a priori, nevertheless have objective but indetermi­
nate validity, and serve as a rule of possible experience, and can even be
used with good success, as heuristic principles, in actually elaborating it;
and yet one cannot bring about a transcendental deduction of them,
which, as has been proved above, is always impossible in regard to ideas.
In the Transcendental Analytic we have distinguished among the
principles of understanding the dynamical ones, as merely regulative
principles b of intuition, from the mathematical ones, which are con­
stitutive in regard to intuition. Despite this, the dynamical laws we are
thinking of are stilI constitutive in regard to experience, since they
make possible a priori the concepts without which there is no experi­
ence. Principlesc of pure reason, on the contrary, cannot be constitutive
even in regard to empirical concepts, because for them no corre­
sponding schema of sensibility can be given, and therefore they can
have no object in concreto. Now if I depart from such an empirical use of
them, as constitutive principles, how will I nevertheless secure for them
a regulative use, and with this some objective validity? And what sort of
meaningd can that use have?
The understanding constitutes an object for reason, just as sensibility
does for the understanding. To make systematic the unity of all possible
empirical actions of the understanding is a business of reason, just as the
understanding connects the manifold of appearances through concepts
and brings it under empirical laws. The actions of the understanding,
however, apart from the schemata of sensibility, are undetermined;
likewise the unity of reason is also in itself undetermined in regard to
the conditions under which, and the degree to which, the understand­
ing should combine its concepts systematically. Yet although no schema
can be found in intuition for the thoroughgoing systematic unity of all
concepts of the understanding, an analogue of such a schema can and
must be given, which is the idea of the maximum of division and uni­
fication of the understanding's cognition in one principle! For that
which is greatest and most complete may be kept determinately in
mind! because all restricting conditions, which give indeterminate
manifolds, are omitted. Thus the idea of reason is an analogue of a
schema of sensibility, but with this difference, that the application of
concepts of the understanding to the schema of reason is not likewise a
Principien
Principien
, Principien
d Bedeutung
Princip
f lasst sich bestimmt gedenken; the first edition reads "liisst sich bestimmt denken" (may be
a

h

e

thought determinately).

602

Section VII. Critique of all speculative theology

cognition of the object itself (as in the application of the categories to
their sensible schemata), but only a rule or principlea of the systematic
unity of all use of the understanding. Now since every principle that es­
tablishes for the understanding a thoroughgoing unity of its use a priori
is also valid, albeit only indirectly, for the object of experience, the prin­
ciples of pure reason will also have objective reality in regard to this ob­
ject, yet not so as to detennine something in it, but only to indicate the
procedure in accordance with which the empirical and determinate use
of the understanding in experience can be brought into thoroughgoing
agreement with itself, by bringing it as far as possible into connection
with the principleb of thoroughJoing unity; and from that it is derived.
I call all subjective principles that are taken not from the constitution
of the objectC but from the interest of reason in regard to a certain pos­
sible perfection of the cognition of this object, d maxims of reason. l I 8
Thus there are maxims of speculative reason, which rest solely on rea­
son's speculative interest, even though it may seem as if they were ob­
jective principles. e
If merely regulative principles are considered as constitutive, then as
objective principles! they can be in conflict; but if one considers them
merely as maxims, then it is not a true conflict, but it is merely a dif­
ferent interest of reason that causes a divorce between ways of think­
ing.g Reason has in fact only a single unifiedh interest, and the conflict
between its maxims is only a variation and a reciprocal limitation of the
methods satisfying this interest.
In this way the interest in manifoldness (in accordance with the
principlei of specification) might hold more for this sophistical rea­
soner/ while unity (in accordance with the principlek of aggregation)
holds more for that one. Each of them believes that his judgment
comes from insight into the object,' and yet he grounds it solely on the
greater or lesser attachment to one of the two principles, neither of

which rests on any objective grounds, but only on the interest of reason, and that could better be called "maxims" than "principles."m If I see
a Princip
b Princip
, Object
d Object
, Principien
f Principien
g Trennung der Denkungsart
h einiges
, Princip
j Vernunftler
k Princip
I Object
Principien
m

603

A 666 / B 694

A66 7 / B 695

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A668/ B 696

insightful men in conflict with one another over the characteristics of
human beings, animals or plants, or even of bodies in the mineral realm,
where some, e.g., assume particular characters of peoples based on their
descent or on decisive and hereditary distinctions between families,
races, etc., while others, by contrast, fix their minds on the thought that
nature has set up no predispositions at all in this matter, and that all dif­
ferences rest only on external contingency, then I need only consider
the constitution of the object in order to comprehend that it lies too
deeply hidden for either of them to be able to speak from an insight into
the nature of the object.o There is nothing here but the twofold inter­
est of reason, where each party takes to heart one interest or the other,
or affects to do so, hence either the maxim of the manifoldness of na­
ture or that of the unity of nature; these maxims can of course be united,
but as long as they are held to be objective insights, they occasion not
only conflict but also hindrances that delay the discovery of the truth,
until a means is found of uniting the disputedb interests and satisfying
reason about them.
It is the same with the assertion of, or the attack on, the widely re­
spected law of the ladder of continuityc among creatures, made cur­
rent by Leibniz"9 and excellently supported by Bonnet,'20 which is
nothing but a pursuit of the principle of affinity resting on the interests
of reason; for observation and insight into the arrangements of nature
could never provide it as something to be asserted objectively. The
rungs of such a ladder, such as experience can give them to us, stand too
far apart from one another, and what we presume to be small differ­
ences are commonly such wide gaps in nature itself that on the basis of
such observations (chiefly of the great manifoldness of things, among
which it must always be easy to find certain similarities and approxima­
tions) nothing can be figured out about the intentions of nature. The
method for seeking out order in nature in accord with such a principle,d
on the contrary, and the maxim of regarding such an order as grounded
in nature in general, even though it is undetermined where or to what
extent, is a legitimate and excellent regulative principle' of reason,
which, however, as such, goes much too far for experience or observa­
tion ever to catch up with it; without determining anything, it only
points f the way toward systematic unity.
Object
streitig; the first edition reads "strittig" (dubious).
kontinuierlichen Stufenleiter
d Princip
Princip
f vorzeichnen
a

b

,

e

604

On the final aim of the natural dialectic
of human reason

The ideas of pure reason can never be dialectical in themselves; rather
it is merely their misuse which brings it about that a deceptive illusion
arises out of them; for they are given as problems for us by the nature
of our reason, and this highest court of appeals for all rights and claims
of our speculation cannot possibly contain original deceptions and sem­
blances. Presumably, therefore, they have their good and purposive vo­
cation in regard to the natural predisposition of our reason. But as usual
the mob of sophists makes a hue and cry over absurdities and contra­
dictions and rails at the regime whose inmost plans they are unable to
penetrate, although they too have its benevolent influences to thank for
their preservation and even for the culture which puts them in a posi­
tion to blame and condemn.
One cannot avail oneself of a concept a priori with any security unless
one has brought about a transcendental deduction of it. The ideas of
reason, of course, do not permit any deduction of the same kind as the
categories; but if they are to have the least objective validity, even if it
is only an indeterminate one, and are not to represent merely empty
thought-entities (entia rationis ratiocinantis),a then a deduction of them
must definitely be possible, granted that it must also diverge quite far
from the deduction one can carry out in the case of the categories. That
deduction is the completion of the critical business of pure reason, and
it is what we will now undertake.
It makes a big difference whether something is given to my reason as
an object absolutely or is given only as an object in the idea. In the
first case my concepts go as far as determining the object; but in the sec­
ond, there is really only a schema for which no object is given, not even
hypothetically, but which serves only to represent other objects to us, in
accordance with their systematic unity, by means of the relation to this
idea, hence to represent these objects indirectly. Thus I say the concept
of a highest intelligence is a mere idea, i.e., its objective reality is not to
consist in the fact that it relates straightway to an object (for in such a
signification we would not be able to justify its objective validity); rather,
it is only a schema, ordered in accordance with the conditions of the
greatest unity of reason, for the concept of a thing in general, which

a Gedankenwesen; beings of sophistical reason

605

A67o/B 698

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A671 / B 699

A672 / B 700

serves only to preserve the greatest systematic unity in the empirical use
of our reason, in that one derives the object of experience, as it were,
from the imagined object of this idea as its ground or cause. Then it is
said, e.g., that the things in the world must be considered as if they had
gotten their existence from a highest intelligence. In such a way the idea
is only a heuristic and not an ostensive concept; and it shows not how an
object is constituted but how, under the guidance of that concept, we
ought to seek after the constitution and connection of objects of expe­
rience in general. Now if one can show that although the three kinds of
transcendental ideas (psychological,a cosmological and theological)
cannot be referred directly to any object corresponding to them and to
its determination, and nevertheless that all rules of the empirical use of
reason under the presupposition of such an object in the idea lead to
systematic unity, always extending the cognition of experience but never
going contrary to experience, then it is a necessary maxim of reason to
proceed in accordance with such ideas. And this is the transcendental
deduction of all the ideas of speculative reason, not as constitutive prin­
ciplesb for the extension of our cognition to more objects than experi­
ence can give, but as regulative principlesc for the systematic unity of
the manifold of empirical cognition in general, through which this cog­
nition, within its proper boundaries, is cultivated and corrected d more
than could happen without such ideas, through the mere use of the prin­
ciples of understanding.
I will make this clearer. Following the ideas named above as principles, e we will first (in psychology) connect all appearances, actions, and
receptivity of our mind to the guiding thread of inner experience as if
the mind were a simple substance that (at least in this life) persists in ex­
istence with personal identity, while its states - to which the states of
the body belong only as external conditions - are continuously chang­
ing. Then second (in cosmology) we have to pursue the conditions of
the inner as well as the outer appearances of nature through an investi­
gation that will nowhere be completed, as if nature were infinite in
itself and without a first or supreme member - although, without deny­
ing, outside of all appearances, the merely intelligible primary grounds
for them, we may never bring these grounds into connection with ex­
planations of nature, because we are not acquainted with them at all.
Finally and thirdly, (in regard to theology) we have to consider every-

a

b

The first edition reads "the psychological

.

.

.

"

Principien
, Principien
d berichtigt; the first edition reads "berechtigt" (justified).
, Principien
606

Section VII. Critique of all speculative theology

thing that might ever belong to the context of possible experience as if
this experience constituted an absolute unity, but one dependent
through and through, and always still conditioned within the world of
sense, yet at the same time as if the sum total of all appearances (the
world of sense itself) had a single supreme and all-sufficient ground
outside its range, namely an independent, original, and creative reason,
as it were, in relation to which we direct every empirical use of our reason in its greatest extension as if the objects themselves had arisen from
that original image of all reason. That means: it is not from a simple
thinking substance that we derive the inner appearances of our soul, but
from one another in accordance with the idea of a simple being; it is not
from a highest intelligence that we derive the order of the world and its
systematic unity, but rather it is from the idea of a most wise cause that
we take the rule that reason is best off using for its own satisfaction
when it connects up causes and effects in the world.
Now there is not the least thing to hinder us from assuming these
ideas as objective and hypostatic, except only the cosmological ones,
where reason runs up against an antinomy when it tries to bring this
about (the psychological and theological ideas contain nothing of that
sort at all). For there is no contradiction in them, so how could anyone
dispute their objective reality, since he knows just as little about their
possibility in denying it as we do in affirming it? Nevertheless, in order
to assume something it is not enough that there is no positive hindrance
to doing so, and we cannot be allowed to introduce mere thought­
entities a that transcend all our concepts, though they contradict none
of them, as real and determinate objects merely on credit, just so that
speculative reason can complete its business as it likes. Thus they
should not be assumed in themselves, but their reality should hold only
as that of a schema of the regulative principleb for the systematic unity
of all cognitions of nature; hence they should be grounded only as analogues of real things, but not as things in themselves. We remove from
the object of an idea those conditions that limit our concept of the understanding, but that also make it possible for us to be able to have a
determinate concept of any thing. And now we are thinking of a Something about which we have no concept at all of how it is in itself, but
about which we think a relation to the sum total of appearances, which
is analogous to the relation that appearances have to one another.
If, accordingly, we assume such ideal entities, then we do not really
extend our cognition beyond the objects of possible experience, but
c

Gedankenwesen
Princip
, Objecte
a

b

607

A673 / B 701

A674/B 702

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A 675 I B 703

A6761 B 704

only extend the empirical unity of these objects a through the systematic
unity for which the idea gives us the schema; hence the idea holds not
as a constitutive but merely as a regulative principle. b For that we posit
a thing corresponding to the idea, a Something or a real being - by this
fact it is not said that we would extend our cognition of things with
transcendental concepts; this being is grounded only in the idea and not
in itself, hence only in order to express the systematic unity which is to
serve us as the standard for the empirical use of reason, without settling
anything about what the ground of this unity is, or about the inner
property of such a being on which, as cause, it rests.
Thus the transcendental and single determinate concept of God that
merely speculative reason gives us is in the most precise sense deistic,
i.e., reason does not furnish us with the objective validity of such a con­
cept, but only with the idea of something on which all empirical reality
grounds its highest and necessary unity, and which we cannot think ex­
cept in accordance with the analogy of an actual substance that is the
cause of all things according to laws of reason; of course this is insofar
as we undertake to think it as a particular object at all, and do not, con­
tent with the mere idea of the regulative principle of reason, rather
prefer to set aside the completion of all conditions of thought as too ex­
travagantd for human understanding; but that is not consistent with the
aim of a perfect systematic unity in our cognition, to which reason at
least sets no limits.
Hence now it happens that if I assume a divine being, I do not have
the least concept either of the inner possibility of such a highest perfection or of the necessity of its existence; but then I can deal satisfac­
torily with all other questions concerning the contingent, and reason
can obtain the most perfect satisfaction in regard to the greatest unity
for which it is searching in its empirical use, but not in regard to the
presupposition itself; this proves that it is reason's speculative interest
and not its insight which justifies it in starting from a point lying so
far beyond its sphere in order to consider its objects in one complete
whole.
Now here, regarding one and the same presupposition, a distinction
reveals itself between ways of thinking which is rather subtle but never­
theless of great importance for transcendental philosophy. I can have a
satisfactory reason for assuming something relatively (suppositio relativa)
without being warranted in assuming it absolutely (suppositio absoluta).
This distinction is pertinent when we have to do merely with a regulaa Objecte

b

Princip
, Princip
d uberschwenglich
608

Section VII. Critique of all speculative theology

tive principle/ which we recognize as necessary, but whose source we do
not know,b and for which we assume a supreme ground merely with the
intention of thinking the universality of the principlec all the more de­
terminately, as, e.g., when I think as existing a being that corresponds to
a mere and indeed transcendental idea. For here I can never assume the
existence of this thing in itself, because none of the concepts through
which I can think any object determinately will attain to it, and the conditions for the objective validity of my concepts are excluded by the idea
itself. The concepts of reality, substance, causality, even that of necessity
in existence have, beyond their use in making possible the empirical
cognition of an object, no significance at all which might determine any
object.d They can therefore be used for explaining the possibility of
things in the world of sense, but not the possibility of a world-whole
itself, because this ground of explanation would have to be outside the
world and hence it would not be an object of a possible experience. Now
I can nevertheless assume such an incomprehensible being, the object of
a mere idea, relative to the world of sense, though not in itself. For if the
greatest possible empirical use of my reason is grounded on an idea (that
of systematic complete unity, about which I will have more to say
presently), which in itself can never be presented adequately in experience, even tllOugh it is unavoidably necessary for approximating to the
highest possible degree of empirical unity, then I am not only warranted
but even compelled to realize this idea, i.e., to posit for it an actual object, but only as a Something in general with which I am not acquainted
at all and to which, as a ground of that systematic unity and in relation
to that, I give such properties as are analogous to the concepts of the understanding in their empirical use. Thus according to the analogy of realities in the world, of substances, causality, and necessity, I will think of
a being that possesses all of these in their highest perfection, and since
this idea rests merely on my reason, I am able to think this being as selfsufficient reason, which is the cause of the world-whole through ideas
of the greatest harmony and unity; thus I leave out all conditions limiting the idea, so as - under the auspicese of such an original ground - to
make possible systematic unity of the manifold in the world-whole and,
by means of this unity, the greatest possible empirical use of reason, by
seeing all combinations as if they were ordained by a highest reason of
which our reason is only a weak copy. Then I think this highest reason
through mere concepts, which really have their application only in the
a

Princip

h erkennen

, Princip
d Object
, Schutze
609

A67 7 ! B 705

A678! B 706

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A 679/ B 707

A680/ B 708

world of sense; but since I put that transcendental presupposition to no
other use but a relative one - namely that it should give the substratum
for the greatest possible unity of experience - I may very well think a
being that I distinguish from the world through properties which be­
long solely to the world of sense. For by no means do I require, nor am
I warranted in requiring, cognition of this object of my idea as to what
it might be in itself; for I have no concepts for that, and even the concepts of reality, substance, causality, indeed even necessity in existence,
lose all meaninga and are empty titles for concepts without any content
when with them I venture outside the field of sense. I think only the re­
lationb which a being, in itself unknown to me, has to the greatest sys­
tematic unity of the world-whole, and this is solely in order to make it
into the schema of a regulative principle< for the greatest possible em­
pirical use of my reason.
If we now cast our glance over the transcendental object of our idea,
then we see that we cannot presuppose its actuality in accordance with
the concepts of reality, substance, causality, etc., in itself, because these
concepts have not the least application to something that is entirely dif­
ferent from the world of sense. Thus reason's suppositiond of a highest
being as the supreme cause is thought merely relatively, on behalf of the
systematic unity of the world of sense, and it is a mere Something in the
idea, of which we have no concept of what it is in itself. This also ex­
plains why, in relation to that which is given to the senses as existing,
we need the idea of a being which is necessary in itself, but can never
have the least concept of this being and its absolute necessity.
Now we can place the result of the entire Transcendental Dialectic
clearly before our eyes, and precisely determine the final aim of the
ideas of pure reason, which become dialectical only through misunder­
standing and carelessness. Pure reason is in fact concerned with noth­
ing but itself, and it can have no other concern, because what is given
to it is not objects to be unified for the concept of experience, but cog­
nitions of understanding to be unified for the concept of reason, i.e., to
be connected in one principle.' The unity of reason is the unity of a sys­
tem, and this systematic unity does not serve reason objectively as a
principle, extending it over objects, but subjectively as a maxim, in
order to extend it over all possible empirical cognition of objects.
Nevertheless, the systematic connection that reason can give to the em­
pirical use of the understanding furthers not only its extension but also
a Bedeutung
b

Relation
, Princip
d Supposition
, Princip
610

Section VII. Critique of all speculative theology

guarantees its correctness, and the principle a of such a systematic unity
is also objective but in an indeterminate way (principium vagum): b not as
a constitutive principle' for determining something in regard to its di­
rect object, but rather as a merely regulative principle and maxim for
furthering and strengthening the empirical use of reason by opening up
new paths into the infinite (the undetermined) with which the under­
standing is not acquainted, yet without ever being the least bit contrary
to the laws of its empirical use.
But reason cannot think this systematic unity in any other way than
by giving its idea an object, which, however, cannot be given through
any experience; for experience never gives an example of perfect systematic unity. Now this being of reason (ens rationis ratiocinatae)d is, to
be sure, a mere idea, and is therefore not assumed absolutely and in itself as something actual, but is rather taken as a ground only problematically (because we cannot reach it through any concepts of the
understanding), so as to regard all the connection of things in the world
of sense as if they had their ground in this being of reason; but solely
with the intention of grounding on it the systematic unity that is indispensable to reason and conducive in every way to empirical cognition
of the understanding but can never be obstructive to it.
One mistakes the significance of this idea right away if one takes it to
be the assertion, or even only the presupposition, of an actual thinge to
which one would think of ascribing the ground for the systematic con­
stitution of the world; rather, one leaves it entirely open what sort of
constitution in itself this ground, which eludes our concepts, might
have, and posits an idea only as a unique standpoint from which alone
one can extend the unity that is so essential to reason and so salutary to
the understanding; in a word, this transcendental thing is merely the
schema of that regulative principle! through which reason, as far a s it
can, extends systematic unity over all experience.
The first objectg of such an idea is I myself, considered merely as
thinking nature (soul). If I want to seek out the properties with which a
thinking thing exists in itself, then I have to ask experience, and I can­
not even apply any of the categories to this object except insofar as its
schema is given in sensible intuition. By this means, however, I will
never attain to a systematic unity of all the appearances of inner sense.
Thus instead of the concept of experience (of that which the soul actua

b
,

d

Princip
vague principle

Princip
"being of reason reasoned," i.e., an entity created by reason functioning rationally.

Sache
f Princip
g Object
,

611

A 68 I I B 709

A682 / B 7 I O

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A683 / B 7 I I

A 684/ B 7 1 2

ally is), which cannot lead us very far, reason takes the concept of the
empirical unity of all thought, and, by thinking this unity uncondition­
ally and originally, it makes out of it a concept of reason (an idea) of a
simple substance, unchangeable in itself (identical in personality),
standing in community with other real things outside it - in a word, the
concept of a simple self-sufficient intelligence. With this, however, rea­
son has nothing before its eyes except principles a of the systematic unity
in explaining the appearances of the soul, namely by considering all de­
terminations as in one subject, all powers, as far as possible, as derived
from one unique fundamental power, all change as belonging to the
states of one and the same persisting being, and by representing all ap­
pearances in space as entirely distinct from the actions of thinking.
That simplicity of substance, etc., ought to be only the schema for this
regulative principle,b and it is not presupposed as if it were the real
ground of properties of the soul. For these properties could rest on en­
tirely different grounds, with which we are not acquainted at all, just as
we might not really be able to cognize the soul at all through these as­
sumed predicates even if we let them hold of it absolutely, since they
constitute a mere idea that cannot be represented in concreto at all. Now
nothing but advantage can arise from such a psychological idea, if only
one guards against letting it hold as something more than a mere idea,
i.e., if one lets it hold merely relative to the systematic use of reason in
respect of the appearances of our soul. For then empirical laws of cor­
poreal appearances, which are of an entirely different species, will not
be mixed up in the explanation of what belongs merely toC inner sense;
then no windy hypotheses about the generation, destruction or palin­
genesis'2' of souls, etc., will be admitted; a consideration of this object
of inner sense as a whole will d therefore be instituted, and this will not
be mixed up with properties of any different kind; moreover, the inves­
tigation of reason will be directed to carrying through the grounds of
explanation in this subject as far as possible on the basis of a single principle;e all of this is best effected through such a schema just as if it were
an actual being - indeed, it can be effected only and solely in this way.
The psychological idea can also signity nothing other than the schema
of a regulative concept. For if I wanted only to ask whether the soul is
not in itself of a spiritual nature, this question would have no sense at
all. For through such a concept I would take away not merely corporeal
nature, but all nature whatever, i.e., all predicates of any possible expea Principien

b

Princip
for; the first edition reads "vor" (before).
d wird; this word is missing in the first edition.
Princip
C

C

612

Section VII. Critique of all speculative theology

rience, hence all conditions for thinking an object for such a concept,
which alone and solely makes it possible for one to say that it has any
sense.
The second regulative idea of merely speculative reason is the con­
cept of the world in general. For nature is really the single given objecta
in regard to which reason needs regulative principles.b This nature is
twofold: either thinking nature or corporeal nature. Yet to think of the
latter as regards its inner possibility, i.e., to determine the application of
the categories to it, we do not need any idea, i.e., any representation
transcending experience; no such representation is possible in regard to
it, because here we are guided merely by sensible intuition - not as with
the fundamental psychological concept (the I), which contains a priori
a certain form of thinking, namely its unity. Thus for pure reason there
is nothing left to us except nature in general, and the completeness of
conditions in it in accordance with some one principle.c The absolute
totality of the series of these conditions in the derivation of their members is an idea which of course can never come about fully in the empirical use of reason, but nevertheless serves as a rule for the way we
ought to proceed in regard to them: namely that in the explanation of
given appearances (in a regress or ascent), we ought to proceed as if the
series were in itself infinite, i.e., proceed in indefinitum;'22 but where
reason itself is considered as the determining cause (in the case of freedom), hence in the case of practical principles,d we should proceed as if
we did not have before us an objecte of sense but one of pure understanding, where the conditions can no longer be posited in the series of
appearances, but are posited outside it, and the series of states can be
regarded as if it began absolutely (through an intelligible cause); all this
proves that the cosmological ideas are nothing but regulative principles/ and are far from positing, as it were constitutively, an actual totality in such series. The rest one can seek in its place in the Antinomy
of Pure Reason. 1 2 3
The third idea of pure reason, which contains a merely relative sup­
positiong of a being as the sole and all-sufficient cause of all cosmological series, is the rational concept of God. We do not have the least
reason to assume absolutely (to supposeh in itself) the object of this
idea; for what could enable or even justify us in believing or asserting a
a Object
b Principien
Princip
d Principien
Object
f Principien
g Supposition
h supponieren
C

C

613

A68S / B 7 1 3

A686 / B 71 4

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A687/ B 7 I 5

being having the highest perfection, and its nature as necessarily exis­
tent, merely on the basis of its concept, were it not the world in relation
to which alone this suppositiona can be necessary? And that shows
clearly that the idea of that being, like all speculative ideas, means noth­
ing more than that reason bids us consider every connection in the
world according to principles b of a systematic unity, hence as if they
had all arisen from one single all-encompassing being, as supreme and
all-sufficient cause. From this it is clear that here reason could aim at
nothing except its own formal rule in the extension of its empirical use,
but never at an extension of it beyond all the boundaries of empiri­
cal use, consequently, that under this idea there does not lie hidden any
constitutive principle< for its use directed to possible experience.
This highest formal unity that alone rests on concepts of reason is
the purposive unity of things; and the speculative interest of reason
makes it necessary to regard every ordinance in the world as if it had
sprouted from the intention of a highest reason. Such a principle,d
namely, opens up for our reason, as applied to the field of experience,
entirely new prospects for connecting up things in the world in accor­
dance with teleological laws, and thereby attaining to the greatest
systematic unity among them. The presupposition of a supreme intel­
ligence, as the sole cause of the world-whole, but of course merely in
the idea, can therefore always be useful to reason and never harmful to
it. Thus if in regard to the shape e of the earth (which is round but
somewhat flattened), * we presuppose the mountains, seas, etc., to be
wise intentions of a world-author, then in this way we can make a lot of
discoveries. As long as we keep to this presupposition as a regulative
principle,! then even error cannot do us any harm. For then nothing

* The advantage created by the earth's spherical shape is well known; but few
know that its flattening as a spheroid is the only thing preventing the eleva­
tions on the dry land, or even smaller mountains perhaps thrown up by earth­
quakes, from continuously displacing the earth's axis and perhaps appreciably
so in not too long a time; this might happen if the swelling out of the earth at
the equator were not such a mighty mountain that the centrifugal forceg of
every other mountain can never noticeably bring it out of place in regard to
its axis. And yet without scruples we explain this wise arrangement from the
equilibrium of the formerly fluid mass of the earth.
a Supposition

b Principien
, Princip
d Princip
, Figur
f Princip
g Schwung
614

Section VII. Critique of all speculative theology

more can follow from it in any case than that where we expected a tele­
ological connection (nexusfinalis), a merely mechanical or physical one
(nexus effectivus) is to be found; in such a case we only miss one more
unity, but we do not ruin the unity of reason in its empirical use. But
even this setback cannot at all affect the law itself, in its universal and
teleological aim. For although an anatomist can be convicted of error
when he relates some organ of an animal's body to an end which, as one
can clearly show, does not follow from it, it is nevertheless quite impossible to prove in any one case that a natural arrangement, whatever
it might be, has no end at all. Hence (medical) physiology extends its
very limited empirical acquaintance with the ends served by the structure of an organic body through a principle prompted merely by pure
reason - and this to such an extent that it is assumed confidently, and
with the agreement of all who understand the matter, that everything
in an animal has its utility and good aim; this presupposition, if it is
supposed to be constitutive, goes much further than previous observation can justify; from this it can be seen that it is nothing but a regulative principle a of reason for attaining to the highest systematic unity by
means of the idea of the purposive causality of the supreme cause of the
world, as if this being, as the highest intelligence, were the cause of
everything according to the wisest aim.
But if we depart from this restriction of the idea to a merely regulative
use, then reason will be misled in several ways, by forsaking the ground
of experience, which has to contain the markers for its course, and by
venturing beyond experience into the incomprehensible and inscrutable,
in whose heights it necessarily becomes dizzy because from this standpoint it sees itself entirely cut off from every use attuned to experience.
The first mistake that arises from using the idea of a highest being
not merely regulatively but (contrary to the nature of an idea) constitu­
tively, is that of lazy reason (ignava ratio).* One can use this term for
any principle that makes one regard his investigation into nature, whatever it may be, as absolutely complete, so that reason can take a rest, as
though it had fully accomplished its business. Hence the psychological
idea too, if it is used as a constitutive principleb to explain the appear* This is what the ancient dialecticians called the sophismc which goes as follows: If it is your fate to recover from this illness, then that will happen
whether you employ a physician or not. I24 Cicero says that this way of inferring gets its name from the fact that if one follows it, then that would leave
reason without any use in life. I2 5 This is why I record the sophistical argument
of pure reason using the same name.
a Princip
b
C

Princip
Trugschlufl (deceptive inference).
615

A 688 / B 7 1 6

A 689/ B 7 I 7

A 690/ B 7 I 8

A 689/B7 I 7

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A69I / B 7 1 9

A 692 / B 720

ances of our soul, and then further to extend our cognition of this sub­
ject beyond all experience (to its state after death), makes things very
convenient for reason, but also completely ruins and destroys every nat­
ural use of reason according to the guidance of experience. Thus the
dogmatic spiritualist explains the unity of the person, which consists in
remaining unaltered through all changes in its states, by the unity of a
thinking substance, which he thinks he perceives immediately in the
"I," and he explains the interest we take in things that are supposed to
come to pass only after our death from the consciousness of the imma­
terial nature of our thinking subject, etc.; he presumes to dispense with
all the natural investigation of the cause of these inner appearances of
ours from physical grounds of explanation by, as it were, passing over
the immanent sources of cognition in experience through an edict as it
were of a transcendent reason, which makes things comfortable for him
but also forfeits all insight. These disadvantageous consequences come
to view even more clearly in the case of the dogmatism of our idea of
a highest intelligence and the theological system of nature (physicotheology) that is falsely grounded on it. For there all the ends showing
themselves in nature, which are often only made up by us, serve only to
make it extremely convenient for us in our search for causes, so that in­
stead of seeking them in the universal laws of the mechanism of matter,
we appeal right away to the inscrutable decree of the highest wisdom,
and regard the toil of reason as completed when in fact the use of rea­
son has been completely dispensed with - a use which finds its guiding
thread nowhere unless it is provided to us by the order of nature and
the series of alterations according to their internal and more general
laws. This mistake can be avoided if we do not consider from the view­
point of ends merely a few parts of nature, e.g., the distribution of dry
land, its structure and the constitution and situation of mountains, or
even only the organization of the vegetable and animal kingdoms, but
if we rather make the systematic unity of nature entirely universal in
relation to the idea of a highest intelligence. For then we make a pur­
posiveness in accordance with universal laws of nature the ground, from
which no particular arrangement is excepted, but arrangements are des­
ignated only in a way that is more or less discernible by us; then we have
a regulative principlea of the systematic unity of a teleological connec­
tion, which, however, we do not determine beforehand, but may only
expect while pursuing the physical-mechanical connection according to
universal laws. For only in this way can the principleb of purposive unity
always extend the use of reason in regard to experience without doing
damage to it in any individual case.
a Princip
b

Princip
616

Section VII. Critique of all speculative theology

The second mistake that arises from the misinterpretation of the in­
tended principlea of systematic unity is that of perverted reason (perversa
ratio, VOTEQOV :1TQaTEQov rationis). b The idea of systematic unity should
only serve as a regulative principle for seeking this unity in the combi­
nation of things in accordance with universal laws of nature, and to the
extent that something of the sort is encountered in an empirical way,
one should believe oneself to have approximated to completeness in its
use, though one obviously will never reach it. Instead of this, one re­
verses the matter and begins by grounding things hypostatically on the
actuality of a principled of purposive unity; because it is entirely in­
scrutable, the concept of such a highest intelligence is determined an­
thropomorphically, and then one imposes ends on nature forcibly and
dictatorially, instead of seeking for them reasonably on the path of
physical investigation, so that teleology, which ought to serve only to
supplement the unity of nature in accordance with universal laws, not
only works to do away with it, but even deprives reason of its end,
namely proving the existence o f such an intelligent supreme cause from
nature according to this end. For if one cannot presuppose the highest
purposiveness in nature a priori, i.e., as belonging to the essence of nature, then how can one be assigned to seek it out and, following the ladder of purposiveness, to approach the highest perfection of an author of
nature as a perfection which is absolutely necessary, hence cognizable a
priori? The regulative principle' demands that systematic unity be presupposed absolutely as a unity of nature that is recognized not only
empirically but also a priori, though still indeterminately, and hence as
following from the essence of things. But if ! antecedently make a highest ordering being the ground, then the unity of nature will in fact be
done away with. For then this unity is entirely foreign and contingent
in relation to the nature of things, and it cannot be cognized from the
universal laws thereof. Hence arises a vicious circle in one's proof,
where one presupposes what really ought to have been proved.
To take the regulative principle! of the systematic unity of nature for
a constitutive one, and to presuppose hypostatically, as a cause, what is
only in the idea as a ground for the harmonious use of reason, is only
to confuse reason. The investigation of nature takes its own course, following only the chain o f natural causes according to their universal
laws in conformity to the idea of an author, to be sure, yet not to derive from that idea the purposiveness it is seeking everywhere, but
a

Princip

b

perverse reason, later first of reason,, 6

,
d
,
f

Princip
Princip
Princip
Princip
617

A693 / B 7 2 I

A694/ B 7 2 2

Doctrine of Elements. Pt.

A695/ B 723

A 696 / B 72 4

A 695 /B 72 3

II.

Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

rather in order to cognize its existence from this purposiveness which
it seeks in the essence of natural things, where possible in the essence
of all things in general as well, and hence to cognize it as absolutely
necessary. VV'hether or not this latter may succeed, the idea always re­
mains correct, and so does its use, if it has been restricted to the con­
ditions of a merely regulative principle. a
Complete purposive unity is perfection (absolutely considered). If we
do not find this in the essence of the things which constitute the whole
object of experience, i.e., all our objectively valid cognition, hence in
universal and necessary laws of nature, then how will we infer straight­
away from this to the idea of a highest and absolutely necessary per­
fection in an original being, which is the origin of all causality? The
greatest systematic unity, consequently also purposive unity, is the
school and even the ground of the possibility of the greatest use of
human reason. Hence the idea of it is inseparably bound up with the
essence of our reason. The very same idea, therefore, is legislative for us,
and thus it is very natural to assume a corresponding legislative reason
(intelleetus archetypus) from which all systematic unity of nature, as the
object of our reason, is to be derived.
In the Antinomy of Pure Reason, we took the opportunity to say that
all questions that pure reason poses must absolutely be answerable, I 27
and that the excuse of the limits of our cognition, which in many ques­
tions of nature is as unavoidable as it is proper, cannot be permitted
here, because here the questions are not laid before us by the nature of
things but only through the nature of reason, and they are solely about
its internal arrangement. We can now confirm this assertion, which
seemed bold at first glance, regarding the two questions in which pure
reason has its greatest interest, and thereby bring our consideration of
reason's dialectic to full completion.
Thus if one asks (in respect of a transcendental theology)* first
whether there is anything different from the world which contains the
ground of the world order and its connection according to universal
laws, then the answer is: Without a doubt. For the world is a sum of
appearances, and so there has to be some transcendental ground for it,
* What I have said earlier about the psychological idea and its proper vocationb
as a principle' for the merely regulative use of reason exempts me from any
particularly lengthy discussion of the transcendental illusion according to
which that systematic unity of all manifoldness of inner sense is represented
hypostatically. The procedure here is very similar to the one that the Critique
observes in regard to the theological ideal.
Princip
Bestimmung
, Princip

a

b

618

Section VII. Critique of all speculative theology

i.e., a ground thinkable merely by the pure understanding. If the ques­
tion is second whether this being is substance, of the greatest reality,
necessary, etc., then I answer that this question has no significance
at all. For all the categories through which I attempt to frame a con­
cept of such an object are of none but an empirical use, and they have
no sense at all when they are not applied to objectsa of possible experi­
ence, i.e., to the world of sense. Outside this field they are mere titles
for concepts, which one might allow, but through which one can also
understand nothing. Finally, if the question is third whether we may
not at least think this being different from the world in accordance with
an analogy with objects of experience, then the answer is by all means,
but only as object in the idea and not in reality, namely, only insofar as
i t is a substratum, unknown to us, of the systematic unity, order, and
purposiveness of the world's arrangement, which reason has to make
into a regulative principleb of its investigation of nature. Still more, in
this idea we can allow certain anthropomorphisms, which are expedient
for the regulative principle we are thinking of, without fear or blame.
For it is always only an idea, which is by no means related directly to a
being different from the world, but rather referred to the regulative
principled of the world's systematic unity, but only by means of a schema
of that unity, namely of a supreme intelligence that is its author through
wise intentions. What this original grounde of the world's unity is in itself ought not to have been thought through this, but rather only how
we ought to use it, or rather its idea, in relation to the systematic use of
reason in regard to things in the world.
But in this way (one will continue to ask) can we nevertheless assume
a unique wise and all-powerful world author? Without any doubt; and
not only that, but we must presuppose such a being. But then do we ex­
tend our cognition beyond the field of possible experience? By no
means. For we have only presupposed a Something, of which we have
no concept at all of what it is in itself (a merely transcendental object);
but, in relation to the systematic and purposive order of the world's
structure, which we must presuppose when we study nature, we have
thought this being, which is unknown to us, in accordance with the
analogy with an intelligence (an empirical concept); i.e., in regard to
the ends and the perfection on which those ends are grounded, we have
given it just those properties that could contain the ground for such a
systematic unity in accordance with the conditions of our reason. This
a

b

Objecte

Princip
, Princip
d Princip
, Urgrund, following the first edition; the second edition reads " Ungrund" (abyss).

619

A697 / B 72 5

A 698/ B 726

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

A 6991 B 7 2 7

A 7001 B 728

idea is therefore grounded entirely respective to the use our reason
makes of it in the world. But if we wanted to grant it absolute objec­
tive validity, then we would be forgetting that we are thinking solely of
a being in the idea; and, since we began with a ground which is not de­
terminable at all through considering the world, we would thereby
place ourselves in no position to apply this principlea suitably to the
empirical use of reason.
But (one will ask further) in such a way can I still make use of the
concept and the presupposition of a highest being in rationally consid­
ering the world? Yes; that was really why things were grounded on this
idea of reason. Yet may I regard purpose-likeb orderings as intentions,
b y deriving them from the divine will, though o f course mediately
through predispositions toward them set up in the world? Yes, you can
do that too, but only in such a way that it is all the same to you whether
someone says that the divine wisdom has ordered everything to its
supreme ends, or that the idea of the highest wisdom is a regulative one
in the investigation of nature and a principle of the systematic and
purposive unity thereof in accordance with universal laws, even where
we are not aware of it; i.e., where you do perceive purposive unity, it
must not matter at all whether you say, "God has wisely willed it so" or
"Nature has wisely so ordered it." For the greatest systematic and pur­
posive unity, which your reason demands as a regulative principled to
ground all investigation of nature, was precisely what justified you in
making the idea of a highest intelligence the ground as a schema of the
regulative principle;e and however much purposiveness you encounter
in the world in accordance with that principle! so much confirmation
do you have for the rightness of your idea; since, however, the prin­
cipleg you are thinking of has no other aim than to seek out the neces­
sary and greatest possible unity of nature, we will have the idea of a
highest being to thank for this so far as we reach it, but we can never
get around the universal laws of nature, so as to regard this purposiveness of nature as contingent and hyperphysical in its origin, without
contradicting ourselves, since it was only by taking these laws as our aim
that things were grounded on the idea; for we were not justified in as­
suming a being above nature with the properties we are thinking of, but
only in grounding things on the idea of this being in order to regard apn

b

,
d
,
f
g

Princip
zweckdhnliche
Princip
Princip
Princip
Princip
Princip

620

Section VII. Critique of all speculative theology

pearances" as systematically connected to one another in accordance
with the analogy of a causal determination.
Just for this reason we are also justified in thinking of the world­
cause in the idea not only according to a subtle anthropomorphism
(without which nothing at all could be thought about itb), namely as a
being that has understanding, liking and disliking, and desire and will
in conformity with them, etc., but also in ascribing to that being infi­
nite perfection far transcending what we could justify on the basis of
our empirical acquaintance with the world-order. For the regulative
law of systematic unity would have us study nature as if systematic and
purposive unity together with the greatest possible manifoldness were
to be encountered everywhere to infinity. For although we may light on
or reach only a little of this perfection of the world, yet it belongs to
the legislation of our reason to seek for it and presume it everywhere,
and it must always be advantageous for us, and can never become disadvantageous, to institute our consideration of nature in accordance
with this principle.c But under this way of representing the idea of a
highest world-author as a ground, it is clear that I ground things not on
the existence or acquaintance with this being, but only on its idea; thus
I really derive nothing from this being, but only from the idea of it, i.e.,
from the nature of the things in the world in accordance with such an
idea. It also seems to have been a certain, though to be sure undeveloped, consciousness of the genuine use of this rational concept of ours
which occasioned the modest and reasonabled language used by philosophers of all ages in talking of the wisdom and providence of nature,
and of divine wisdom, as if they were expressions with the same
meaninge - preferring, indeed, the first expression as long as they have
to do merely with speculative reason, because this restrains us from the
presumption of making a bigger assertion than we are warranted in
making, and at the same time points reason back to its proper field,
which is nature.
Thus pure reason, which initially seemed to promise us nothing less
than an extension of our knowledge! beyond all the boundaries of ex­
perience, if we understand it rightly contains nothing but regulative
a

b

In Kant's text, this noun is preceded by der, an article that is either genitive or dative,
leaving the verb "regard" with no direct object; with Erdmann, we read die, putting this
noun in the accusative.
ibm, whose only natural referent grammatically would be "anthropomorphism"; Wille
suggests that the text be amended to read ibr, making the referent "the world cause."

, Princip
billige
, Bedeutung
f Kenntnisse
d

62 1

A 70I

I B7 29

Doctrine of Elements. Pt.

A 702 / B 730

II.

Div. II. Bk. II. Ch. III

principles,a which certainly command greater unity than the empirical
use of the understanding can reach, but just because they put the goal
we are approaching so far off, they bring this goal to the highest degree
of agreement with itself through systematic unity; but if one misunder­
stands them and takes them to be constitutive principlesb of transcen­
dent cognition, then they produce a dazzling but deceptive illusion,
persuasion and imaginary knowledge, and thus also eternal contradic­
tions and controversies.
* * *

A 703 / B 73 I

Thus all human cognition begins with intuitions, goes from there to
concepts, and ends with ideas. Although in regard to all three elements
it has sources of cognition a priori which seem at first glance to scorn
the boundaries of all experience, a completed critique convinces us that
reason in its speculative use can with these elements never get beyond
the field of possible experience, and that the proper vocation' of this
supreme faculty of cognition is to employ all its methods and principles
only in order to penetrate into the deepest inwardness of natureI28 in
accordance with all possible principles d of unity, of which the unity of
ends is the most prominent, but is never to fly across the boundaries
of nature, outside which there is for us nothing but empty space. Of
course the critical investigation, in the Transcendental Analytic, of all
propositions that can extend our cognition beyond all actual experience
has sufficiently convinced us that they can never lead to anything mote
than a possible experience, and if one were not mistrustful of even the
clearest of abstract e and general doctrines/ and if charming and plau­
sible prospects did not lure us to reject the compulsion of these doc­
trines, then of course we might have been able to dispense with our
painstaking examination of the dialectical witnesses which a transcen­
dent reason brings forward on behalf of its pretensions; for we already
knew beforehand with complete certainty that all their allegations,
while perhaps honestly meant, had to be absolutely null and void, be­
cause they dealt with informationg which no human being can ever get.
Yet because there will never be an end to discussion unless one gets to
the bottom of the illusion that can fool even the most rational, and also
because the resolution of all our transcendental cognition into its elePrincipien
Principien
, Bestimmung
d Principien
n

b

, The first edition reads " . . . even the clearest or abstract and general . . . "

f Lehrsdtze
g Kundschaft
622

Section VII. Critique of all speculative theology

ments (as a study of our inner nature) not only has in itself no small
value, but is even a duty for a philosopher, it was not only necessary to
carry out an exhaustive examination of the vain elaborations of specula­
tive reason in their entirety down to its primary sources, but also - since
dialectical illusion is here not only deceptive for our judgment but also,
owing to the interest we take in these judgments, is also alluring and
natural, and so will b e present in the future too - it was advisable to
draw up an exhaustive dossier, as it were, of these proceedings and store
it in the archives of human reason, so as to prevent future errors of a
similar kind.

623

A 704
B 732

.'

II.
Transcendental Doctrine ofMethod

alf I regard the sum total of all cognition of pure and speculative reason as an edifice for which we have in ourselves at least the idea, then I
can say that in the Transcendental Doctrine of Elements we have made
an estimate of the building materials and determined for what sort of
edifice, with what height and strength, they would suffice. It turned out,
of course, that although we had in mind a tower that would reach the
heavens, the supply of materials sufficed only for a dwelling that was just
roomy enough for our business on the plane of experience and high
enough to survey it; however, that bold undertaking had to fail from lack
of material, not to mention the confusion of languages that unavoidably
divided the workers over the plan and dispersed them throughout the
world, leaving each to build on his own according to his own design. I
Now we are concerned not so much with the materials as with the plan,
and, having been warned not to venture some arbitrary and blind project that might entirely exceed our entire capacity,b yet not being able to
abstain from the erection of a sturdy dwelling, we have to aim at an edifice in relatione to the supplies given to us that is at the same time suited
to our needs.
By the transcendental doctrine of method, therefore, I understand
the determination of the formal conditions of a complete system of
pure reason. With this aim, we shall have to concern ourselves with a
discipline, a canon, an architectonic, and finally a history of pure reason,2 and will accomplish, in a transcendental respect, that which, under
the name of a practical logic,3 with regard to the use of the understanding in general, the schools sought but accomplished only badly;
for since general logic is not limited to any particular kind of cognition
of the understanding (e.g., not to the pure cognition of the understanding) nor to certain objects, it cannot, without borrowing knowledge from other sciences, do more than expound titles for possible
methods and technical expressions that are used in regard to that which
is systematic in all sorts of sciences, which first makes the novice familiar with names the significance and use of which he will only learn in
the future.
a

b

Throughout this part of the work there are minor changes in orthography between the
two editions, very few of which affect the translation. Only the few that do will be
noted.

Vermijgen
, Verhdltnis

627

A 707 / B 73 5

A 708/ B 736

The Transcendental Doctrine of Method
First Chapter
The discipline ofpure reason 4

A 708/B 736

A 709/ B 7 3 7

A 7 IO/ B 7 3 8

In humanity's general lust for knowledge, negative judgments, which
are negative not merely on the basis of logical form but also on the basis
of their content, do not stand in high regard: one regards them as jeal­
ous enemies of our unremitting drive straining for the expansion of our
cognition, and i t almost takes an apology to earn toleration for them,
let alone favor and esteem.
To be sure, logically one can express negatively any propositions that
one wants, but in regard to the content of our cognition in general, that
is, whether it is expanded or limited by a judgment, negative judgments
have the special job solely of preventing error. Hence even negative
propositions, which are to prevent a false cognition, are often quite true
yet empty where error is never possible, i.e., not appropriate for their
purpose, and for this reason are often ridiculous, like the proposition of
the scholastic orator that Alexander could not have conquered any lands
without an army.
But where the limits of our possible cognition are very narrow, where
the temptation to judge is great, where the illusion that presents itself
is very deceptive, and where the disadvantage of error is very serious,
there the negative in instruction, which serves merely to defend us
from errors, is more important than many a positive teaching by means
of which our cognition could be augmented. The compulsion through
which the constant propensity to stray from certain rules is limited and
finally eradicated is called discipline. It is different from culture,
which would merely produce a skill without first canceling out another
one that is already present. In the formation of a talent, therefore,
which already has b y itself a tendency to expression, discipline will
make a negative contribution,* but culture and doctrine a positive one.
* I am well aware that in the language of the schools the name of discipline is
customarily used as equivalent to that of instruction." But there are so many
d

Unterweisung

628

The discipline of pure reason

Everyone will readily grant that the temperament as well as the tal­
ents that would allow a free and unlimited movement (such as imagina­
tion and wit) require discipline in many respects. But that reason, which
is properly obliged to prescribe its discipline for all other endeavors,
should have need of one itself, may certainly seem strange, and in fact
reason has previously escaped such a humiliation only because, given
the pomp and the serious mien with which it appears, no one could eas­
ily come to suspect it of frivolously playing with fancies instead of con­
cepts and words instead of things.
No critique of reason in empirical use was needed, since its principles
were subjected to a continuous examination on the touchstone of experience; it was likewise unnecessary in mathematics, whose concepts
must immediately be exhibited in concreto in pure intuition, through
which anything unfounded and arbitrary instantly becomes obvious.
But where neither empirical nor pure intuition keeps reason in a visible
track, namely in its transcendental use in accordance with mere concepts, there it so badly needs a discipline to constrain its propensity to
expansion beyond the narrow boundaries of possible experience and to
preserve it from straying and error that the entire philosophy of pure
reason is concerned merely with this negative use. Individual errors can
be remedied through censure and their causes through critique. But
where, as in pure reason, an entire system of delusions and deceptions
is encountered, which are connected with each other and unified under
common principles,a there a quite special and indeed negative legislation seems to be required, which under the name of a discipline erects,
as it were, a system of caution and self-examination out of the nature of
reason and the objects of its pure use, before which no false sophistical
illusion can stand up but must rather immediately betray itself, regardless of all grounds for being spared.
But it is well to note that in this second main part of the transcendental critique I do not direct the discipline of pure reason to the content but rather only to the method of cognition from pure reason. The
former has already taken place in the Doctrine of Elements. But there
is so much that is similar in the use of reason, whatever object it may be
other cases where the first expression, as correction/ must carefully be con­
trasted to teaching,' and the nature of things itself also makes it necessary to
preserve the only suitable expression for this difference, that I wish that this
word would never be allowed to be used in anything but the negative sense.
a Principien

b Zucbt
, Belebrung

629

A 7 1 1 / B 739

A 7 1 2 / B 740

Doctrine of Method.

Ch. I.

Sec. I

applied to, and yet, insofar as it would be transcendental, it is so essen­
tially different from all other uses, that without the admonitory nega­
tive doctrine of a discipline especially aimed at them the errors could
not be avoided that must necessarily arise from the inappropriate pur­
suit of such methods, which might be suitable for reason elsewhere but
not here.

First Chapter
First Section
The discipline of pure reason in dogmatic use.

A 7 I 3 /B 741

A 7 14/ B 742

Mathematics gives the most resplendent example of pure reason hap­
pily expanding itself without assistance from experience. Examples are
contagious, especially for the same faculty, which naturally flatters itself
that it will have the same good fortune in other cases that it has had in
one. Hence pure reason hopes to be able to expand itself in as happy
and well grounded a way in its transcendental use as it succeeded in
doing in its mathematical use, by applying the same method in the for­
mer case that was of such evident utility in the latter. It is therefore very
important for us to know whether the method for obtaining apodictic
certainty that one calls mathematical in the latter science is identical
with that by means of which one seeks the same certainty in philosophy,
and that would there have to be called dogmatic.
Philosophical cognition is rational cognition from concepts,
mathematical cognition that from the construction of concepts.5 But
to construct a concept means to exhibit a priori the intuition corre­
sponding to it. For the construction of a concept, therefore, a non­
empirical intuition is required, which consequently, as intuition, is an
individual object,a but that must nevertheless, as the construction of a
concept (of a general representation), express in the representation uni­
versal validity for all possible intuitions that belong under the same
concept. Thus I construct a triangle by exhibiting an object corre­
sponding to this concept, either through mere imagination, in pure in­
tuition, or on paper, in empirical intuition, but in both cases completely
a priori, without having had to borrow the pattern for it from any experience. The individual drawn figure is empirical, and nevertheless
serves to express the concept without damage to its universality, for in
the case of this empirical intuition we have taken account only of the ac­
tion of constructing the concept, to which many determinations, e.g.,
those of the magnitude of the sides and the angles, are entirely indif­
ferent, and thus we have abstracted from these differences, which do
not alter the concept of the triangle.
a Object
630

The discipline of pure reason in dogmatic use

Philosophical cognition thus considers the particular only in the uni­
versal, but mathematical cognition considers the universal in the par­
ticular, indeed even in the individual, yet nonetheless a priori and by
means of reason, so that just as this individual is determined under cer­
tain general conditions of construction, the object of the concept, to
which this individual corresponds only as its schema, must likewise be
thought as universally determined.
The essential difference between these two kinds of rational cogni­
tion therefore consists in this form, and does not rest on the difference
in their matter, or objects. Those who thought to distinguish philoso­
phy from mathematics by saying of the former that it has merely qual­
ity while the latter has quantity as its object a have taken the effect for
the cause. The form of mathematical cognition is the cause of its per­
taining solely to quanta. For only the concept of magnitudes can be
constructed, i.e., exhibited a priori in intuition, while qualities cannot be
exhibited in anything but empirical intuition. Hence a rational cognition of them can be possible only through concepts. Thus no one
can ever derive an intuition corresponding to the concept of reality
from anywhere except experience, and can never partake of it a priori
from oneself and prior to empirical consciousness. The shape of a cone
can be made intuitive without any empirical assistance, merely in accordance with the concept, but the color of this cone must first be given
in one experience or another. I cannot exhibit the concept of a cause in
general in intuition in any way except in an example given to me by experience, etc. Now philosophy as well as mathematics does deal with
magnitudes, e.g., with totality, infinity, etc. And mathematics also occupies itself with the difference between lines and planes as spaces with
different quality, and with the continuity of extension as a quality of it.
But although in such cases they have a common object, the manner of
dealing with it through reason is entirely different in philosophical than
in mathematical consideration. The former confines itself solely to general concepts, the latter cannot do anything with the mere concepts but
hurries immediately to intuition, in which it considers the concept in
concreto, although not empirically, but rather solely as one which it has
exhibited a priori, i.e., constructed, and in which that which follows
from the general conditions of the construction must also hold generally of the objecrl' of the constructed concept.
Give a philosopher the concept of a triangle, and let him try to find
out in his way how the sum of its angles might be related to a right
angle. He has nothing but the concept of a figure enclosed by three
straight lines, and in it the concept of equally many angles. Now he may
a

b

Object
Objecte
63 1

A 7 I S / B 743

A 7 I 6 / B 744

Doctrine of Method. Ch. I. Sec. I

A 7 1 7 / B 745

A 7 1 8 / B 746

reflect on this concept as long as he wants, yet he will never produce
anything new. He can analyze and make distinct the concept of a
straight line, or of an angle, or of the number three, but he will not
come upon any other properties that do not already lie in these con­
cepts. But now let the geometer take up this question. He begins at
once to construct a triangle. Since he knows that two right angles to­
gether are exactly equal to all of the adjacent angles that can be drawn
at one point on a straight line, he extends one side of his triangle, and
obtains two adjacent angles that together are equal to two right ones.
Now he divides the external one of these angles by drawing a line par­
allel to the opposite side of the triangle, and sees that here there arises
an external adjacent angle which is equal to an internal one, etc.6 In
such a way, through a chain of inferences that is always guided by intu­
ition, he arrives at a fully illuminating and at the same time general so­
lution of the question.
But mathematics does not merely construct magnitudes (quanta), as
in geometry, but also mere magnitude (quantitatem), as in algebra,a
where it entirely abstracts from the constitution of the object that is to
be thought in accordance with such a concept of magnitude.7 In this
case it chooses a certain notation for all construction of magnitudes in
general (numbers), as well as addition, subtraction, extraction of roots,
etc./ and, after it has also designated the general concept of quantities
in accordance with their different relations,' it then exhibits all the pro­
cedures through which magnitude is generated and altered in accor­
dance with certain rules in intuition; where one magnitude is to be
divided by another, it places their symbols together in accordance with
the form of notation for division, and thereby achieves by a symbolic
construction equally well what geometry does by an ostensive or geo­
metrical construction (of the objects themselves), which discursive cog­
nition could never achieve by means of mere concepts.
"What might be the cause of the very different situations in which
these two reasoners find themselves, one of whom makes his way in ac­
cordance with concepts, the other in accordance with intuitions that
he exhibits a priori for the concepts? According to the transcendental
fundamental doctrine expounded above, this cause is clear. At issue
here are not analytic propositions, which can be generated through
mere analysis of concepts (here the philosopher would without doubt
have the advantage over his rival), but synthetic ones, and indeed ones
that are to be cognized a priori. For I am not to see what I actually think
" Buchstabenrechung
b Following Erdmann, closing the parenthesis after "numbers" instead of "subtra:ction";
also moving the "etc." following "subtraction" to its present position.

, Verhiiltnissen
632

The discipline of pure reason in dogmatic use

in my concept of a triangle (this is nothing further than its mere defin­
ition), rather I am to go beyond it to properties that do not lie in this
concept but still belong to it. Now this is not possible in any way but
by determining my object in accordance with the conditions of either
empirical or pure intuition. The former would yield only an empirical
proposition (through measurement of its angles), which would contain
no universality, let alone necessity, and propositions of this sort are not
under discussion here. The second procedure, however, is that of
mathematical and here indeed of geometrical construction, by means
of which I put together in a pure intuition, just as in an empirical one,
the manifold that belongs to the schema of a triangle in general and
thus to its concept, through which general synthetic propositions must
be constructed.a
In vain, therefore, would I reflect on the triangle philosophically, i.e.,
discursively, without thereby getting any further than the mere definition with which, however, I had to begin. There is, to be sure, a transcendental synthesis from concepts alone, with which in turn only the
philosopher can succeed, but which never concerns more than a thing
in general, with regard to the conditions under which its perception
could belong to possible experience. But in mathematical problems the
question is not about this nor about existenceb as such at all, but about
the properties of the objects in themselves, solely insofar as these are
combined with the concept of them.
In these examples we have only attempted to make distinct what a
great difference there is between the discursive use of reason in accor­
dance with concepts and its intuitive use through the construction of
concepts. Now the question naturally arises, what is the cause that
makes such a twofold use of reason necessary, and by means of which
conditions can one knowc whether only the first or also the second takes
place?
All of our cognition is in the end related to possible intuitions: for
through these alone is an object given. Now an a priori concept (a non­
empirical concept) either already contains a pure intuition in itself, in
which case it can be constructed; or else it contains nothing but the syn­
thesis of possible intuitions, which are not given a priori, in which case
one can well judge synthetically and a priori by its means, but only discursively, in accordance with concepts, andd never intuitively through
the construction of the concept.
Now of all intuition none is given a priori except the mere form of apa The word construiert is missing in the first edition.
b Existenz
, erkennen
d und in the second edition replaces aber in the first.
633

A 7 1 9 / B 747

A 720/ B 748

Doctrine of Method.

Ch. 1.

Sec. I

pearances, space and time, and a concept of these, as quanta, can be ex­
hibited a priori in pure intuition, i.e., constructed, together with either
its quality (its shape) or else merely its quantity (the mere synthesis of
the homogeneous manifold) through number. The matter of appear­
ances, however, through which things in space and time are given to us,
can be represented only in perception, thus a posteriori. The only con­
cept that represents this empirical content of appearances a priori is
the concept of the thing in general, and the synthetic a priori cognition
of this can never yield a priori more than the mere rule of the synthesis
of that which perception may give a posteriori, but never the intuition of
the real object, since this must necessarily be empirical.
Synthetic propositions that pertain to things in general, the intuition
of which cannot be given a priori, are transcendental. Thus transcen­
dental propositions can never be given through construction of con­
cepts, but only in accordance with a priori concepts. They contain
merely the rule in accordance with which a certain synthetic unity of
A 72 I i B 749

A 7 2 z 1 B 750

that which cannot be intuitively represented a priori (of perceptions)
should be sought empirically. They cannot, however, exhibit a single
one of their concepts a priori in any case, but do this only a posteriori, by
means of experience, which first becomes possible in accordance with
those synthetic principles.
If one is to judge synthetically about a concept, then one must go be­
yond this concept, and indeed go to the intuition in which it is given. For
if one were to remain with that which is contained in the concept, then
the judgment would be merely analytic, an explanation of what is actu­
ally contained in the thought. However, I can go from the concept to the
pure or empirical intuition corresponding to it in order to assess it in con­
creto and cognize a priori or a posteriori what pertains to its object. The
former is rational and mathematical cognition through the construction
of the concept, the latter merely empirical (mechanical) cognition,
which can never yield necessary and apodictic propositions. Thus I could
analyze my empirical concept of gold without thereby gaining anything
more than being able to enumerate what I actually think by means of this
word, which would certainly produce a logical improvement in my cog­
nition, but no augmentation or supplementation of it. But I can take the
matter that goes by this name and initiate perceptions of it, which will
provide me with various synthetic though empirical propositions. The
mathematical concept of a triangle I would construct, i.e., give in intu­
ition a priori, and in this way I would acquire synthetic but rational cog­
nition. However, if I am given the transcendental concept of a reality,
substance, force, etc., it designates neither an empirical nor a pure intu­
ition, but only the synthesis of empirical intuitions (which thus qnnot
be given a priori), and since the synthesis cannot proceed a priori to the
intuition that corresponds to it, no determining synthetic proposition
634

The discipline of pure reason in dogmatic use

but only a principle of the synthesis* of possible empirical intuitions can
arise from it. A transcendental proposition is therefore a synthetic ratio­
nal cognition in accordance with mere concepts, and thus discursive,
since through it all synthetic unity of empirical cognition first becomes
possible, but no intuition is given by it a priori.
There are thus two uses of reason, which, regardless of the universality o f cognition and its a priori generation, which they have i n common, are nevertheless very different in procedure, precisely because
there are two components to the appearance through which all objects
are given to us: the form of intuition (space and time), which can be
cognized and determined completely a priori, and the matter (the physical), or the content, which signifies a something that is encountered in
space and time, and which thus contains an existence and corresponds
to sensation. With regard to the latter, which can never be given in a
determinate manner except empirically, we can have nothing a priori except indeterminate concepts of the synthesis of possible sensations insofar as they belong to the unity of apperception (in a possible
experience). With regard to the former we can determine our concepts
a priori in intuition, for we create the objects themselves in space and
time through homogeneouso synthesis, considering them merely as
quanta. The former is called the use of reason in accordance with concepts, because we can do nothing further than bring appearances under
concepts, according to their real content, which cannot be determined
except empirically, i.e., a posteriori (though in accord with those concepts as rules of an empirical synthesis); the latter is the use of reason
through construction of concepts, because these concepts, since they already apply to an a priori intuition, for that very reason can be determinately given in pure intuition a priori and without any empirical data. To
decide about everything that exists (a thing in space or time) whether
and how far it is or is not a quantum, whether existence or the lack
thereof must be represented in it, how far this something (which fills
space or time) is a primary substratum or mere determination, whether
it has a relation of its existence to something else as cause or effect, and

* By means of the concept of cause I actually go beyond the empirical concept
of an occurrence (that something happens), but not to the intuition that exhibits the concept of cause in concreto, rather to the time-conditions in general
that may be found to be in accord with the concept of cause in experience. I
therefore proceed merely in accordance with concepts, and cannot proceed
through construction of concepts, since the concept is a rule of the synthesis
of perceptions, which are not pure intuitions and which therefore cannot be
given a priori.

a gleichfo'rmige

635

A 72 3 / B 7 5 ]

A 724/B 752

A 72 2 / B 750

Doctrine of Method. Ch. 1. Sec. I

A725/B 753

A 726/B 754

finally whether with regard to its existence it is isolated or in reciprocal
dependence with others; to decide about the possibility, actuality, and
necessity of its existence or the opposites thereof: all of this belongs to
rational cognition from concepts, which is called philosophical. But
to determine an intuition a priori in space (shape), to divide time (dura­
tion), or merely to cognize the universal in the synthesis of one and the
same thing in time and space and the magnitude of an intuition in gen­
eral (number) which arises from that: that is a concern of reason
through construction of the concepts, and is called mathematical.
The great good fortune that reason enjoys by means of mathematics
leads entirely naturally to the expectation that, if not mathematics itself,
then at least its method will also succeed outside of the field of magnitudes, since i t brings all o f its concepts to intuitions that i t can give a
priori and by means of which, so to speak, it becomes master over na­
ture; while pure philosophy, on the contrary, fumbles around in nature
with discursive a priori concepts without being able to make their real­
ity intuitive a priori and by that means confirm it. Further, the masters
of this art do not seem to lack any confidence in themselves, nor does
the public seem to lack any great expectations of their talents, should
they ever concern themselves about this at all. For since they have
hardly ever philosophized about mathematics (a difficult business!),
they have never given a thought to the specific difference between the
two uses of reason. Rules used customarily and empirically, which they
have borrowed from common reason, count as axioms with them. From
whence the concepts of space and time with which they busy themselves
(as the only original quanta) might be derived, they have never con­
cerned themselves, and likewise it seems to them to be useless to inves­
tigate the origin of pure concepts of the understanding and the scope of
their validity; rather, they merely use them. In all of this they proceed
quite correctly, as long as they do not overstep their appointed bound­
aries, namely those of nature. But they slip unnoticed from the field of
sensibility to the insecure territory of pure and even transcendental
concepts, where they are allowed the ground neither to stand nor swim
(instabilis tellus, innabilis unda), a and can make only perfunctory steps of
which time does not preserve the least trace, while on the contrary their
progress in mathematics is a high road on which even their most remote
descendants can still stride with confidence.
a "Earth that cannot be stood upon, water that cannot be swum in" (Ovid, Metamorphoses,

1. r 6). The line comes from Ovid's opening image of chaos, in which there are no fixed
boundaries: "If there was land and sea, there was no discernible shoreline, no way to
walk on the one, or swim or sail in the other. In the gloom and murk, vague shapes ap­
peared for a moment, loomed, and then gave way, unsaying themselves and the world
as weI!." (The Metamorphoses of Ovid, tr. David R. Slavitt [Baltimore: Johns Hopkins,
1994], p. r)

636

The discipline of pure reason in dogmatic use

Since we have made it our duty to determine the bounds of pure rea­
son in transcendental use exactly and with certainty, but this sort of en­
deavor has the peculiarity that, in spite of the most pressing and clearest
warnings, it still always lets itself hope that it can stave off having to give
up entirely the effort to get beyond the bounds of experience into the
charming regions of the intellectual, it is therefore necessary to cut
away, as it were, the last anchor of a fantastical hope, and to show that
the pursuit of the mathematical method in this sort of cognition cannot
offer the least advantage, unless it is that of revealing its own nakedness
all the more distinctly, and revealing that mathematicsO and philosophy
are two entirely different things, although they offer each other their
hand in natural science, thus that the procedure of the one can never be
imitated by that of the other.
Mathematics is thoroughly grounded on definitions, axioms, and
demonstrations. I will content myself with showing that none of these
elements, in the sense in which the mathematician takes them, can be
achieved or imitated by philosophyjb and that by means of his method
the mathematician can build nothing in philosophy except houses of
cards, while by means of his method the philosopher can produce nothing in mathematics but idle chatter, while philosophy consists precisely
in knowing its bounds, and even the mathematician, if his talent is not
already bounded by nature and limited to his specialty, can neither reject its warnings nor disregard them.
I . On definitions.c,s As the expression itself reveals, to define prop­
erly means just to exhibit originallyd the exhaustive concept of a thing
within its boundaries.* Given such a requirement, an empirical con­
cept cannot be defined at all but only explicated. For since we have in
it only some marks of a certain kind of objects of the senses, it is never
certain whether by means of the word that designates the same object
* Exhaustiveness signifies the clarity and sufficiency ofmarks; boundaries, the
precision, that is, that there are no more of these than are required for the ex­
haustive concept; original, however, that this boundary-determination is not
derived from anywhere else and thus in need of a proof, which would make
the supposed definition' incapable of standing at the head of all judgments
about an object.
q

b

C

d

Meflkunst.
Substituting a semicolon for Kant's period.

Definitionen. In this passage Kant prefers the Latinate Definition because it is, as he will
argue, more precise in meaning than the German Erklarung. Throughout this para­
graph "definition" will translate Definition and "define," definiren, unless otherwise
noted.

urpsranglich
, Erklarung
637

A72 7 / B 7 5 5

Doctrine of Method. Ch. I. Sec. I

A 7 2 8 / B 756

A 729/ B 75 7

A 7 30/ B 75 8

one does not sometimes think more of these marks but another time
fewer of them. Thus in the concept of gold one person might think, be­
sides its weight, color, and ductility, its property of not rusting, while
another might know nothing about this. One makes use of certain
marks only as long as they are sufficient for making distinctions; new
observations, however, take some away and add some, and therefore the
concept never remains within secure boundaries. And in any case what
would be the point of defining such a concept? - since when, e.g., water
and its properties are under discussion, one will not stop at what is in­
tended by the word "water" but rather advance to experiments, and the
word, with the few marks that are attached to it, is to constitute only a
designation and not a concept of the thing; thus the putative definition
is nothing other than the determination of the word. Second, strictly
speaking no concept given a priori can be defined, e.g., substance, cause,
right, equity, etc. For I can never be certain that the distinct represen­
tation of a (still confused) given concept has been exhaustively devel­
oped unless I know that it is adequate to the object. But since the
concept of the latter, as it is given, can contain many obscure represen­
tations, which we pass by in our analysis though we always use them in
application, the exhaustiveness of the analysis of my concept is always
doubtful, and by many appropriate examples can only be made proba­
bly but never apodictically certain. Instead of the expression "defini­
tion" I would rather use that of exposition,a which is always cautious,
and which the critic can accept as valid to a certain degree while yet re­
taining reservations about its exhaustiveness. Since therefore neither
empirical concepts nor concepts given a priori can be defined, there re­
main none but arbitrarily thought ones for which one can attempt this
trick. In such a case I can always define my concept: for I must know
what I wanted to think, since I deliberately made it up, and it was not
given to me either through the nature of the understanding or through
experience; but I cannot say that I have thereby defined a true object.9
For if the concept depends upon empirical conditions, e.g., a chro­
nometer,b,IO then the object and its possibility are not given through this
arbitrary concept; from the concept I do not even know whether it has
an object, and my explanationc could better be called a declaration (of
my project) than a definition of an object. Thus there remain no other
concepts that are fit for being defined than those containing an arbi­
trary synthesis which can be constructed a priori, and thus only mathe­
matics has definitions. For the object that it thinks it also exhibits a
priori in intuition, and this can surely contain neither more nor less than
a Exposition
b

Schiffsuhr
, Erkliirung
638

The discipline of pure reason in dogmatic use

the concept, since through the explanationa of the concept the object
is originally given, i.e., without the explanation being derived from
anywhere else. The German language has for the expressions exposi­
tion, explication, declaration and definition b nothing more than the
one word "explanation,"c, I I and hence we must somewhat weaken the
stringency of the requirement by which we denied philosophical expla­
nations the honorary title of "definition," and limit this entire remark
to this, that philosophical definitions come about only as expositions of
given concepts, but mathematical ones as constructions of concepts
that are originally made, thus the former come about only analyti­
cally through analysis (the completeness of which is never apodicti­
cally certain), while the latter come about synthetically, and therefore
make the concept itself, while the former only explain it. From this it
follows:
a) That in philosophy one must not imitate mathematics in putting
the definitions first, unless perhaps as a mere experiment. For since they
are analyses of given concepts, these concepts, though perhaps only still
confused, come first, and the incomplete exposition precedes the com­
plete one, so that we can often infer much from some marks that we
have drawn from an as yet uncompleted analysis before we have arrived
at a complete exposition, i.e., at a definition; in a word, it follows that
in philosophy the definition, as distinctness made precise, must conelude rather than begin the work. * On the contrary, in mathematics we
do not have any concept at all prior to the definitions, as that through
which the concept is first given; it therefore must and also always can
begin with them.
b) Mathematical definitions can never err. For since the concept is
first given through the definition, it contains just that which the defin* Philosophy is swarming with mistaken definitions, especially those that actu­
ally contain elements for definition but are not yet complete. If one would not
know what to do with a concept until one had defined it, then all philoso­
phizing would be in a bad way. But since, however far the elements (of the
analysis) reach, a good and secure use can always be made of them, even im­
perfect definitions, i.e., propositions that are not really definitions but are true
and thus approximations to them, can be used with great advantage. In math­
ematics definitions belong ad esse,d in philosophy ad melius esse. Attaining them
is fine, but often very difficult. Jurists are still searching for a definition of
their concept of right.
e

a Erkliirung
h All Latinate words: "Exposition, Explikation, Deklaration und Definition. "

Erkliirung
d to the being

C

e

to the improvement of being

639

A 7 3 1 / B 759

Doctrine of Method. Ch. I. Sec. I

A 73 2 / B 760

B 76 I

A 73 3

ition would think through it. However, although nothing incorrect can
occur in its content, nevertheless sometimes, though to be sure only
rarely, there can be a defect in the form (of its dress), namely with re­
gard to precision. Thus the common explanation of the circle, that it is
a curved line every point of which is the same distance from a single
one (the center-point), contains the error of unnecessarily introducing
the determination curved. For it must be a particular theorem, which
can be deduced from the definition and easily proved, that every line
each point of which is equally distant from a single one is curved (no
part of it is straight). Analytical definitions, on the contrary, can err in
many ways, either by bringing in marks that really do not lie in the con­
cept or by lacking the exhaustiveness that constitutes what is essential
in definitions, since one cannot be so entirely certain of the complete­
ness of their analysis. For this reason the mathematical method of def­
inition cannot be imitated in philosophy.
2 . On axioms. These are synthetic a priori principles, insofar as they
are immediately certain. Now one concept cannot be synthetically yet
immediately combined with another, since for us to be able to go be­
yond a concept a third, mediating cognition is necessary. Now since
philosophy is merely rational cognition in accordance with concepts, no
principle is to be encountered in it that deserves the name of an axiom.
Mathematics, on the contrary, is capable of axioms, e.g., that three
points always lie in a plane, because by means of the construction of
concepts in the intuition of the object it can connect the predicates of
the latter a priori and immediately. A synthetic principle, on the contrary, e.g., the proposition that everything that happens has its cause,
can never be immediately certain from mere concepts, because I must
always look around for some third thing, namely the condition of time­
determination in an experience, and could never directly cognize such
a principle immediately from concepts alone. Discursive principles are
therefore something entirely different from intuitive ones, i.e., axioms.
The former always require a deduction, with which the latter can en­
tirely dispense, and, since the latter are on the same account self­
evident, which the philosophical principles, for all their certainty, can
never pretend to be, any synthetic proposition of pure and transcen­
dental reason is infinitely less obvious (as is stubbornly said) than the
proposition that Two times two is four. To be sure, in the Analytic, in
the table of the principles of pure understanding, I have also thought of
certain axioms of intuition; but the principle that was introduced there
was not itself an axiom, but only served to provide the principle a of the
possibility of axioms in general, and was itself only a principle from
concepts. For even the possibility of mathematics must be shown in
a

Principium
640

The discipline of pure reason in dogmatic use

transcendental philosophy. Philosophy thus has no axioms and can
never simply offer its a priori principles as such, but must content itself
with justifying their authority through a thorough deduction.
3 . On demonstrations.a Only an apodictic proof, insofar as it is in­
tuitive, can be called a demonstration. Experience may well teach us
what is, but not that it could not be otherwise. Hence empirical grounds
of proof cannot yield apodictic proof. From a priori concepts (in discur­
sive cognition), however, intuitive certainty, i.e., self-evidence,b can
never arise, however apodictically certain the judgment may otherwise
be. Thus only mathematics contains demonstrations, since it does not
derive its cognition from concepts, but from their construction, i.e.,
from the intuition that can be given a priori corresponding to the con­
cepts. Even the way algebraists proceed with their equations, from
which by means of reduction they bring forth the truth together with
the proof, is not a geometrical construction, but it is still a characteris­
tic construction,12 in which one displays by signs in intuition the con­
cepts, especially of relationsc of quantities, and, without even regarding
the heuristic, secures all inferences against mistakes by placing each of
them before one's eyes. Philosophical cognition, on the contrary, must
do without this advantage, since it must always consider the universal in
abstracto (through concepts), while mathematics can assess the universal
in concreto (in the individual intuition) and yet through pure a priori
intuition, where every false step becomes visible. Since they can only be
conducted by means of mere words (the object in thought), I would
therefore prefer to call the former acroamatic (discursive) proofs rather
than demonstrations, which, as the expression already indicates, proceed through the intuition of the object.
Now from all of this it follows that it is not suited to the nature of
philosophy, especially in the field of pure reason, to strut about with a
dogmatic gait and to decorate itself with the titles and ribbons of math­
ematics, to whose ranks philosophy does not belong, although it has
every cause to hope for a sisterly union with it. These are idle preten­
sions that can never succeed, but that instead countermand its aim
of revealing the deceptions of a reason that misjudges its own bound­
aries and of bringing the self-conceit of speculation back to modest but
thorough self-knowledged by means of a sufficient illumination of our
concepts. In its transcendental efforts, therefore, reason cannot look
ahead so confidently, as if the path on which it has traveled leads quite
directly to the goal, and it must not count so boldly on the premises
a Demonstrationen
b Evidenz
Verhdlnisse
d Selbsterkenntnis
[

641

A 7 34/ B 762

A 7 3 5 / B 763

Doctrine of Method. Ch. 1. Sec. I

A 736/B 764

A 7 3 7 / B 76 5

that ground it as if it were unnecessary for it frequently to look back
and consider whether there might not be errors in the progress of its in­
ferences to be discovered that were overlooked in its principles" and
that make it necessary either to determine them further or else to alter
them entirely.
I divide all apodictic propositions (whether they are demonstrable or
immediately certain) into dogmata and mathemata. A direct synthetic
proposition from concepts is a dogma; such a proposition through con­
struction of concepts, on the contrary, is a mathema. Analytic judg­
ments do not really teach us anything moreb about the object than what
the concept that we have of it already contains in itself, since they do
not expand cognition beyond the concept of the subject, but only elu­
cidate this concept. They cannot therefore properly be called dogmas
(a word which one could perhaps translate as theorems).c But in ac­
cordance with ordinary usage, of the two types of synthetic a priori
propositions only those belonging to philosophical cognition carry this
name, and one would hardly call the propositions of arithmetic or
geometry "dogmata." This usage thus confirms the explanation we have
given that only judgments from concepts, and not those from the con­
struction of concepts, can be called dogmatic.
Now all of pure reason in its merely speculative use contains not a
single direct synthetic judgment from concepts. For through ideas, as
we have shown, it is not capable of any synthetic judgments that would
have objective validity; through concepts of the understanding, however, it certainly erects secure principles, but not directly from con­
cepts, but rather always only indirectly through the relation of these
concepts to something entirely contingent, namely possible experi­
ence; since if this (something as object of possible experience) is pre­
supposed, then they are of course apodictically certain, but in them­
selves they cannot even be cognized a priori (directly) at all. Thus no
one can have fundamental insight into the proposition "Everything that
happens has its cause" from these given concepts alone. Hence it is not
a dogma, although from another point of view, namely that of the sole
field of its possible use, i.e., experience, it can very well be proved apo­
dictically. But although it must be proved, it is called a principle and
not a theoremd because it has the special property that it first makes
possible its ground of proof, namely experience, and must always be
presupposed in this.
Now if in the content of the speculative use of pure reason there are
a Principien
b

Emphasized in the first edition.

, Lehrspriiche
d Grundsatz und nicht Lehrsatz
642

The discipline of pure reason in polemical use

no dogmata at all, then any dogmatic method, whether it is borrowed
from the mathematicians or is of some special kind, is inappropriate per
se. For it merely masks mistakes and errors, and deceives philosophy,
the proper aim of which is to allow all of the steps of reason to be seen
in the clearest light. Nevertheless, the method can always be systematic. For our reason itself (subjectively) is a system, but in its pure use,
by means of mere concepts, only a system for research in accordance
with principles of unity, for which experience alone can give the matter. Of the special method of a transcendental philosophy, however,
nothing can here be said, since we are concerned only with a critique of
the circumstances of our faculty - whether we can build at all, and how
high we can carry our building with the materials that we have (the pure
a priori concepts).

A 7 3 8 / B 766

First Chapter
Second Section
The discipline of pure reason
with regard to its polemical use.
Reason must subject itself to critique in all its undertakings, and cannot
restrict the freedom of critique through any prohibition without dam­
aging itself and drawing upon itself a disadvantageous suspicion. Now
there is nothing so important because of its utility, nothing so holy, that
it may be exempted from this searching review and inspection, which
knows no respect for persons. The very existencea of reason depends
upon this freedom, which has no dictatorial authority, but whose claim
is never anything more than the agreement of free citizens, each of
whom must be able to express his reservations, indeed even his veto,
without holding back.
But now although reason can never refuse critique, it does not al­
ways have cause to shrink from it. Pure reason in its dogmatic (not
mathematical) use is not, however, so conscious of the most exact ob­
servation of its supreme laws that it can appear before the critical eye of
a higher and judicial reason except with modesty, indeed with a com­
plete renunciation of all pretensions to dogmatic authority.
But it is quite different if it does not have to deal with the censure of
a judge, but with the claims of its fellow citizens, against which it has
merely to defend itself. For since the latter would be just as dogmatic,
though in denial, as reason would be in its affirmation, there can be a
justification xm;' <'iv8go)Jtov,b which secures it against all interference
and provides it with a title to its possession that need shrink from no
a Existenz
b ad hominem (i.e., according to the person)
643

A 739/ B 767

Doctrine of Method. Ch. I. Sec. II

foreign pretensions, even though it cannot itself be sufficiently proved
xm:'

A 740 / B 768

A 741 / B 769

aA�8ELav. a

Now by the polemical use of pure reason I understand the defense of
its propositions against dogmatic denials of them. Here the issue is not
whether its own assertions might perhaps also be false, but only that no
one can ever assert the opposite with apodictic certainty (or even only
with greater plausibility). For in this case we do not hold our possession
merely by sufferance if we have a title to it, even if not a sufficient one,
and it is completely certain that no one can ever prove the unlawfulness
of this possession.
It is worrisome and depressing that there should be an antithetic of
pure reason at all, and that pure reason, though it represents the
supreme court of justice for all disputes, should still come into conflict
with itself. We had such an apparent antithetic of reason before us
above, '3 to be sure, but it turned out that it rested on a misunderstand­
ing, namely that of taking, in accord with common prejudice, appear­
ances for things in themselves, and then demanding an absolute
completeness in their synthesis, in one or another way (which were
both equally impossible), which could hardly be expected in the case of
appearances. There was thus in that case no real contradiction of rea­
son with itself in the propositions "The series of appearances given in
themselves has an absolutely first beginning" and "This series is ab­
solutely and in itself without any beginning"; for both propositions are
quite compatible, since appearances, as regards their existence (as ap­
pearances) in themselves are nothing at all, i.e., something contra­
dictory, and thus their presupposition must naturally be followed by
contradictory consequences.
However, such a misunderstanding cannot be alleged and the conflict
of reason thereby set aside if, say, it is asserted theistically There is a
highest being and asserted atheistically, on the contrary, There is no
highest being, or when it is asserted, in psychology, "Everything that
thinks is of absolutely persistent unity and therefore distinct from all
transitory material unity," against which someone else asserts, "The
soul is not an immaterial unity and cannot be exempted from all transi­
toriness." For the object of the question is here free of anything foreign
that contradicts its nature, and the understanding is concerned only
with things in themselves and not with appearances. There would
thus certainly be a genuine conflict here, if only pure reason had any­
thing to say on the negative side that would approximate the ground for
an assertion; for as far as the critique of the grounds of proof of the dog­
matic affirmations is concerned, one can very well concede it without
a according to the truth

644

The discipline of pure reason in polemical use

thereby giving up these propositions, which still have at least the inter­
est of reason in their behalf, to which the opponent cannot appeal at all.
I am not, to be sure, of the opinion that excellent and thoughtful men
(e.g., Sulzer),14 aware of the weakness of previous proofs, have so often
expressed, that one can still hope someday to find self-evident demon­
strations of the two cardinal propositions of our pure reason: there is a
God, and there is a future life. Rather, I am certain that this will never
happen. For whence will reason derive the ground for such synthetic assertions, which are not related to objects of experience and their inner
possibility? But it is also apodictically certain that no human being will
ever step forward who could assert the opposite with the least plausibility, let alone assert it dogmatically. For since he could only establish
this through pure reason, he would have to undertake to prove that a
highest being or the thinking subject in us as pure intelligence is impossible. But whence will he derive the knowledge that would justify
him in judging synthetically about things beyond all possible experience? We can therefore be entirely unconcerned that somebody will
someday prove the opposite; we therefore do not have to think up
scholastic proofs, but can always assume these propositions, which are
quite consistent with the speculative interest of our reason in its empirical use and are, moreover, the only means for uniting this with the
practical interest. For the opponent (who cannot here be considered a
mere critic) we have our non liqueta ready, which must unfailingly confound him, while we do not need to refute his retort, for we always have
in reserve the subjective maxims of reason, which he necessarily lacks,
and under their protection we can regard all his shadow-boxing with
tranquility and indifference.
Thus there is properly no antithetic of pure reason at all. For the only
battleground for it would have to be sought in the field of pure theol­
ogy and psychology; but this ground will bear no warrior in full armor
and equipped with weapons that are to be feared. He can only step for­
ward with ridicule and boasting, which can be laughed at like child's
play. This is a comforting remark, which gives reason courage again; for
on what else could it rely, if it, which is called to do away with all errors,
were itself ruined, without any hope for peace and tranquil possession?
Everything that nature itself arranges is good for some aim. Even
poisons serve to overpower other poisons which are generated in our
own humors,b and therefore may not be omitted from a complete col­
lection of cures (medicines). The objections against the suasions and
the self-conceit of our purely speculative reason are themselves put
a

b

I.e., the verdict "not proved."
Siiften, i.e., bodily liquids, or the four humors of premodern medicine.

645

A 742 / B 770

A 743 / B 77 1

Doctrine of Method. Ch. I. Sec. II

A 744/ B 77 2

A 745/ B 773

forth by the nature of this reason, and they must therefore have their
good vocationO and aim, which one must not cast to the wind. Why has
providence set many objects, although they are intimately connected
with our highest interest, so high that it is barely granted to us to en­
counter them in an indistinct perception, doubted even by ourselves,
through which our searching glance is more enticed than satisfied?
Whether it is useful to venture determinate answers with regard to such
views is at least doubtful, and perhaps even dangerous. But it is always
and without any doubt useful to grant reason full freedom in its search
as well as its examination, so that it can take care of its own interest
without hindrance, which is promoted just as much by setting limits to
its insights as by expanding them, and which always suffers if foreign
hands intervene to lead it forcibly to aims contrary to its natural path.
Thus let your opponent speak only reason, and fight him solely with
weapons of reason. For the rest, do not worry about the good causeb (of
practical reason), for that never comes into play in a merely speculative
dispute. In this case the dispute reveals nothing but a certain antinomy
of reason, which, since it depends upon its nature, must necessarily be
heard and examined. The conflict cultivates reason by the consideration
of its object on both sides, and corrects its judgment by thus limiting it.
What is here in dispute is not the marterC but the tone. For enough re­
mains left to you to speak the language, justified by the sharpest reason,
of a firm helief, even though you must surrender that of knowledge.
If one were to ask the cool-headed David Hume, especially consti­
tuted for equilibrium of judgment, "What moved you to undermine, by
means of reservations brooded on with so much effort, the persuasion,
so comforting and useful for humans, that the insight of their reason is
adequate for the assertion and determinate concept of a highest
being?",rs he would answer: "Nothing but the intention of bringing
reason further in its self-knowledge,d and at the same time a certain
aversion to the coercion which one would exercise against reason by
treating it as great and yet at the same time preventing a free confession
of its weaknesses, which become obvious to it in the examination of it­
self." But if, on the contrary, you were to ask Priestley, 1 6 who is devoted
only to the principles of the empirical use of reason and is disinclined
to all transcendental speculation, what sort of motives he had for tear­
ing down two such pillars of all religion as the freedom and immortal­
ity of our soul (the hope of a future life is according to him merely the
expectation of a miracle of resurrection), he, who is himself a pious and
Bestimmung
Sache, used in this sense throughout the remainder of this section.
, Sache
d Selbsterkenntnis
a

b

646

The discipline of pure reason in polemical use

eager teacher of religion, would not be able to answer anything other
than: the interest of reason, which is diminished by the exemption of
certain objects from the laws of material nature, which are the only ones
that we can know and determine with precision. It would seem unfair
to decry the latter, who knew how to unite his paradoxical assertion
with the aim of religion, and to do injury to a well-meaning man because he could not find his bearings as soon as he left the field of theory and nature. But this favor must likewise be shown to the no less
well-intentioned Hume, unblemished in his moral character, who cannot forsake his abstract speculation because he rightly holds that its object lies entirely beyond the boundaries of natural science, in the field
of pure ideas.
Now what is to be done, especially in regard to the danger which
seems to threaten the common good from this quarter? Nothing is
more natural, nothing more equitable than the decision that you have
to make. Let these people do what they want; if they exhibit talent, if
they exhibit deep and new research, in a word, if only they exhibit rea­
son, then reason always wins. If you grasp at means other than unco­
erced reason, if you cry high treason, if you call together the public,
which understands nothing of such subtle refinements, as if they were
to put out a fire, then you make yourself ridiculous. For the issue is not
what is advantageous or disadvantageous to the common good in these
matters, but only how far reason can get in its speculation in abstraction
from all interest, and whether one can count on such speculation at all
or must rather give it up altogether in favor of the practical. Thus instead of charging in with a sword, you should instead watch this conflict
peaceably from the safe seat of critique, a conflict which must be exhausting for the combatants but entertaining for you, with an outcome
that will certainly be bloodless and advantageous for your insight. For
it is quite absurd to expect enlightenment from reason and yet to prescribe to it in advance on which side it must come out. Besides, reason
is already so well restrained and held within limits by reason itself that
you do not need to call out the guard to put up civil resistance against
that party whose worrisome superiority seems dangerous to you. In this
dialectic there is no victory about which you would have cause to worry.
Reason also very much needs such a conflict, and it is to be wished
that it had been undertaken earlier and with unlimited public permis­
sion. For then a mature critique would have come about all the earlier,
at the appearance of which all of this controversy would have had to dis­
appear, since the disputants would have learned insight into the illusion
and prejudices that have disunited them.
There is a certain dishonesty a in human nature, which yet in the end,
a Unlauterkeit
647

A 746 / B 774

A 747 I B 775

Doctrine of Method. Ch. I. Sec. II
A 748 / B 776

A 749/ B 777

like everything else that comes from nature, must contain a tendency to
good purposes, namely an inclination to hide its true dispositions and
to make a show of certain assumed ones that are held to be good and
creditable. It is quite certain that through this propensity to conceal
themselves as well as to assume an appearance that is advantageous for
them humans have not merely civilized themselves but gradually mor­
alized themselves to a certain degree, since no one could penetrate the
mask of respectability, honorableness, and propriety, and one therefore
found a school for self-improvement in the supposedly genuine exam­
ples of the good which he saw around himself. Yet this tendency a to
pretend to be better than one is and to express dispositionsb that one
does not have serves as it were only provisionally to bring the human
being out of his crudeness and first allow him to assume at least the
manner of the good, which he recognizes; for later, when the genuine
principles have finally been developed and incorporated into his way of
thought, that duplicity must gradually be vigorously combated, for oth­
erwise it corrupts the heart, and good dispositions cannot grow among
the rampant weeds of fair appearance
I am sorry to perceive the very same dishonesty, misrepresentation,
and hypocrisy even in the utterances of the speculative way of thinking,
where human beings have far fewer hindrances to and no advantage at
all in forthrightly confessing their thoughts openly and unreservedly.
For what can be more disadvantageous to insight than falsely com­
municating even mere thoughts, than concealing doubts which we feel
about our own assertions, or giving a semblance of self-evidence to
grounds of proof which do not satisfy ourselves? As long as these
machinations arise merely from private vanity (which is usually the case
in speculative judgments, which have no special interest and are not
readily liable to apodictic certainty), then the vanity of others resists
them with public approval, and in the end things end up at the same
point to which they would have been brought, though much earlier, by
the most honest disposition and sincerity. But where the public holds
that subtle sophistsd are after nothing less than to shake the foundation
of the public welfare, then it seems not only prudent but also permissi­
ble and even creditable to come to the aid of the good cause with spu­
rious grounds rather than to give its putative enemies even the
advantage of lowering our voice to the modesty of a merely practical
conviction and necessitating us to admit the lack of speculative and apo­
dictic certainty. I should think, however, that there is nothing in the
" Anlage
b Gesinnungen
, des scho"nen Scheins
d Vernunftler
648

The discipline of pure reason in polemical use

world less compatible with the aim of maintaining a good cause than
duplicity, misrepresentation, and treachery. That in weighing up the rational grounds of a mere speculation everything must proceed honorably seems to be the least that one can demand. If one could securely
count even on this minimum, however, then the dispute of speculative
reason about the important questions of God, immortality (of the soul),
and freedom would either have long been decided or else would be
brought to an end very soon. Thus honesty of disposition often stands
in an inverse relationa to the goodness of the cause itself, and the latter
has perhaps more upright and sincere opponents than defenders.
I therefore presuppose readers who would not want a just cause to be
defended with injustice. Now with regard to them it is already decided
that, in accordance with our principles of critique, if one looks not to
what happens but to what properly should happen, then there really
must not be any polemic of pure reason. For how can two people con­
duct a dispute about a matter the reality of which neither of them can
exhibit in an actual or even in a merely possible experience, about the
idea of which he only broods in order to bring forth from it something
more than an idea, namely the actuality of the object itself? By what
means would they escape from the dispute, since neither can make his
cause directly comprehensible and certain, but rather can only attack
and refute that of his opponent? For this is the fate of all assertions of
pure reason: that since they go beyond the conditions of all possible
experience, outside of which no document of truth is ever to be encountered, yet at the same time must make use of the laws of the understanding, which are destined merely for empirical use but without
which no step may be taken in synthetic thought, they must always be
exposed to the enemy, and each can take advantage of the exposure of
his enemy.
One can regard the critique of pure reason as the true court of justice
for all controversies of pure reason; for the critique is not involved in
these disputes, which pertain immediately to objects,b but is rather set
the task of determining and judging what is lawfulc in reason in general
in accordance with the principles of its primary institution.
WIthout this, reason is as it were in the state of nature, and it cannot
make its assertions and claims valid or secure them except through war.
The critique, on the contrary, which derives all decisions from the
ground-rules of its own constitution, whose authority no one can doubt,
grants us the peace of a state of law,d in which we should not conduct
a Verhdltnisse
b Objecte
die Rechtsame
d eines gestzlichen Zustandes
C

649

A 7 5 0 / B 778

A 7 5 I I B 779

Doctrine of Method. Ch. 1. Sec. II

our controversy except by due process. What brings the quarrel in the
state of nature to an end is a victory, of which both sides boast, although
for the most part there follows only an uncertain peace, arranged by an
authority
in the middle; but in the state of law it is the verdict, which,
B
780
A752/
since it goes to the origin of the controversies themselves, must secure
a perpetual peace. And the endless controversies of a merely dogmatic
reason finally make it necessary to seek peace in some sort of critique of
this reason itself, and in a legislation grounded upon it; just as Hobbes
asserted, the state of nature is a state of injustice and violence, and one
must necessarily leave it in order to submit himself to the lawful coer­
cion which alone limits our freedom in such a way that it can be consis­
tent with the freedom of everyone else and thereby with the common
good.l?
To this freedom, then, there also belongs the freedom to exhibit the
thoughts and doubts which one cannot resolve oneself for public judg­
ment without thereupon being decried as a malcontent and a dangerous
citizen. This lies already in the original right of human reason, which
recognizes no other judge than universal human reason itself, in which
everyone has a voice; and since all improvement of which our condition
is capable must come from this, such a right is holy, and must not be
curtailed. It is also very unwise to denounce as dangerous certain dar­
ing assertions or audacious attacks upon that which already has on its
side the approval of the greatest and best part of the public: for that
A753 / B 78 1 would be to give them an importance that they should not have a t all.
When I hear that an uncommon mind has demonstrated away the free­
dom of the human will, the hope of a future life, and the existence of
God, I am eager to read the book, for I expect that his talent will ad­
vance my insights. I am completely certain in advance that he will not
have accomplished any of this, not because I believe myself already to
be in possession of incontrovertible proofs of these important proposi­
tions, but rather because the transcendental critique, which has revealed
to me the entire stock of our pure reason, has completely convinced me
that just as pure reason is entirely inadequate for affirmative assertions
in this field, even less will it know what to do in order to be able to as­
sert something negative about these questions. For where would the
supposed free-thinker derive his knowledge that, there is, e.g., no high­
est being? This proposition lies outside the field of possible experience,
and therefore also beyond the boundaries of all human insight. The
dogmatic defender of the good cause against this enemy I would not
read at all, because I know in advance that he will only attack the illu­
sory grounds of the other in order to gain entry for his own, and that
an everyday illusion does not give as much material for new observa­
tions as an alien one that is sensibly thought out. The enemy of reliA 7 541 B 782
gion, on the contrary, who is dogmatic in his own way, would give my
650

The discipline of pure reason in polemical use

critique desirable occupation and occasion for some refinement of its
principles, without his principles being anything to fear in the least.
But should not the young, at least, who are entrusted to academic in­
struction, be warned about writings of that sort, and be protected from
premature acquaintance with such dangerous propositions, until their
power of judgment has matured or rather the doctrine that one would
ground in them has become firmly rooted, in order vigorously to resist
all persuasion to the contrary, from wherever it might come?
If matters of pure reason had to be left to dogmatic procedures, and
if the opponents really had to be disposed of polemically, i.e., in such a
way that one must enter into battle armed with grounds of proof against
opposed assertions, then nothing would be more advisable in the short
run, but at the same time nothing more vain and fruitless in the long
run, than to place the reason of the young under tutelage for a long
time and protect it against seduction for at least as long. But when, sub­
sequently, either curiosity or the fashion of the age should put writings
of that sort in their hands, would that youthful persuasion then hold
fast? He who brings with him nothing but dogmatic weapons to resist
the attacks of his opponent, and who does not know how to develop the
hidden dialectic which lies no less in his own breast than in that of his
counterpart, sees illusory grounds that have the advantage of novelty
step forth against illusory grounds that no longer have that advantage
but which instead arouse the suspicion of having abused the credulity of
the young. He believes that he cannot better show that he has outgrown
the discipline of childhood than by setting himself above those well-intended warnings, and, accustomed to dogmatism, he takes long drafts
of the poison that dogmatically corrupts his principles.
Exactly the opposite of that which has just been recommended must
take place in academic education, although, to be sure, only under the
presupposition of a thorough instruction in the critique of pure reason.
For in order to put the principleso of the latter into practice as early as
possible and to show their adequacy against the greatest dialectical illu­
sion, it is absolutely necessary to direct the attacks that would be so
fearsome for the dogmatist against the reason of the student, which is
still weak but is enlightened by critique, and allow him to make the ex­
periment of examining the groundless assertions of his opponents one
by one in light of those principles. It cannot be difficult for him to dis­
solve those arguments into thin air, and thus he feels early his own
power to defend himself fully against harmful deceptions of that sort,
which must in the end lose all their plausibilityb for him. But now
whether the very same blows that bring down the edifice of the enemy
a

Principien

b Schein
651

A 7551 B 7 83

A 75 6 / B7 84

Doctrine of Method. Ch. 1. Sec. II

A 757 / B 78 5

must also be just as damaging to his own speculative structure, should
he think of erecting anything of the sort: about that he is entirely un­
concerned, because he does not need to dwell in that, but rather still has
before him a prospect in the practical field, where with good ground he
can hope for a firmer terrain on which to erect his rational and salutary
system.
There is accordingly no real polemic in the field of pure reason. Both
parties fence in the air and wrestle with their shadows, for they go be­
yond nature, where there is nothing that their dogmatic grasp can seize
and hold. Fight as they may, the shadows that they cleave apart grow
back together in an instant, like the heroes of Valhalla, to amuse them­
selves anew in bloodless battles.
However, there is also no permissible skeptical use of pure reason,
which one could call the principle of its neutrality in all controversies.
To incite reason against itself, to hand it weapons on both sides, and
then to watch its heated struggle quietly and scornfully is not seemly
from a dogmatic point of view, but rather has the look of a spiteful and
malicious cast of mind. If, however, one takes regard of the inexorable
deception and bragging of the sophists, who will not be moderated by
any critique, then there is really no other course but to set the boasting
of one side against another, which stands on the same rights, in order at
least to shock reason, by means of the resistance of an enemy, into rais­
ing some doubts about its pretensions and giving a hearing to the cri­
tique. But for reason to leave just these doubts standing, and to set out
to recommend the conviction and confession of its ignorance, not
merely as a cure for dogmatic self-conceit but also as the way in which
to end the conflict of reason with itself, is an entirely vain attempt, by
no means suitable for arranging a peaceful retirement for reason; rather
it is at best only a means for awaking it from its sweet dogmatic dreams
in order to undertake a more careful examination of its condition.
Since, however, this skeptical manner of withdrawing from a tedious
quarrel of reason seems to be the shortcut, as it were, for arriving at en­
during philosophical tranquility, or at least the high road that is happily
recommended by those who would give a philosophical appearance to
a scornful contempt for all investigations of this kind, I find it necessary
to exhibit this manner of thought in its true light.
On the
impossibility of a skeptical satisfaction
of pure reason that is divided against itself. IS
The consciousness of my ignorance (if this is not at the same. time
known to be necessary) should not end my inquiries, but is rather the

652

The discipline of pure reason in polemical use

proper cause to arouse them. All ignorance is either that of thingsa or
of the determination and boundaries of my cognition. Now if the igno­
rance is contingent, then in the first case it must drive me to investigate
the things (objects) dogmatically, in the second case to investigate the
boundaries of my possible cognition critically. But that my ignorance
is absolutely necessary and hence absolves me from all further investi­
gation can never be made out empirically, from observation, but only
critically, by getting to the bottom Ofb the primary sources of our cog­
nition. Thus the determination of the boundaries of our reason can
only take place in accordance with a priori grounds; its limitation, how­
ever, which is a merely indeterminate cognition of an ignorance that is
never completely to be lifted, can also be cognized a posteriori, through
that which always remains to be known even with all of our knowledge.
The former cognition of ignorance, which is possible only by means of
the critique of reason itself, is thus science, the latter is nothing but
perception, about which one cannot say how far the inference from it
might reach. If I represent the surface of the earth (in accordance with
sensible appearancey as a plate, I cannot know how far it extends. But
experience teaches me this: that wherever I go, I always see a space
around me in which I could proceed farther; thus I cognize the limits of
my actual knowledge of the earthd at any time, but not the boundaries
of all possible description of the earth. But if I have gotten as far as
knowing that the earth is a sphere and its surface the surface of a sphere,
then from a small part of the latter, e.g., from the magnitude of one degree, I can cognize its diameter and, by means of this, the complete
boundary, i.e., surface of the earth, determinately and in accordance
with a priori principles;' and although I am ignorant in regard to the objects that this surface might contain, I am not ignorant in regard to the
magnitude and limits of the domain that contains them.
The sum total of all possible objects for our cognition seems to us to
be a flat surface, which has its apparent horizon, namely that which
comprehends its entire domain and which is called by us the rational
concept of unconditioned totality. It is impossible to attain this empir­
ically, and all attempts to determine it a priori in accordance with a certain principle! have been in vain. Yet all questions of our pure reason
pertain to that which might lie outside this horizon or in any case at
least on its borderline.
a

b

Sachen

Erg;riindung

Schein
Erdkunde (i.e., geography)
, Principien
f Princip
C

d

653

A 7591 B 787

A 7601 B 788

Doctrine of Method. Ch. I. Sec. II

A 761 / B 789

A 762/ B 790

The famous David Hume was one of these geographers of human
reason, who took himself to have satisfactorily disposed of these ques­
tions by having expelled them outside the horizon of human reason,
which however he could not determine. He dwelt primarily on the prin­
ciple of causality, and quite rightly remarked about that that one could
not base its truth (indeed not even the objective validity of the concept
of an efficient cause in general) on any insight at all, i.e., a priori cogni­
tion, and thus that the authority of this law is not constituted in the least
by its necessity, but only by its merely general usefulness in the course
of experience and a subjective necessity arising therefrom, which he
called custom.I9 Now from the incapacity of our reason to make a use
of this principle that goes beyond all experience, he inferred the nullity
of all pretensions of reason in general to go beyond the empirical.
One can call a procedure of this sort, subjecting the facta of reason to
examination and when necessary to blame, the censorship of reason. It
is beyond doubt that this censorship inevitably leads to doubt about all
transcendent use of principles. But this is only the second step, which is
far from completing the work. The first step in matters of pure reason,
which characterizes its childhood, is dogmatic. The just mentioned
second step is skeptical, and gives evidencea of the caution of the power
of judgment sharpened by experience. Now, however, a third step is still
necessary, which pertains only to the mature and adult power!' of judg­
ment, which has at its basis firm maxims of proven universality, that,
namely, which subjects to evaluation not the facta of reason but reason
itself, as concerns its entire capacityc and suitability for pure a priori
cognitions; this is not the censorship but the critique of pure reason,
whereby not merely limits but rather the determinate boundaries of
it - not merely ignorance in one part or another but ignorance in
regard to all possible questions of a certain sort - are not merely sus­
pected but are proved from principles.d Thus skepticism is a resting­
place for human reason, which can reflect upon its dogmatic peregri­
nation and make a survey of the region in which it finds itself in order
to be able to choose its path in the future with greater certainty, but it
is not a dwelling-place for permanent residence; for the latter can only
be found in a complete certainty, whether it be one of the cognition of
the objects themselves or of the boundaries within which all of our cognition of objects is enclosed.
Our reason is not like an indeterminably extended plane, the limits of
a

zeugt; in A, zeigt. If zeugt is a misprint introduced in E, then the translation would be
"shows."

b miinnlichen

, Vermijgen
Principien

d

654

The discipline of pure reason in polemical use

which one can cognize only in general, but must rather be compared
with a sphere, the radius of which can be found out from the curvature
of an arc on its surface (from the nature of synthetic a priori proposi­
tions), from which its content and its boundary can also be ascertained
with certainty. Outside this sphere (field of experience) nothing is an
object" for it; indeed even questions about such supposed objects con­
cern only subjective principlesb of a thoroughgoing determination of
the relationsc that can obtain among the concepts of understanding in­
side of this sphere.
We are really in possession of synthetic a priori cognition, as is estab­
lished by the principles of understanding, which anticipate experience.
Now if someone cannot even make the possibility of these comprehen­
sible to himself, he may certainly begin to doubt whether they are really
present in us a priori; but he cannot declare this to be an impossibility
through the mere power of the understanding, and declare to be nuga­
tory all of the steps that reason takes in accordance with their guidance.
He can only say: If we had insight into their origin and authenticity,
then we would be able to determine the domain and the boundaries of
our reason; but until this has happened, all assertions of the latter are
shots in the dark. And in such a way a thoroughgoing doubt of all dogmatic philosophy that goes its way without any critique of reason itself
would be entirely well founded; yet reason cannot on that account be
entirely denied such a progress, if it is prepared and secured through
better groundwork.d For one thing, all the concepts, indeed all the questions that pure reason lays before us, lie not in experience but themselves in turn only in reason, and they must therefore be able to be
solved and their validity or nullity must be able to be comprehended.
We are, also, not justified in repudiating these problems under the excuse of our incapacity, as if their solution really lay in the nature of
things, and in rejecting further investigation, since reason has given
birth to these ideas from its own womb alone, and is therefore liable to
give account of either their validity or their dialectical illusion.
All skeptical polemicizing is properly directed only against the dog­
matist, who continues gravely along his path without any mistrust of his
original objective principles,' i.e., without critique, in order to unhinge
his concept! and bring him to self-knowledge.g In itself it settles noth­
ing at all about what we can know and what by contrast we cannot
Object
b Principien
, Verhdltnisse
d Grundlegung
, Principien
f Concept
g Selbsterkenntnis
a

655

A 763 / B 79I

Doctrine of Method. Ch. 1. Sec. II
A 7 64 / B 792

A 765 / B 793

A 766/ B

794

know. All failed dogmatic attempts of reason arefacta, which it is always
useful to subject to censure. But this cannot decide anything about rea­
son's expectations of hoping for better success in its future efforts and
making claims to that; mere censure can therefore never bring to an end
the controversy about what is lawfula in human reason.
Since Hume is perhaps the most ingenious of all skeptics, and is in­
controvertibly the preeminent one with regard to the influence that the
skeptical procedure can have on awakening a thorough examination of
reason, it is well worth the trouble to make clear, to the extent that is
appropriate to my aim, the path of his inferences and the aberrations of
such an insightful and valuable man, which nevertheless began on the
trail of truth.
Hume perhaps had it in mind, although he never fully developed it,
that in judgments of a certain kind we go beyond our concept of the ob­
ject. I have called this sort of judgment synthetic. There is no difficulty
about how, by means of experience, I can go beyond the concepts that I
possess thus far. Experience is itself a synthesis of perceptions that aug­
ments my concept which I have by means of one perception by the ad­
dition of others. But we also believe ourselves to be able to go beyond
our concepts a priori and to amplify our cognition. We attempt to do this
either through pure understanding, with regard to that which can at
least be an ob;ecti' of experience, or even through pure reason, with re­
gard to such properties of things, or even with regard to the existence of
such objects, that can never come forth in experience. Our skeptic did
not distinguish these two kinds of judgments, as he should have, and for
that reason held this augmentation of concepts out of themselves and the
parthenogenesis, so to speak, of our understanding (together with rea­
son), without impregnation by experience, to be impossible; thus he held
all of its supposedly a priori principles' to be merely imagined, and found
that they are nothing but a custom arising from experience and its laws,
thus are merely empirical, i.e., intrinsically contingent rules, to which we
ascribe a supposed necessity and universality. However, for the assertion
of this disturbing proposition he referred to the universally acknowl­
edged principle of the relationship of cause to effect. Since in that case
no faculty of understanding can lead us from the concept of a thing to
the existence of something else which is thereby universally and neces­
sarily given, he believed that he could infer from this that without expe­
rience we have nothing that could augment our concept and justify us in
making such a judgment, which amplifies itself a priori. That the sunlight
that illuminates the wax also melts it, though it hardens clay, underdie Recbtsame
b Object
, Principien

a

656

The discipline of pure reason in polemical use
standing could not discover let alone lawfully infer from the concepts
that we antecedently have of these things, and only experience could
teach us such a law. In the transcendental logic, on the contrary, we have
seen that although of course we can never immediately go beyond the
content of the concept which is given to us, nevertheless we can still cog­
nize the law of the connection with other things completely a priori, al­
though in relation to a third thing, namely possible experience, but still
a priori. Thus if wax that was previously firm melts, I can cognize a pri­

that something must have preceded (e.g., the warmth of the sun) on
which this has followed in accordance with a constant law, though with­
out experience, to be sure, I could determinately cognize neither the

ori

cause from the effect nor the effect from the cause a priori and without
instruction from experience. He therefore falsely inferred from the con­
tingency of our determination

in accordance with the law the contin­
the law itself, and he confused going beyond the concept of a
thing to possible experience (which takes place a priori and constitutes
gency of

the objective reality of the concept) with the synthesis of the objects of
actual experience, which is of course always empirical; thereby, however,
he made a principled of affinity, which has its seat in the understanding
and asserts necessary connection, into a rule of association, which is
found merely in the imitative imagination and which can present only
contingent combinations, not objective ones at all.
The skeptical aberrations of this otherwise extremely acute man, how­
ever, arose primarily from a failing that he had in common with all dog­
matists, namely, that he did not systematically survey all the kinds of a

priori synthesis of the understanding. For had he done so, he would have
found, not to mention any others here, that e.g., the principle of per­
sistence is one that anticipates experience just as much as that of
causality. He would thereby have been able to mark out determinate
boundaries for the understanding that expands itself a priori and for pure
reason. But since he merely limits our understanding without drawing
boundaries for it, and brings about a general distrust but no determinate
knowledgeb of the ignorance that is unavoidable for us, by censuring cer­
tain principles of the understanding without placing this understanding
in regard to its entire capacityc on the scales of critique, and, while rightly
denying to understanding what it really cannot accomplish, goes further,
and disputes all its capacityd to expand itself a priori without having as­
sessed this entire capacity, the same thing happens to him that always
brings down skepticism, namely, he is himself doubted, for his objections

Princip
b Kenntnis
, Vermiigen
d Vermbgen

a

657

A 767 / B 795

Doctrine of Method. Ch. I. Sec. III

A 7681 B 796

A769/B797

rest only on facta, which are contingent, but not on principles a that could
effect a necessary renunciation of the right to dogmatic assertions.
Further, since he does not know the difference between the well
founded claims of the understanding and the dialectical pretensions of
reason, against which his attacks are chiefly directed, reason, whose en­
tirely peculiar momentum is not in the least disturbed, but only hin­
dered, does not feel that the room for its expansion is cut off, and
although it is annoyed here and there it can never be entirely dissuaded
from its efforts. For it is armed to parry attacks, and is all the more ob­
stinate in attempting to carry out its demands. But a complete overview
of its entire capacity and the conviction arising from that of the cer­
tainty of a small possession, even in case of the vanity of higher claims,
put an end to all dispute, and move it to rest satisfied with a limited but
undisputed property.
Against the uncritical dogmatist, who has not measured the sphere of
his understanding and thus has not determined the boundaries of his
possible cognition in accordance with principles,b who therefore does
not already know in advance how much he is capable of but thinks he
can find it out through mere experiments, these skeptical attacks are not
merely dangerous but are even disastrous. For if he is hit in a single assertion that he cannot justify or make plausible by means of principles,c
then suspicion falls upon all of them, however persuasive they might
otherwise be.
And thus the skeptic is the taskmaster of the dogmatic sophist for a
healthy critique of the understanding and of reason itself. When he has
gotten this far he does not have to fear any further challenge, for he
then distinguishes his possession from that which lies entirely outside
it, to which he makes no claims and about which he cannot become in­
volved in any controversies. Thus the skeptical procedure is not, to be
sure, itself satisfying for questions of reason, but it is nevertheless
preparatory for arousing its caution and showing it fundamental means
for securing it in its rightful possessions.
First Chapter
Third S ection
The
discipline of pure reason with regard
to hypotheses.
Since, then, through the critique of our reason we finally know that we
cannot in fact know anything at all in its pure and speculative use,
a

b
C

Principien
Principien
Principien
658

The discipline of pure reason in hypotheses
should it not then open up an all the wider field for

hypotheses, since

it is at least granted to reason to invent" and to opine, if not to assert?
If the imagination is not simply to enthuse but is, under the strict
oversight of reason,

to invent,b something must always first be fully certain and not invented,c or a mere opinion, and that is the possibility of

A nO/ B 798

the object itself. In that case it is permissible to take refuge in opinion
concerning the actuality of the object, which opinion, however, in order
not to be groundless, must be connected as a ground of explanation
with that which is actually given and consequently certain, and it is then
called an

hypothesis.20

Now since we cannot construct a priori the least concept of the pos­
sibility of dynamical connection, and the category of the pure under­
standing does not serve for thinking up such a thing but only for
understanding it where it is encountered in experience, we cannot orig­
inally cook up,d in accordance with these categories, a single object with
any new and not empirically given property and ground a permissible
hypothesis on it; for this would be to found reason on empty figments
of the brain rather than concepts of things. Thus we are not allowed to
think up any sort of new original forces, e.g., an understanding that is
capable of intuiting its object without sense or an attractive force with­
out any contact, or a new kind of substance, e.g., one which would be
present in space without impenetrability; consequently we also cannot
conceive of any community of substances that would be different from
anything that experience provides;2I no presence except in space, no duration except merely in time. In a word: it is only possible for our reason to use the conditions of possible experience as conditions of the
possibility of things; but it is by no means possible for it as it were to
create new ones, independent of these conditions, for concepts of this
sort, although free of contradiction, would nevertheless also be without
any object.
The concepts of reason are, as we have said, mere ideas, and of course
have no object in any sort of experience, but also do not on that account
designate objects that are inventede and at the same time thereby as­
sumed to be possible. They are merely thought problematically, in
order to ground regulative principles! of the systematic use of the un­
derstanding in the field of experience in relation to them (as heuristic
fictions). If one departs from this, they are mere thought-entities, the

dichten
dichten
erdichtet
d aussinnen
, gedichtete
f Principien
a

b
c'

659

A n I / B 799

Doctrine of Method. Ch. 1. Sec. III
possibility of which is not demonstrable, and which thus cannot be used
to ground the explanation of actual appearances through an hypothesis.
It is entirely permissible to think the soul as simple in order, in accor­
dance with this

idea, to make a complete and necessary unity of all
in con­

powers of the mind, even though one cannot have insight into it

creto, into the principlea of our judgment of its inner appearances. But
to assume the soul as simple substance (a transcendent concept) would
be a proposition that would not only be indemonstrable (as is the case
A 772

/ B 800

with many physical hypotheses), but which would also be hazarded en­
tirely arbitrarily and blindly, since the simple cannot come forth in any
experience at all, and, if one here understands by substance the per­
sistent object b of sensible intuition, there can be no insight at all into
the possibility of a

simple appearance. Merely intelligible beings or

merely intelligible properties of the things of the sensible world cannot
be assumed as opinions with any well-founded authority of reason, al­
though (since one has no concept of either their possibility or their im­
possibility ) they also cannot be dogmatically denied on the basis of any
supposedly better insight.
For the explanation of given appearances no other things and
grounds of explanation can be adduced than those which are connected
to the given appearances by already known laws of appearances. A tran­
scendental hypothesis, in which a mere idea of reason would be used
for the explanation of things in nature, would thus be no explanation at
all, since that which one does not adequately understand on the basis of
known empirical principlesc would be explained by means of something
about which one understands nothing at all. And the principled of such
an hypothesis would really serve only for the satisfaction of reason and
not for the advancement of the use of the understanding in regard to
objects. Order and purposiveness in nature must in turn be explained
from natural grounds and in accordance with laws of nature, and here
A 773 / B 801

even the wildest hypotheses, as long as they are physical, are more tol­
erable than a hyperphysical hy pothesis, i.e., the appeal to a divine au­
thor, which one presupposes to this end. For that would be a principle'
of lazy reason

(ignava ratio),

at once bypassing all causes, of whose ob­

jective reality, at least as far as possibility is concerned, one could still
learn through continued experience, in order to take refuge in a mere
idea, which is very comforting to reason. As far as the absolute totality
of the ground of explanation in the series of those causes is concerned,

a

b

Princip
Object

Principien
d Princip
, Princip
C

660

The discipline of pure reason in hypotheses
however, that can create no difficulty with regard to the objects of the
world,a for since these are nothing but appearances, nothing that is
completed in the synthesis of the series of conditions can be hoped for
from them.
Transcendental hypotheses of the speculative use of reason and a
freedom to make good the lack of physical grounds of explanation by
using all sorts of hyperphysical ones can never be permitted at all, partly
because reason is not advanced by them but rather cut off from all
progress in their use, and partly because this license must ultimately de­
stroy all fruits of the cultivation of its own proper soil, namely ex­
perience. For whenever the explanation of nature becomes difficult, we
always have at hand a transcendental ground of explanation that spares
us that inquiry, and our research is concluded not through insight but
through the total incomprehensibility of a principleb which was thought
up so far in advance that it must have contained the concept of that
which is absolutely first.
The second point which is requisite to make an hypothesis worthy of
being assumed is its adequacy for determining a priori the consequences
these are given. If for this purpose auxiliary hypotheses need to be
called in, they arouse the suspicion of being a mere invention, since
each of them requires the same justification which the underlying
thought needed, and hence can give no reliable testimony. If on the pre­
supposition of an unlimitedly perfect cause there is no lack of grounds
of explanation for all the purposiveness, order, and greatnessc that is
found in the world, then the deviations from these and the evils that re­
veal themselves, at least according to our concepts, require still further
hypotheses in order to save the first from these objections. If the sim­
ple self-sufficiency of the human soul, which has been laid at the ground
of its appearances, is impugned by difficulties because these are phe­
nomena similar to the alterations of matter (growth and decay), then
new hypotheses must be called in to help, which are not without plau­
sibility but are still without any confirmation, except that which is given
to them by the opinion assumed as the primary ground, which they
were supposed to explain.
If the assertions of reason that have here been adduced as examples
(incorporeal unity of the soul and existence of a highest being) are not
to count as hypotheses, but as dogmata proven a priori, then they are
not even an issue. In that case, however, one would indeed take care that
the proof have the apodictic certainty of a demonstration. For to make
the actuality of such ideas merely probable is an absurd proposal, just
Weltobjecte
b Princips
a

, Grofe
661

A 774/ B 802

Doctrine of Method. Ch. 1. Sec. III
as if one thought to prove a proposition of geometry as merely proba­
ble. Reason in abstraction from all experience can cognize everything
only a priori and necessarily, or not at all; hence its judgment is never an
opinion, but either abstention from all judgment or apodictic certainty.
Opinions and probable judgments about what pertains to things can
occur only as grounds of explanation of that which is actually given or
as consequences in accordance with empirical laws of that which actu­
ally grounds what is actually given; thus they can occur only in the se­
ries of objects of experience. To

fonn opinions outside this field is the

same as to play with thoughts, unless one merely has the opinion that
an uncertain path of judgment can perhaps lead to truth.
A 776/ B

804

However, although in merely speculative questions of pure reason no
hypotheses are allowed to ground propositions, they are nevertheless
entirely admissible for defending them, i.e., not in dogmatic but in
polemical use. By defense, however, I understand not the augmentation
of grounds of proof for its assertion, but rather the mere frustration of
the opponent's illusory insights, which would demolish our own as­
serted propositions. But now all synthetic propositions from pure rea­
son have the peculiarity that if he who asserts the reality of certain ideas
never knows enough to make his proposition certain, on the other side
his opponent can just as little know enough to assert the contrary. This
equality in the lot of human reason favors neither of them in specula­
tive cognitions, and there is thus the true battleground of feuds that can
never be resolved. It will be shown in what follows, however, that in re­
gard to its

practical use reason still has the right to assume something

which it would in no way be warranted in presupposing in the field of
mere speculation without sufficient grounds of proof; for all such pre­
suppositions injure the perfection of speculation, about which, however,

the practical interest does not trouble itself at al1. There

it thus has a

possession the legitimacy of which need not be proved, and the proof of
A 777 / B 805

which it could not in fact give. The opponent should therefore prove.
But since he no more knows something about the object that is doubted
which would establish its non-being than does the former, who asserts
its actuality, here an advantage on the side of he who asserts something
as a practically necessary presupposition (melior est conditio possidentis)a is
revealed. He is, namely, free to use, as it were in an emergency, the very
same means for his good causeb as his opponent would use against it,
i.e., to use the hypotheses that do not serve to strengthen the proof of
it but serve only to show that the opponent understands far too little
about the object of the dispute to be able to flatter himself with an ad­
vantage in speculative insight over us.
a

The condition of the possessor is the better.

b Sache
662

The discipline of pure reason in hypotheses

Hypotheses are therefore allowed in the field of pure reason only as
weapons of war, not for grounding a right but only for defending it.
However, we must always seek the enemy here in ourselves. For specu­
lative reason in its transcendental use is dialectical in itself. The objec­
tions that are to be feared lie in ourselves. We must search them out like
old but unexpired claims, in order to ground perpetual peace on their
annihilation. External quiet is only illusory. The seed of the attacks,
which lies in the nature of human reason, must be extirpated; but how
can we extirpate it if we do not give it freedom, indeed even nourishment, to send out shoots, so that we can discover it and afterwards eradicate it with its root? Thus, think up for yourself the objections which
have not yet occurred to any opponent, and even lend him the weapons
or concede him the most favorable position that he could desire. There
is nothing in this to fear, though much to hope, namely that you will
come into a possession that can never be attacked in the future.
Now to your complete armament there also belong the hypotheses of
pure reason, which, although they are merely leaden weapons (for they
have not been steeled through any law of experience), are nevertheless
just as capable as those which any opponent might use against you. If,
therefore, you come up against the difficulty for the immaterial nature
of the soul which is not subjected to any corporeal transformation (as­
sumed in some other, non-speculative context), the difficulty, namely,
that experience seems to prove that both the elevation as well as the de­
rangement of our mental powers are merely different modifications of
our organs, you can weaken the power of this proof by assuming that
our body is nothing but the fundamental appearance to which the en­
tire faculty of sensibility and therewith all thinking are related, as their
condition, in our present state (in life). Separation from the body would
be the end of this sensible use of your cognitive power and the beginning of the intellectual. The body would thus be not the cause of thinking but a merely restricting condition on it, thus it would be regarded
as furthering the sensible and animal but for that reason all the more as
hindering the pure and spiritual life, and the dependence of the former
on the corporeal constitution would prove nothing about the dependence of life in its entirety on the state of our organs. But you could go
even further, and indeed raise new doubts, which have either not been
suggested before or else have not been driven far enough.
The contingency of conception, which in humans as well as in irra­
tional creatures depends on opportunity, but besides this also on nour­
ishment, on government, on its moods and caprices, even on vices,
presents a great difficulty for the opinion of the eternal duration of a
creature whose life has first begun under circumstances so trivial and so
entirely dependent on our liberty. As far as the duration of the entire
species (here on earth) is concerned, this difficulty amounts to li ttle,
663

A 778/ B 806

A 779 / B 807

Doctrine of Method. Ch. r. Sec. III

A 780/ B 808

A 78 I / B 809

since the contingency in the individuaP is nonetheless subjected to a
rule in the whole; but with regard to each individualb it certainly seems
questionable to expect such a powerful effect from such inconsequen­
tial causes. Against this, however, you could propose a transcendental
hypothesis: that all life is really only intelligible, not subject to tempo­
ral alterations at all, and has neither begun at birth nor will be ended
through death;' that this life is nothing but a mere appearance, i.e., a
sensible representation of the purely spiritual life, and the entire world
of the senses is a mere image, which hovers before our present kind of
cognition and, like a dream, has no objective reality in itself; that if we
could intuit the things and ourselves as they are we would see ourselves
in a world of spiritual natures with which our only true community had
not begun with birth nor would not cease with bodily death (as mere
appearances), etc.
Now although we do not know or seriously assert the least thing
about all of this which we have here pleaded against the attack, and it is
all not even an idea of reason but merely a concept thought up for self- (
defense, nevertheless we proceed quite rationally here, showing the op­
ponent who thinks he has exhausted all of the possibilities by falsely
representing the lack of their empirical conditions as a proof of the
complete impossibility of that which is believed by us, that he can span
the entire field of possible things in themselves through mere laws of
experience just as little as we can acquire anything for our reason in a
well-grounded manner outside of experience. He who turns such hypothetical countermeasures against the pretensions of his rashly negative
opponent must not be considered to hold them as his own genuine
opinions. He abandons them as soon as he has finished off the dogmatic
self-conceit of his opponent. For as modest and as moderate as it may
be for someone merely to refuse and deny the assertions of another, as
soon as he would make these objections valid as proof of the opposite
his claim would be no less proud and conceited than if he had seized
hold of the affirmative party and its assertion.
Thus one sees that in the speculative use of reason hypotheses have
no validity as opinions in themselves, but only relative to opposed tran­
scendent pretensions. For the extension of the principlesd of possible
experience to the possibility of things in general is just as transcendent
as the assertion of the objective reality of such concepts, which can
never find their objects anywhere but outside the boundary of all pos­
sible experience. What pure reason judges assertorically must be necesim Einzeln
b jeden Individuum
a

, Following Erdmann, using a semicolon instead of Kant's period here.
d

Principien

664

The discipline of pure reason in proofs

sary (like everything cognized by reason), or it is nothing at all. Thus in
fact it contains no opinions at all. The hypotheses in question are,
however, only problematic judgments, which at least cannot be refuted,
though of course they cannot be proved by anything, and they are
therefore not private opinions, though against reigning scruples they
cannot b e dispensed with (even for inner tranquility). But one must preserve them in this quality, and indeed carefully make sure that they are
not believed in themselves and as having an absolute validity, and that
they do not drown reason in fictions and deceptions.

A 782 / B 8 1 0

First Chapter
Fourth Section
The discipline of pure reason in regard
to its proofs.
The proofs of transcendental and synthetic propositions are unique
among all proofs of synthetic a priori cognition in that in their case rea­
son may not apply itself directly to the object by means of its concepts,
but must first establish the objective validity of the concepts and the
possibility of their synthesis a priori. This is not merely a necessary rule
of caution, but concerns the essence and the possibility of the proofs
themselves. It is impossible for me to go beyond the concept of an ob­
ject a priori without a special clue which is to be found outside of this
concept. In mathematics it is a priori intuition that guides my synthesis,
and there all inferences can be immediately drawn from a pure intuition.
In transcendental cognition, as long as it has to do merely with concepts
of the understanding, this guideline is possible experience. The proof
does not show, that is, that the given concept (e.g., of that which happens) leads directly to another concept (that of a cause), for such a
transition would be a leap for which nothing could be held responsible; rather it shows that experience itself, hence the objectb of experience, would be impossible without such a connection. The proof,
therefore, had to indicate at the same time the possibility of achieving
synthetically and a priori a certain cognition of things which is not contained in the concept of them. Without attention to this the proofs, like
water breaking its banks, run wildly across the country, wherever the
tendency of hidden association may happen to lead them. The illusion
of conviction, which rests on subjective causes of association and is
taken for the insight of a natural affinity, cannot balance the misgiving
to which steps risked in this way properly give rise. Hence all attempts
to prove the principle of sufficient reason have also, according to the
a

Following the second edition, which reads "von"; the first has "an."

b Object

665

A 783 / B 8 I I

Doctrine of Method. Ch. I. Sec. IV

A 784/ B 8 I2

A 78S/B 8I3

general consensus of experts, been in vain, and, since one still could not
abandon this principle, until the transcendental critique came onto the
scene one preferred obstinately to appeal to healthy human understanding (a refuge, which always proves that the cause of reason is in de­
spair) rather than to attempt new dogmatic proofs.
But if the proposition of which a proof is to be given is an assertion
of pure reason, and if I would even go beyond my concepts of experi­
ence by means of mere ideas, then all the more must this proof contain
the justification of such a step of synthesis (if it would otherwise be pos­
sible) as a necessary condition of its probative force. Hence as plausible
as the supposed proof of the simple nature of our thinking substance
from the unity of apperception may be, yet it is unavoidably faced with
the difficulty that, since absolute simplicity is not a concept that can
be immediately related to a perception, but rather as an idea must be
merely inferred, there can be no insight at all into how the mere con­
sciousness that is contained or at least can be contained in all thinking
should, even though it is to this extent a simple representation, lead to
the consciousness and knowledge of a thing in which alone thinking
can be contained. 22 For if I represent to myself the force of my body in
motion, it is to that extent absolute unity for me, and my representation
of it is simple; hence I can also express it through the motion of a point,
since its volume is not relevant, and without diminution of the force it
can be represented as being as small as one wants and can even be conceived of as being located in one point. But I would not infer from this
that if nothing is given to me except the moving force of a body then
the body can be conceived of as a simple substance just because its rep­
resentation abstracts from all magnitude of the content of space and is
therefore simple. Now I discover a paralogism in the fact that the sim­
ple in the abstract is entirely different from the simple in the objectb
and that the I, which taken in the first sense comprises no manifold
within itself, if taken in the second sense, in which it signifies the soul
itself, can be a very complex concept, namely containing under itself
and designating quite a lot. Only in order to have any presentiment of
this paralogism (for without such a provisional conjecture one would
hardly have any suspicion of the proot), it is always necessary to have at
hand an enduring criterion of the possibility of such synthetic proposi­
tions, which prove more than experience can yield, which criterion con­
sists in the fact that the proof leads to the required predicate not
directly but only by means of a principled of the possibility of expandKenntnis
Object
, im ersteren Verstande
d Princips
a

b

666

The discipline of pure reason in proofs

ing our given concepts a priori to ideas and realizing these. If this cau­
tion is always used, and if before one even attempts the proof one wisely
considers how and with what basis for hope one could expect such an
expansion through pure reason, and whence, in cases of this sort, one
would derive these insights, which are not developed from concepts and
which also cannot be anticipated in relation to possible experience, then
one can be spared many difficult and nevertheless fruitless efforts, since
one would not attribute to reason anything which obviously exceeds its
capacity,a but would rather subject reason, which does not gladly suffer
constraint in the paroxysms of its lust for speculative expansion, to the
discipline of abstinence.
The first rule, therefore, is this: to attempt no transcendental proofs
without having first considered whence one can justifiably derive the
principles on which one intends to build and with what right one can
expect success in inferences from them. If they are principles of the un­
derstanding (e.g., of causality), then it is in vain to try to arrive by their
means at ideas of pure reason; for those principles are valid only for ob­
jects of possible experience. If they are to be principles from pure rea­
son, then again all effort is in vain. For reason has principles, to be sure,
but as objective principles they are all dialectical, and can only be valid
as regulative principlesb of the systematically coherent use of experi­
ence. But if such ostensible proofs are already given, then oppose the
non liquetC of your mature power of judgment against their deceptive
conviction, and even if you cannot yet penetrate their deception you
still have a perfect right to demand the deduction of the principles that
are used in them, which, if they are supposed to have arisen from pure
reason, will never be provided for you. And thus it is not even necessary
for you to concern yourself with the development and refutation of
each groundless illusion, but you can dispose of the entire heap of these
inexhaustible tricks of dialectic at once in the court of a critical reason,
which demands laws.
The second peculiarity of transcendental proofs is this: that for each
transcendental proposition only a single proof can be found. If I am to
draw an inference not from concepts but rather from the intuition
which corresponds to a concept, whether it be a pure intuition, as in
mathematics, or an empirical intuition, as in natural science, the intu­
ition that grounds the inference offers me a manifold of material for
synthetic propositions that I can connect in more than one way, thus al­
lowing me to reach the same proposition by different paths since I may
start out from more than one point.
a

b

VermiJiien
Principien

, The verdict "not proved."

667

A 786/ B 8 14

A 787 / B 81 5

Doctrine of Method. Ch. 1. Sec. IV

A 788/ B 816

A 7891 B 8 I 7

Every transcendental proposition, however, proceeds solely from one
concept, and states the synthetic condition of the possibility of the ob­
ject in accordance with this concept. The ground of proof can therefore
only be unique, since outside this concept there is nothing further by
means of which the object could be determined, and the proof can
therefore contain nothing more than the determination of an object in
general in accordance with this concept, which is also unique. In the
transcendental analytic we drew, e.g., the principle "Everything that
happens has a cause" from the unique condition of the objective possi­
bility of a concept of that which happens in general, namely that the
determination of an occurrence in time, and consequently this (occur­
rence) as belonging to experience, would be impossible if it did not
stand under such a dynamical rule. Now this is also the only possible
ground of proof; for only through the fact that an object is determined
for the concept by means of the law of causality does the represented
occurrence have objective validity, i.e., truth. To be sure, still other
proofs of this principle, e.g., from contingency, have been attempted;23
but if this is considered clearly, one cannot discover any characteristic
of contingency except that of happening, i.e., existence which is pre­
ceded by a not-being of the object, and one therefore always comes
back to the same ground of proof. If the proposition "Everything that
thinks is simple" is to be proved, one does not dwell on the manifold­
ness of thinking, but sticks solely with the concept of the I, which is
simple and to which all thinking is related. It is just the same with the
transcendental proof of the existence of God, which depends solely on
the reciprocality of the concepts of the most real being and the neces­
sary being, and cannot be sought anywhere else.
Through this cautionary remark the critique of the assertions of rea­
son is very much reduced. �ere reason would conduct its business
through mere concepts, only a single proof is possible if any proof is
possible at all. Thus if one sees the dogmatist step forth with ten proofs,
one can be sure that he has none at all. For if he had one that proved
apodictically (as must be the case in matters of pure reason), for what
would he need the rest? His intention is only that of every parliamen­
tary advocate: one argument for this one, another one for that, in order
to take advantage of the weakness of his judges who, without getting
into the business deeply and in order to get rid of it quickly, just grasp
at the first argument that occurs to them and decide accordingly.
The third special rule of pure reason, if it is subjected to a discipline
in regard to transcendental proofs, is that its proofs must never be ap­
agogic but always ostensive. The direct or ostensive proof is, in all
kinds of cognition, that which is combined with the conviction of truth
and simultaneously with insight into its sources; the apagogic proof, on
the contrary, can produce certainty, to be sure, but never comprehensi668

The discipline of pure reason in proofs

bility of the truth in regard to its connection with the grounds of its
possibility. Hence the latter are more of an emergency aid than a procedure which satisfies all the aims of reason. Yet they have an advantage
in self-evidence over the direct proofs in this: that a contradiction always carries with it more clarity of representation than the best connection, and thereby more closely approaches the intuitiveness of a
demonstration.
The real cause for the use of apagogic proofs in various sciences is
probably this. If the grounds from which a certain cognition should
be derived are too manifold or lie too deeply hidden, then one tries
whether they may not be reached through their consequences. Now
modus ponens, inferring the truth of a cognition from the truth of its
consequences, would be allowed only if all of the possible consequences
are true; for in this case only a single ground of this is possible, which
is therefore also the true one.24 But this procedure is unusable, because
to have insight into all possible consequences of any proposition that is
assumed exceeds our powers; yet one uses this kind of inference, though
to be sure with a certain degree of care, if it is merely a matter of prov­
ing something as an hypothesis, since there an inference by analogy is
allowed: that, namely, if as many consequences as one has tested agree
with an assumed ground then all other possible ones will also agree with
it. But for this reason an hypothesis can never be transformed into a
demonstrated truth by this path. The modus tollens of rational inferences,a which infers from the consequences to the grounds, proves not
only entirely strictly but also in all cases easily. For if even only a single
false consequence can be derived from a proposition, then this proposition is false.25 Now instead of having to run through the entire series
of the grounds in an ostensive proof that can lead to the truth of a cognition, by means of complete insight into its possibility, one need only
find a single false one among the consequences flowing from its contrary, and then the contrary is also false, thus the cognition that one had
to prove is true.
Apagogic proof, however, can be allowed only in those sciences
where it is impossible to substitute that which is subjective in our rep­
resentations for that which is objective, namely the cognition of what is
in the object. Where the latter is the dominant concern, however, then
it must frequently transpire that the opposite of a certain proposition
either simply contradicts the subjective conditions of thought but not
the object, or else that both propositions contradict each other only
under a subjective condition that is falsely held to be objective, and that
since the condition is false, both of them can be false, without it being
possible to infer the truth of one from the falsehood of the other.
a

Vernunftschlusse, which could also be translated "syllogisms."
669

A 790/ B 818

A 79 I / B 8I9

Doctrine of Method. Ch. 1. Sec. N
A 792/ B 820

A 793 / B

82 I

A 794/ B 822

In mathematics this subreption is impossible; hence apagogic proof
has its proper place there. In natural science, since everything there is
grounded on empirical intuitions, such false pretenses can frequently be
guarded against through the comparison of many observations; but this
kind of proof itself is for the most part unimportant in this area. The
transcendental attempts of pure reason, however, are all conducted
within the real medium of dialectical illusion, i.e., the subjective which
offers itself to or even forces itself upon reason as objective in its
premises. Now here it simply cannot be allowed that assertions of
synthetic propositions be justified by the refutation of their opposites.
For either this refutation is nothing other than the mere representation
of the conflict of the opposed opinion with the subjective conditions of
comprehensibility through our reason, which does nothing by way of
rejecting the thing itself (just as, e.g., unconditional necessity in the ex­
istence of a being cannot be conceived by us at all, and hence every
speculative proof of a necessary highest being is therefore rightfully op­
posed subjectively, but the possibility of such an original being in it­
self is not rightfully opposed), or else both, the affirmative as well as the
negative part, taken in by transcendental illusion, have as their ground
an impossible concept of the object, and then the rule holds that non
entis nulla sunt predicata,a i.e., both what one asserts affirmatively as well
as what one asserts negatively of the object are incorrect, and one can­
not arrive at cognition of the truth apagogically through the refutation
of its opposite. So, for example, if it is presupposed that the sensible
world is given in its totality in itself, then it is false that it must be ei­
ther infinite in space orb finite and bounded, just because both of these
are false. For appearances (as mere representations), which would yet be
given in themselves (as objects), are something impossible, and the in­
finity of this imagined whole would, to be sure, be unconditioned, but
would nevertheless (since everything in appearances is conditioned)
contradict the unconditioned determination of magnitude that is pre­
supposed in the concept.
Apagogic proof is also the real deception with which the admirers of
the thoroughness of our dogmatic sophists have always been held off; it
is the champion, as it were, who would prove the honor and the indis­
putable right of his chosen party by his pledge to take on anyone who
would doubt it, although through such boasting nothing is settled about
the real issue but only the relative strength of the opponents, and in­
deed only that of the one who is on the attack. The observers, seeing
that each is in turn first victor then vanquished, often take the occasion
a

Nothing is to be predicated of any non-being.

b The "or" is emphasized in the first edition but not in the second.
Objecte

,

670

The discipline of pure reason in proofs

to have skeptical doubts about the objecta of the dispute itself. How­
ever, they do not have cause for this, and it is sufficient to declare to
them: non defensoribus istis tempus eget. b Each must conduct his affair by
means of a legitimate proof through the transcendental deduction of its
grounds of proof, i.e., directly, so that one can see what his claim of
reason has to say for itself. For if his opponent stands on subjective
grounds, it is of course easy to refute him, but without any advantage to
the dogmatist, who commonly depends in just the same way on subjec­
tive causes of judgment and who can in the same way be driven into a
corner by his opponent. But if both sides would only proceed directly,
then either they themselves must notice the difficulty, indeed the im­
possibility of discovering a title for their assertions, and will in the end
be able to appeal only to their antiquity, or else the critique will easily
reveal the dogmatic illusion, and compel pure reason to surrender its
exaggerated pretensions in its speculative use, and to draw back within
the boundaries of its proper territory, namely practical principles.
Object
b "The time does not need these defenses." The complete quotation is "Non tali auxilio,
nee defensoribus istis tempus eget" (Virgil, Aeneid 11.5 , 2 I); in the translation by Robert
Fitzgerald, "The time is past for help like this, for this kind of defending" (Virgil, The
Aeneid, tr. Robert Fitzgerald [New York: Random House, I98I], p. 5 I). The line is spo­

a

ken by Hecuba to Priam as the aged king of Troy arms himself against the Greeks in
the final death throes of his city.

67 1

The Transcendental Doctrine ofMethod
Second Chapter
The canon ofpure reason

A 796/ B 824

It is humiliating for human reason that it accomplishes nothing in its
pure use, and even requires a discipline to check its extravagances and
avoid the deceptions that come from them. But, on the other side, that
reason can and must exercise this discipline itself, without allowing any­
thing else to censor it, elevates it and gives it confidence in itself, for the
boundaries that it is required to set for its speculative use at the same
time limit the sophistical pretensions of every opponent, and thus it can
secure against all attacks everything that may still be left to it from its
previously exaggerated demands. The greatest and perhaps only utility
of all philosophy of pure reason is thus only negative, namely that it
does not serve for expansion, as an organon, but rather, as a discipline,
serves for the determination of boundaries, and instead of discovering
truth it has only the silent merit of guarding against errors.
Nevertheless, there must somewhere be a source of positive cogni­
tions that belong in the domain of pure reason, and that perhaps give
occasion for errors only through misunderstanding, but that in fact
constitute the goal of the strenuous effort of reason. For to what cause
should the unquenchable desire to find a firm footing beyond all
bounds of experience otherwise be ascribed? Pure reason has a presen­
timent of objects of great interest to it. It takes the path of mere specu­
lation in order to come closer to these; but they flee before it.
Presumably it may hope for better luck on the only path that still re­
mains to it, namely that of its practical use.
r understand by a canon the sum total of the a priori principles of the
correct use of certain cognitive faculties in general. Thus general logic
in its analytical part is a canon for understanding and reason in general,
but only as far as form is concerned, since it abstracts from all content.
Thus the transcendental analytic was the canon of the pure under­
standing; for it alone is capable of true synthetic a priori cognitions. But
where no correct use of a cognitive power is possible there is no canon.
Now according to the proofs that have previously been given, all syn­
thetic cognition of pure reason in its speculative use is entirely impos672

On the ultimate end of pure reason

sible. There is thus no canon for its speculative use at all (for this is
through and through dialectical); rather all transcendental logic is in
this respect nothing but a discipline. Consequently, if there is to be any
legitimate use of pure reason at all, in which case there must also be a
canon of it, this will concern not the speculative but rather the practical use of reason, which we will therefore now investigate. 26

A 797 / B 825

On the Canon of Pure Reason
First Section
On the ultimate end of the pure use
of our reason.
Reason is driven by a propensity of its nature to go beyond its use in ex­
perience, to venture to the outermost bounds of all cognition by means
of mere ideas in a pure use, and to find peace only in the completion of
its circle in a self-subsisting systematic whole. Now is this striving
grounded merely in its speculative interest, or rather uniquely and
solely in its practical interest?
I will set aside the good fortune of reason in a speculative regard, and
ask only about those problems the solution of which constitutes its ul­
timate end, whether it may reach this or not, and in respect to which all
other ends have merely the value of means. These highest ends must, in
accordance with the nature of reason, in turn have unity, in order to advance, in a united manner, that interest of humanity which is subordinated to no higher one.
The final aim to which in the end the speculation of reason in its
transcendental use is directed concerns three objects: the freedom of
the wilV the immortality of the soul, and the existence of God. With
regard to all three the merelyb speculative interest of reason is very
small, and with respect to this an exhausting labor of transcendental re­
search, hampered with unceasing hindrances, would be undertaken
only with difficulty, since one would not be able to make any use of the
discoveries that might be made which would prove its utility in concreto,
i.e., in the investigation of nature. The will may well be free, yet this can
concern only the intelligible cause of our willing. For, in accordance
with an inviolable fundamental maxim without which we could not ex­
ercise any reason in empirical use, we must explain the phenomena of
its manifestations, i.e., actions, no differently than all other appearances
of nature, namely in accordance with its unalterable laws. Second, we
n

des Willens. In what follows, Wille will be translated as "will" and Willkiihr as "choice"
or "faculty of choice."

b Following the second edition, which has das blofJ instead of blofJ das.

673

A 798/ B 826

Doctrine of Method. Ch. II. Sec. I

A 799/ B 827

A 800 / B 828

might be able to have insight into the spiritual nature of the soul (and
with that into its immortality), yet that cannot be counted on either as
an explanatory ground of the appearances in this life or for the special
constitution of the future state, because our concept of an incorporeal
nature is merely negative, and does not in the least expand our cogni­
tion nor offer any suitable material for any conclusions except merely
fictional ones, which cannot be sanctioned by philosophy. Third, even
if the existence of a highest intelligence were proved, we would, to be
sure, be able to make that which is purposive in the arrangement and
order of the world comprehensible in general, but would by no means
be authorized to derive from it any particular arrangement and order,
or boldly to infer one where it is not perceived, for it is a necessary rule
of the speculative use of reason not to bypass natural causes and aban­
don that about which we could be instructed by experience in order to
derive something that we know from something that entirely surpasses
all our knowledge. n In a word, these three propositions always remain
transcendent for speculative reason, and have no immanent use, i.e.,
one that is permissible for objects of experience and therefore useful for
us in some way, but are rather, considered in themselves, entirely idle
even though extremely difficult efforts of our reason.
If, then, these three cardinal propositions are not at all necessary for
our knowing, and yet are insistently recommended to us by our reason,
their importance must really concern only the practical.
Everything is practical that is possible through freedom. But if the
conditions for the exercise of our free choiceb are empirical, then in that
case reason can have none but a regulative use, and can only serve to
produce the unity of empirical laws, as, e.g., in the doctrine of prudence
the unification of all ends that are given to us by our inclinations into
the single end of happiness and the harmony of the means for attain­
ing that end constitute the entire business of reason, which can there­
fore provide none but pragmatic laws of free conduct for reaching the
ends recommended to us by the senses, and therefore can provide no
pure laws that are determined completely a priori. Pure practical laws,
on the contrary, whose end is given by reason completely a priori, and
which do not command under empirical conditions but absolutely,
would be products of pure reason. Of this sort, however, are the moral
laws; thus these alone belong to the practical use of reason and permit
a canon.
Thus the entire armament of reason, in the undertaking that one can
call pure philosophy, is in fact directed only at the three problems that
have been mentioned. These themselves, however, have in turn their
Kenntnis
b Willkiihr

a

674

On the ultimate end of pure reason

more remote aim, namely, what is to be done if the will is free, if there
is a God, and if there is a future world. Now since these concern our
conduct in relation to the highest end, the ultimate aim of nature which
provides for us wisely in the disposition of reason is properly directed
only to what is moral.
However, since we now cast our attention upon an object that is for­
eign* to transcendental philosophy, caution is necessary in order not to
digress into episodes and injure the unity of the same system, but on the
other side also in order not to say too little about the new material, thus
allowing it to fail in clarity or conviction. I hope to achieve both by
keeping as close as possible to the transcendental and setting aside en­
tirely what might here be psychological, i.e., empirical.
And here the first thing to note is that for the present I will use the
concept of freedom only in a practical senseO and set aside, as having
been dealt with above, the transcendental signification of the concept,
which cannot be empirically presupposed as an explanatory ground of
the appearances but is rather itself a problem for reason.27 A faculty of
choice, that is, is merely animal (arbitrium brutum) which cannot be determined other than through sensible impulses, i.e., pathologically.
However, one which can be determined independently of sensory impulses, thus through motivesb that can only be represented by reason, is
called free choice (arbitrium liberum), and everything that is connected
with this, whether as ground or consequence, is called practical.
Practical freedom can be proved through experience. For it is not merely
that which stimulates the senses, i.e., immediately affects them, that determines human choice, but we have a capacityc to overcome impressions on our sensory faculty of desire by representations of that which is
useful or injurious even in a more remote way; but these considerations
about that which in regard to our whole condition is desirable, i.e., good
and useful, depend on reason. Hence this also yields laws that are imperatives, i.e., objective laws of freedom, and that say what ought to
happen, even though perhaps it never does happen, and that are thereby
* All practical concepts pertain to objects of satisfaction or dissatisfaction,d i.e.,
o f pleasure o r displeasure, and thus, a t least indirectly, t o objects of our feeling. But since this is not a power for the representation of things, but lies outside the cognitive power altogether, the elements of our judgments, insofar as
they are related to pleasure or displeasure, thus belong to practical philosophy, and not to the sum total of transcendental philosophy, which has to do
solely with pure a priori cognitions.
Verstande
b Bewegursachen
Vermogen
d Wohlgefallens, oder Miflfallens

a

C

675

A 80I I B 829

A 802 l B 830

A 80I IB 8 2 9

Doctrine of Method. Ch. II. Sec. II

A 803 / B 83 I

A 804/ B 8 3 2

distinguished from laws of nature, which deal only with that which
does happen, on which account the former are also called practical laws.
But whether in these actions, through which it prescribes laws, reason is not itself determined by further influences, and whether that
which with respect to sensory impulses is called freedom might not in
turn with regard to higher and more remote efficient causes be na­
ture - in the practical sphere this does not concern us, since in the first
instance we ask of reason only a precept for conduct; it is rather a
merely speculative question, which we can set aside as long as our aim
is directed to action or omission.a We thus cognize practical freedom
through experience, as one of the natural causes, namely a causality of
reason in the determination of the will, whereas transcendental free­
dom requires an independence of this reason itself (with regard to its
causality for initiating a series of appearances) from all determining
causes of the world of the senses, and to this extent seems to be con­
trary to the law of nature, thus to all possible experience, and so re­
mains a problem. Yet this problem does not belong to reason in its
practical use, so in a canon of pure reason we are concerned with only
two questions that pertain to the practical interest of pure reason, and
with regard to which a canon of its use must be possible, namely: Is
there a God? Is there a future life? The question about transcendental
freedom concerns merely speculative knowledge, which we can set
aside a s quite indifferent i fw e are concerned with what i s practical, and
about which there is already sufficient discussion in the Antinomy of
Pure Reason.
On the Canon of Pure Reason
Second Section
On the ideal of the highest good,
as a determining ground
of the ultimate end of pure reason.
In its speculative use reason led us through the field of experiences, and,
since it could never find complete satisfaction for itself there, it led us
on from there to speculative ideas, which in the end, however, led us
back again to experience, and thus fulfilled its aim in a way that is quite
useful but not quite in accord with our expectation. Now yet another
experiment remains open to us: namely, whether pure reason is also to
be found in practical use, whether in that use it leads us to the ideas that
attain the highest ends of pure reason which we have just adduced, and
thus whether from the point of view of its practical interest reason may
a

Thun oder Lassen, the standard eighteenth-century German phrase for behavior subject
to moral regulation and evaluation.

676

On the ideal of the highest good

not be able to guarantee that which in regard to its speculative interest
it entirely refuses to us.
All interest of my reason (the speculative as well as the practical) is
united in the following three questions:
A 8oS l B 8 3 3

What can I know?
2 . What should I do?
1.

3 . What may I hope?

The first question is merely speculative. We have (as I flatter myself)
already exhausted all possible replies to it, and finally found that with
which reason must certainly satisfy itself and with which, if it does not
look to the practical, it also has cause to be content; but from the two
great ends to which this entire effort of pure reason was really directed
we remain just as distant as if, out of a concern for comfort, we had de­
clined this labor at the outset. If, therefore, the issue is knowledge, then
this much at least is certain and settled, that we can never partake of
knowledge with respect to those two problems.
The second question is merely practical. As such, to be sure, it can
belong to pure reason, but in that case it is not transcendental, but
moral, and thus it cannot be in itself a subject for our critique.
The third question, namely, "If I do what I should, what may I then
hope?" is simultaneously practical and theoretical, so that the practical
leads like a clue to a reply to the theoretical question and, in its highest
form, the speculative question. For all hope concerns happiness, and
with respect to the practical and the moral law it is the very same as
what knowledge and the natural law is with regard to theoretical cognition of things. The former finally comes down to the inference that
something is (which determines the ultimate final end) because something ought to happen; the latter, that something is (which acts as the
supreme cause) because something does happen.
Happiness is the satisfaction of all of our inclinations (extensive,a with
regard to their manifoldness, as well as intensive,b with regard to degree,
andc also protensive, d with regard to duration). The practical law from
the motive of happiness I call pragmatic (rule of prudence); but that
which is such that it has no other motive than the worthiness to be
happy I call moral (moral law)! The first advises us what to do if we
want to partake of happiness; the second commands how we should be­
have in order even to be worthy of happiness. The first is grounded on
a

extensively

b intensively
, In the first edition, "as."
d

protensively

, moralisch (Sittengesetz)
677

A 806 1 B 834

Doctrine of Method.

A 807 / B 8 3 5

A 808 / B 836

Ch. II. Sec. II

empirical principles;a for except by means of experience r can know nei­
ther which inclinations there are that would be satisfied nor what the
natural causes are that could satisfy them. The second abstracts from
inclinations and natural means of satisfying them, and considers only
the freedom of a rational being in general and the necessary conditions
under which alone jr is in agreement with the distribution of happiness
in accordance with principles/ and thus it at least can rest on mere ideas
of pure reason and be cognized a priori.
r assume that there are really pure moral laws, which determine completely a priori (without regard to empirical motives, i.e., happiness) the
action and omission, i.e., the use of the freedom of a rational being in
general, and that these laws command absolutely (not merely hypo­
thetically under the presupposition of other empirical ends), and are
thus necessary in every respect.28 r can legitimately presuppose this
proposition by appealing not only to the proofs of the most enlightened
moralists but also to the moral judgment of every human being, if he
will distinctly think such a law.
Pure reason thus contains - not in its speculative use, to be sure, but
yet in a certain practical use, namely the moral use - principles C of the
possibility of experience, namely of those actions in conformity with
moral precepts which could be encountered in the history of hu­
mankind. For since they command that these actions ought to happen,
they must also be able to happen, and there must therefore be possible
a special kind of systematic unity, namely the moral, whereas the sys­
tematic unity of nature in accordance with speculative principlesd of
reason could not be proved, since reason has causality with regard to
freedom in general but not with regard to the whole of nature, and
moral principles of reasone can produce free actions but not laws of nature. Thus the principles! of pure reason have objective reality in their
practical use, that is, in the moral use.
r call the world as it would be if it were in conformity with all moral
laws (as it can be in accordance with the freedom of rational beings and
should be in accordance with the necessary laws of morality) a moral
world.g This is conceived thus far merely as an intelligible world, since
abstraction is made therein from all conditions (ends) and even from all
hindrances to morality in it (weakness or impurityh of human nature).
Principien
b Principien
( Principien
a

d

Principien

, Vernunftprincipien
f Principien
g

h

Here Kant uses even larger type than his ordinary emphasis.

Unlauterkeit

678

On the ideal of the highest good

Thus far it is therefore a mere, yet practical, idea, which really can and
should have its influence on the sensible world, in order to make it
agree as far as possible with this idea. The idea of a moral world thus
has objective reality, not as if it pertained to an object of an intelligible
intuition (for we cannot even think of such a thing), but as pertaining
to the sensible world, although as an object of pure reason in its practi­
cal use and a corpus mysticum of the rational beings in it, insofar as their
free choice under moral laws has thoroughgoing systematic unity in it­
self as well as with the freedom of everyone else.
This was the reply to the first of the two questions of pure reason that
concern the practical interest: Do that through which you will become worthy to be happy. Now the second question asks: Now if! behave so as not to b e unworthy o f happiness, how may I hope thereby to
partake of it? For the answer to this question, the issue is whether the
principles a of pure reason that prescribe the law a priori also necessarily connect this hope with it.
I say, accordingly, that just as the moral principlesb are necessary in
accordance with reason in its practical use, it is equally necessary to as­
sume in accordance with reason in its theoretical use' that everyone has
cause to hope for happiness in the same measure as he has made him­
self worthy of it in his conduct, and that the system of morality is there­
fore inseparably combined with the system of happiness, though only in
the idea of pure reason.
Now in an intelligible world, i.e., in the moral world, in the concept
of which we have abstracted from all hindrances to morality (of the in­
clinations) ' such a system of happiness proportionately combined with
morality can also be thought as necessary, since freedom, partly moved
and partly restricted by moral laws, would itself be the cause of the gen­
eral happiness, and rational beings, under the guidance of such princi­
ples,d would themselves be the authors of their own enduring welfare
and at the same time that of others. But this system of self-rewarding
morality is only an idea, the realization of which rests on the condition
that everyone do what he should, i.e., that all actions of rational beings
occur as if they arose from a highest will that comprehends all private
choice in or under itself. But since the obligation from the moral law
remains valid for each particular use of freedom even if others do not
conduct themselves in accord with this law, how their consequences will
be related to happiness is determined neither by the nature of the things
in the world, nor by the causality of actions themselves and their relaPrincipien
b Principien

a

, The second occurrence of "use" is added in the second edition.
d

Principien

679

A 809/B 8 3 7

A8IO/ B 838

Doctrine of Method. Ch. II. Sec. II

A SI I / B 839

A 8 1 2 / B 840

tion a to morality; and the necessary connection of the hope of being
happy with the unremitting effort to make oneself worthy of happiness
that has been adduced cannot be cognized through reason if it is
grounded merely in nature, but may be hoped for only if it is at the
same time grounded on a highest reason, which commands in accor­
dance with moral laws, as at the same time the cause of nature.
I call the idea of such an intelligence, in which the morally most per­
fect will, combined with the highest blessedness, is the cause of all hap­
piness in the world, insofar as it stands in exact relationb with morality
(as the worthiness to be happy), the ideal of the highest good. 29 Thus
only in the ideal of the highest original good can pure reason find the
ground of the practically necessary connection of both elements of the
highest derived good, namely of an intelligible, i.e., moral world. Now
since we must necessarily represent ourselves through reason as be­
longing to such a world, although the senses do not present us with any­
thing except a world of appearances, we must assume the moral world
to be a consequence of our conduct in the sensible world; and since the
latter does not offer such a connection to us, we must assume the for­
mer to be a world that is future for us. Thus God and a future life are
two presuppositions that are not to be separated from the obligation
that pure reason imposes on us in accordance with principles ' of that
very same reason.
Morality in itself constitutes a system, but happiness does not, except
insofar as it is distributed precisely in accordance with morality. This,
however, is possible only in the intelligible world, under a wise author
and regent. Reason sees itself as compelled either to assume such a
thing, together with life in such a world, which we must regard as a fu­
ture one, or else to regard the moral laws as empty figments of the
brain, since without that presupposition their necessary success, which
the same reason connects with them, would have to disappear. Hence
everyone also regards the moral laws as commands, which, however,
they could not be if they did not connect appropriate consequences
with their rule a priori, and thus carry with them promises and threats.
This, however, they could not do if they did not lie in a necessary being,
as the highest good, which alone can make possible such a purposive
unity.
Leibniz called the world, insofar as in it one attends only to rational
beings and their interconnection in accordance with moral laws under
the rule of the highest good, the realm30 of grace, and distinguished
it from the realm of nature, where, to be sure, rational beings stand
Verhiiltnisse
Verhiiltnisse
, Principien
a

b

680

On the ideal of the highest good

under moral laws but cannot expect any successes for their conduct ex­
cept in accordance with the course of nature in our sensible worldY
Thus to regard ourselves as in the realm of grace, where every hap­
piness awaits us as long as we do not ourselves limit our share of it
through the unworthiness to be happy, is a practically necessary idea of
reason.
Practical laws, insofar as they are at the same time subjective grounds
of actions, i.e., subjective principles, are called maxims. The judg­
menta of morality concerning its purity and consequences takes place
in accordance with ideas, the observance of its laws, in accordance
with maximsY
It is necessary that our entire course of life be subordinated to moral
maxims; but it would at the same time be impossible for this to happen
if reason did not connect with the moral law, which is a mere idea, an
efficient cause which determines for the conduct in accord with this law
an outcome precisely corresponding to our highest ends, whether in
this or in another life. Thus without a God and a world that is now not
visible to us but is hoped for, the majestic ideas of morality are, to be
sure, objects of approbation and admiration but not incentives for resolve and realization, because they would not fulfill the whole end that
is natural for every rational being and determined a priori and necessarily through the very same pure reason.
Happiness alone is far from the complete good for our reason. Rea­
son does not approve of it (however much inclination may wish for it)
where it is not united with the worthiness to be happy, i.e., with morally
good conduct. Yet morality alone, and with it, the mere worthiness to
be happy, is also far from being the complete good. In order to com­
plete the latter, he who has not conducted himself so as to be unworthy
of happiness must be able to hope to partake of it. Even reason free
from all private aims cannot judge otherwise if, without taking into ac­
count an interest of its own, it puts itself in the place of a being who
would have to distribute all happiness to others; for in the practical idea
both elements are essentially combined, though in such a way that the
moral disposition, as a condition, first makes partaking in happiness
possible, rather than the prospect of happiness first making possible the
moral disposition. For in the latter case the disposition would not be
moral and would therefore also be unworthy of complete happiness,
which knowsb no other limitation before reason except that which is derived from our own immoral conduct.
Thus happiness in exact proportion with the morality of rational be­
ings, through which they are worthy of it, alone constitutes the highest
Beurtheilung
b erkennt
a

681

A 8 1 3 / B 841

A 8 1 4/ B 842

Doctrine of Method. Ch. II. Sec. II

A 8 1 5/ B 843

ASI6/ B 844

good of a world into which we must without exception transpose our­
selves in accordance with the precepts of pure but practical reason, and
which, of course, is only an intelligible world, since the sensible world
does not promise us that sort of systematic unity of ends, the reality of
which can be grounded on nothing other than the presupposition of a
highest original good, since self-sufficient reason, armed with all of the
sufficiency of a supreme cause, in accordance with the most perfect pur­
posiveness, grounds, conserves, and completes the order of things that
is universal though well hidden from us in the sensible world.
Now this moral theology has the peculiar advantage over the specu­
lative one that it inexorably leads to the concept of a single, most per­
fect, and rational primordial being, of which speculative theology
could not on objective grounds give us even a hint, let alone convince
us. For neither in speculative nor in natural theology, as far as reason
may lead us, do we find even a single significant ground for assuming a
singlea being to set before all natural causes, on which we would at the
same time have sufficient cause to make the latter dependent in every
way. On the contrary, if, from the standpoint of moral unity, we assess
the cause that can alone provide this with the appropriate effecrl' and
thus obligating force for us, as a necessary law of the world, then there
must be a single supreme will, which comprehends all these laws in it­
self. For how would we find complete unity of purposes among differ­
ent wills? This will must be omnipotent, so that all of nature and its
relation to morality in the world are subject to it; omniscient, so that it
cognizes the inmost dispositions and their moral worth; omnipresent,
so that it is immediately ready for every need that is demanded by the
highest good for the world; eternal, so that this agreement of nature
and freedom is not lacking at any time, etc.
But this systematic unity of ends in this world of intelligences, which,
though as mere nature it can only be called the sensible world, as a sys­
tem of freedom can be called an intelligible, i.e., moral world (regnum
gratiae),c also leads inexorably to the purposive unity of all things that
constitute this great whole, in accordance with universal laws of nature,
just as the first does in accordance with universal and necessary moral
laws, and unifies practical with speculative reason. The world must be
represented as having arisen out of an idea if it is to be in agreement
with that use of reason without which we would hold ourselves unwor­
thy of reason, namely the moral use, which depends throughout on the
idea of the highest good. All research into nature is thereby directed to­
ward the form of a system of ends, and becomes, in its fullest extension,
" Emphasized in the first edition.

b Effekt
, realm of grace
682

On the ideal of the highest good

physico-theology. This, however, since it arises from moral order as a
unity which is grounded in the essence of freedom and not contingently
founded through external commands, brings the purposiveness of na­
ture down to grounds that must be inseparably connected a priori to the
inner possibility of things, and thereby leads to a transcendental the­
ology that takes the ideal of the highest ontological perfection as a
principle a of systematic unity, which connects all things in accordance
with universal and necessary laws of nature, since they all have their ori­
gin in the absolute necessity of a single original being.
What sort of use can we make of our understanding, even in regard
to experience, if we do not set ends before ourselves? The highest
ends, however, are those of morality, and only pure reason can grant us
cognition of these. But though equipped and guided with these, we still
cannot even make any purposive use of our acquaintanceb with nature
for cognitionc unless nature itself has introduced purposive unity; for
without this we would not even have any reason, since we would have
no school for it and no culture through objects that would offer the
material for such concepts. That purposive unity is necessary, however,
and grounded in the essence of the faculty of choice itself, and therefore this one, which contains the condition of the application of that
unity in concreto, must also be necessary, and thus the transcendental
improvement of our rational cognition is not the cause but rather
merely the effect of the practical purposiveness which pure reason imposes on us.
Hence we also find in the history of human reason that before the
moral concepts were adequately purified and determined and the systematic unity of purposes was understood in accordance with them and
from necessary principles,d the knowledge of nature and even a considerable degree of culture of reason in many other sciences could, on the
one hand, produce only rudimentary and vague concepts of the deity,
and, on the other, leave a remarkable indifference with regard to this
question in general. A greater refinement of moral ideas, which was
made necessary by the extremely pure moral law of our religion, made
reason attend more sharply to its object by means of the interest that it
required reason to take in this object, and, without a contribution from
either more ample acquaintance with nature or correct and reliable
transcendental insights (which have been lacking at all times), produced
a concept of the divine being that we now hold to be correct, not because speculative reason convinces us of its correctness but because it is
Princip
b Kenntnis
, Erkenntnis
d Principien
a

683

A 8 1 7 1 B 845

A S I S/ B S46

Doctrine of Method. Ch. II. Sec. III

A 8 1 9/ B 847

in perfect agreement with the moral principles of reason.a And thus, in
the end, only pure reason, although only in its practical use, always has
the merit of connecting with our highest interest a cognition that mere
speculation can only imagine but never make valid, and of thereby mak­
ing it into not a demonstrated dogma but yet an absolutely necessary
presupposition for reason 's most essential ends.
But now when practical reason has attained this high point, namely
the concept of a single original being as the highest good, it must not
undertake to start out from this concept and derive the moral laws
themselves from it, as if it had elevated itself above all empirical condi­
tions of its application and soared up to an immediate acquaintance with
new objects. For it was these laws alone whose inner practical necessity
led us to the presupposition of a self-sufficient cause or a wise world­
regent, in order to give effectb to these laws, and hence we cannot in
turn regard these as contingent and derived from a mere will, especially
from a will of which we would have had no concept at all had we not
formed it in accordance with those laws.33 So far as practical reason has
the right to lead us, we will not hold actions to be obligatory because
they are God's commands, but will rather regard them as divine com­
mands because we are internally obligated to them.34 We will study free­
dom under the purposive unity in accordance with principlesc of reason,
and will believe ourselves to be in conformity with the divine will only
insofar as we hold as holy the moral law that reason teaches us from the
nature of actions themselves, believing ourselves to serve this divine will
only through furthering what is best for the worldd in ourselves and oth­
ers. Moral theology is therefore only of immanent use, namely for ful­
filling our vocation here in the world by fitting into the system of all
ends, not for fanatically or even impiously abandoning the guidance of
a morally legislative reason in the good course of life in order to con­
nect it immediately to the idea of the highest being, which would pro­
vide a transcendental use but which even so, like the use of mere
speculation, must pervert and frustrate the ultimate ends of reason.

A 820/ B 848

On the Canon of Pure Reason
Third Section
On having an opinion, knowing, and believing.35
Taking something to be true' is an occurrence in our understanding that
may rest on objective grounds, but that also requires subjective causes in
moralischen Vernunftprincipien
Effect
, Principien
d das Weltheste
Das Furwahrhalten

a

b

C

684

On having opinions, knowing, and believing

the mind of him who judges. If it is valid for everyone merely as long as
he has reason, then its ground is objectively sufficient, and in that case
taking something to be true is called conviction.a If it has its ground only
in the particular constitution of the subject, then it is called persuasion.b
Persuasion is a mere semblance,c since the ground of the judgment,
which lies solely in the subject, is held to be objective. Hence such a
judgment also has only private validity, and this taking something to be
true cannot be communicated. Truth, however, rests upon agreement
with the object, d with regard to which, consequently, the judgments of
every understanding must agree (consentientia uni tertio, consentiunt inter
se).e The touchstone of whether taking something to be true is convic­
tion or mere persuasion is therefore, externally, the possibility of com­
municating it and finding it to be valid for the reason of every human
being to take it to be true; for in that case there is at least a presumption that the ground of the agreement of all judgments, regardless of
the difference among the subjects, rests on the common ground,
namely the object/ with which they therefore all agree and through
which the truth of the judgment is proved.
Accordingly, persuasion cannot be distinguished from conviction
subjectively, when the subject has taken something to be true merely as
an appearance of his own mind; but the experiment that one makes on
the understanding of others, to see if the grounds that are valid for us
have the same effect on the reason of others, is a means, though only a
subjective one, not for producing conviction, to be sure, but yet for re­
vealing the merely private validity of the judgment, i.e., something in it
that is mere persuasion.
If, moreover, one can unfold the subjective causes of the judgment,
which we take to be objective grounds for it, and thus explain taking
something to be true deceptively as an occurrence in our mind, without
having any need for the constitution of the object, g then we expose the
illusion and are no longer taken in by it, although we are always
tempted to a certain degree if the subjective cause of the illusion de­
pends upon our nature.
I cannot assert anything, i.e., pronounce it to be a judgment necessarily valid for everyone, except that which produces conviction. I can
preserve persuasion for myself if! please to do so, but cannot and should
not want to make it valid beyond myself.
Uberzeugung
b Uberredung
, Schein
J Objekte
, [Because of] agreement with a third thing, they agree among themselves.
f Objecte
g Objects
a

685

A 8 2 I / B 849

A 8 2 2 / B 8S0

Doctrine of Method. Ch. II. Sec. III

A 8 2 3 / B 85 I

A824/ B 8 5 2

Taking something to be true, or the subjective validity of judgment,
has the following three stages in relation to conviction (which at the
same time is valid objectively): having an opinion, believing, and
knowing. Having an opinion is taking something to be true with the
consciousness that it is subjectively as well as objectively insufficient. If
taking something to be true is only subjectively sufficient and is at the
same time held to be objectively insufficient, then it is called believing.
Finally, when taking something to be true is both subjectively and ob­
jectively sufficient it is called knowing. Subjective sufficiency is called
conviction (for myself), objective sufficiency, certainty (for everyone).
I will not pause for the exposition of such readily grasped concepts.
I must never undertake to have an opinion without at least know­
ing something by means of which the in itself merely problematic judg­
ment acquires a connection with truth which, although it is not
complete, is nevertheless more than an arbitrary invention. Further­
more, the law of such a connection must be certain. For if in regard to
this too I have nothing but opinion, then it is all only a game of imagi­
nation without the least relation to truth. In judging from pure reason,
to have an opinion is not allowed at all. For since it will not be supported on grounds of experience, but everything that is necessary
should be cognized a priori, the principle of connection requires uni­
versality and necessity, thus complete certainty, otherwise no guidance
to the truth is forthcoming at all. Hence it is absurd to have an opinion
in pure mathematics: one must know, or else refrain from all judgment.
It is just the same with the principles of morality, since one must not
venture an action on the mere opinion that something is allowed, but
must know this.
In the transcendental use of reason, on the contrary, to have an opin­
ion is of course too little, but to know is also too much. In a merely
speculative regard, therefore, we cannot judge at all here, for subjective
grounds for taking something to be true, such as those that can produce
belief, deserve no approval in speculative questions, where they neither
remain free of all empirical assistance nor allow of being communicated
to others in equal measure.
Only in a practical relation, however, can taking something that is
theoretically insufficient to be true be called believing,36 This practical
aim is either that of skill or of morality, the former for arbitrary and
contingent ends, the latter, however, for absolutely necessary ends.
Once an end is proposed, then the conditions for attaining it are hy­
pothetically necessary. This necessity is subjectively but still only com­
paratively sufficient if! d o not know o f any other conditions at all under
which the end could be attained; but it is sufficient absolutely and for
a

Princip
686

On having opinions, knowing, and believing

everyone if I know with certainty that no one else can know of any other
conditions that lead to the proposed end. In the first case my presup­
position and taking certain conditions to be true is a merely contingent
belief, in the second case, however, it is a necessary belief. The doctor
must do something for a sick person who is in danger, but he does not
knowa the illness. He looks to the symptoms/ and judges, because he
does not know of anything better, that it is consumption. His belief is
merely contingent even in his own judgment; someone else might per­
haps do better. I call such contingent beliefs, which however ground the
actual use of the means to certain actions, pragmatic beliefs.
The usual touchstone of whether what someone asserts is mere per­
suasion or at least subjective conviction, i.e., firm belief, is betting.
Often someone pronounces his propositions with such confident and
inflexible defiance that he seems to have entirely laid aside all concern
for error. A bet disconcerts him. Sometimes he reveals that he is per­
suaded enough for one ducat but not for ten. For he would happily bet
one, but at ten he suddenly becomes aware of what he had not previously noticed, namely that i t i s quite possible that h e has erred. I f we
entertain the thought that we should wager the happiness of our whole
life on something, our triumphant judgment would quickly disappear,
we would become timid and we would suddenly discover that our belief
does not extend so far,37 Thus pragmatic belief has only a degree, which
can be large or small according to the difference of the interest that is
at stake.
Since, however, even though we might not be able to undertake any­
thing in relation to an object,c and taking something to be true is there­
fore merely theoretical, in many cases we can still conceive and imagine
an undertaking for which we would suppose ourselves to have sufficient
grounds if there were a means for arriving at certainty about the mat­
ter; thus there is in merely theoretical judgments an analogue of prac­
tical judgments, where taking them to be true is aptly described by the
word belief, and which we can call doctrinal beliefs.d If it were possi­
ble to settle by any sort of experience whether there are inhabitants of
at least some of the planets that we see, I might well bet everything that
I have on it. Hence I say that it is not merely an opinion but a strong
belief (on the correctness of which I would wager many advantages in
life) that there are also inhabitants of other worlds.
kennt
b Erscheinungen, here used in a non-technical sense.
Object
d Glaube. While it would be natural to translate Glaube as "faith" when Kant is writing
4

C

specifically about belief in the existence of God, in what follows there are numerous oc­
curr ences of the term which can only be translated by "belief," so it seems better to use
that translation throughout. This also allows us to translate the verb glauben as "believe."

687

A 8 2 S / B 8S 3

Doctrine of Method. Ch. II. Sec. III

A826 / B 8S 4

Now we must concede that the thesis of the existence of God belongs
to doctrinal belief. For although with regard to theoretical knowledge
of the world I have nothing at my command that necessarily presup­
poses this thought as the condition of my explanations of the appear­
ances of the world, but am rather obliged to make use of my reason as
if everything were mere nature, purposive unity is still so important a
condition of the application of reason to nature that I cannot pass it by,
especially since experience liberally supplies examples of it. But I know
no other condition for this unity that could serve me as a clue for the
investigation of nature except insofar as I presuppose that a highest in­
telligence has arranged everything in accordance with the wisest ends.
Consequently, the presupposition of a wise author of the world is a con­
dition of an aim which is, to be sure, contingent but yet not inconsid­
erable, namely that of having a guide for the investigation of nature.
The outcome of my experiments also so often confirms the usefulness
of this presupposition, and nothing can be decisively said against it, so

A827/B 8SS

A 8 2 8 / B 8S6

that I would say too little if I called my taking it to be true merely hav­
ing an opinion, but rather even in this theoretical relationa it can be said
that I firmly believe in God; but in this case this belief must not strictly
be called practical, but must be called a doctrinal belief, which the theology of nature (physico-theology) must everywhere necessarily pro­
duce. In regard to this same wisdom, in respect of the magnificent
equipment of human nature and the shortness of life which is so ill
suited to it, there is likewise to be found sufficient ground for a doctri­
nal belief in the future life of the human soul.
The expression of belief is in such cases an expression of modesty
from an objective point of view, but at the same time of the firmness of
confidence in a subjective one. If here too I would call merely theo­
retically taking something to be true only an hypothesis that I would be
justified in assuming, I would thereby make myself liable for more of a
concept of the constitution of a world-cause and of another world than
I can really boast of; for of that which I even only assume as an hypoth­
esis I must know at least enough of its properties so that I need invent
not its concept but only its existence. The word "belief," however,
concerns only the direction that an idea gives me and the subjective in­
fluence on the advancement of my actions of reason that holds me fast
to it, even though I am not in a position to give an account of it from a
speculative point of view.
But there is something unstable about merely doctrinal belief; one is
often put off from it by difficulties that come up in speculation, al­
though, to be sure, one inexorably returns to it again.
It is entirely otherwise in the case of moral belief. For there it is aba

Verhiiltnisse
688

On having opinions, knowing, and believing

solutely necessary that something must happen, namely, that I fulfill the
moral law in all points. The end here is inescapably fixed, and according
to all my insight there is possible only a single condition under which
this end is consistent with all ends together and thereby has practical va­
lidity, namely, that there be a God and a future world; I also know with
complete certainty that no one else knows of any other conditions that
lead to this same unity of ends under the moral law. But since the moral
precept is thus at the same time my maxim (as reason commands that it
ought to be), I will inexorably believe in the existence of God and a fu­
ture life, and I am sure that nothing can make these beliefs unstable,
since my moral principles themselves, which I cannot renounce without
becoming contemptible in my own eyes, would thereby be subverted.38
In this way enough is left to us, even after the frustration of all the
ambitious aims of a reason that wanders about beyond the boundaries
of all experience, that we have cause to be satisfied with it from a prac­
tical point of view. Of course, no one will be able to boast that he knows
that there is a God and a future life; for if he knows that, then he is precisely the man I have long sought. All knowing (if it concerns an object
of reason alone) can be communicated, and I would therefore also be
able to hope to have my knowledge extended to such a wonderful degree by his instruction. No, the conviction is not logical but moral
certainty, and, since it depends on subjective grounds (of moral disposition) I must not even say "It is morally certain that there is a God,"
etc., but rather "I am morally certain" etc. That is, the belief in a God
and another world is so interwoven with my moral disposition that I am
in as little danger of ever surrendering the former as I am worried that
the latter can ever be torn away from me.
The only reservation that is to be found here is that this rational be­
lief is grounded on the presupposition of moral dispositions. If we de­
part from that, and assume someone who would be entirely indifferent
in regard to moral questions, then the question that is propounded by
reason becomes merely a problem for speculation, and in that case it
can be supported with strong grounds from analogy but not with
grounds to which even the most obstinate skepticisma must yield.* But
* The human mind takes (as I believe is necessarily the case with every rational
being) a natural interest in morality, even though this is not undivided and
practically overwhelming. Strengthen and magnify this interest, and you will
find reason very tractable and even enlightened for uniting the speculative
with the practical interest. But if you do not take care to make human beings
first at least half-way good, you will never be able to make sincere believers
out of them!
a

Zweifelsucht
689

A 8 2 9 / B 857

A830/ B 8 5 8

Doctrine of Method. Ch. II. Sec. III

A 830/B 858

A83 I / B 859

no human being is free of all interest in these questions. For although
he might be separated from the moral interest by the absence of all
good dispositions, yet even in this case there is enough left to make him
fear a divine existence and a future. For to this end nothing more is re­
quired than that he at least cannot pretend to any certainty that there
is no such being and no future life, which would have to be proved
through reason alone and thus apodictically since he would have to es­
tablish them to be impossible, which certainly no rational human can
undertake to do. That would be a negative belief, which, to be sure,
would not produce morality and good dispositions, but would still pro­
duce the analogue of them, namely it could powerfully restrain the out­
break of evil dispositions.
But is that all, one will say, that pure reason accomplishes in opening
up prospects beyond the bounds of experience? Nothing more than two
articles of belief? This much common understanding could also have
accomplished without taking advice from the philosophers!
I will not boast here of the merit that philosophy has on account of
the laborious effort of its critique of human reason, supposing even that
this should be found in the end to be merely negative, for something
more about that will be forthcoming in the next section. But do you de­
mand then that a cognition that pertains to all human beings should
surpass common understanding and be revealed to you only by philoso­
phers? The very thing that you criticize is the best confirmation of the
correctness of the assertions that have been made hitherto, that is, that
it reveals what one could not have foreseen in the beginning, namely
that in what concerns all human beings without exception nature is not
to be blamed for any partiality in the distribution of its gifts, and in re­
gard to the essential ends of human nature even the highest philosophy
cannot advance further than the guidance that nature has also conferred
on the most common understanding.

690

The Transcendental Doctrine ofMethod
Third Chapter
The
architectonic ofpure reason

By an architectonic I understand the art of systems. Since systematic
unity is that which first makes ordinary cognition into science, i.e.,
makes a system out of a mere aggregate of it, architectonic is the doc­
trine of that which is scientific in our cognition in general, and there­
fore necessarily belongs to the doctrine of method.
Under the government of reason our cognitions cannot at all consti­
tute a rhapsody but must constitute a system, in which alone they can
support and advance its essential ends. I understand by a system, how­
ever, the unity of the manifold cognitions under one idea. This is the
rational concept of the form of a whole, insofar as through this the do­
main of the manifold as well as the position of the parts with respect to
each other is determined a priori. The scientific rational concept thus
contains the end and the form of the whole that is congruent with it.
The unity of the end, to which all parts are related and in the idea of
which they are also related to each other, allows the absence of any part
to be noticed in our knowledge of the rest, and there can be no contingent addition or undetermined magnitude of perfection that does not
have its boundaries determined a priori. The whole is therefore articulated (articulatio) and not heaped together (coacervatio);a it can, to be
sure, grow internally (per intus susceptionem)b but not externally (per appositionem),c like an animal body, whose growth does not add a limb but
rather makes each limb stronger and fitter for its end without any alteration of proportion.
For its execution the idea needs a schema, i.e., an essential mani­
foldness and order of the parts determined a priori from the principled
of the end. A schema that is not outlined in accordance with an idea,
a

Literally, "heaped up."

b from an internal cause
, by juxtaposition
d

Princip

69 1

A 83 3 /B 861

Doctrine of Method. Ch. III

A 834/B 862

A83 5 / B 863

i.e., from the chief end of reason, but empirically, in accordance with
aims occurring contingently (whose number" one cannot know in ad­
vance), yields technical unity, but that which arises only in consequence
of an idea (where reason provides the ends a priori and does not await
them empirically) grounds architectonic unity. \Vhat we call science,
whose schema contains the outline (monogramma) and the division of
the whole into members in conformity with the idea, i.e., a priori, can­
not arise technically, from the similarity of the manifold or the contin­
gent use of cognition in concreto for all sorts of arbitrary external ends,
but arises architectonically, for the sake of its affinity and its derivation
from a single supreme and inner end, which first makes possible the
whole; such a science must be distinguished from all others with cer­
tainty and in accordance with principles.b
Nobody attempts to establish a science without grounding it on an
idea. But in its elaboration the schema, indeed even the definition of the
science which is given right at the outset, seldom corresponds to the
idea; for this lies in reason like a seed, all of whose parts still lie very in­
voluted and are hardly recognizable even under microscopic observa­
tion. For this reason sciences, since they have all been thought out from
the viewpoint of a certain general interest, must not be explained and
determined in accordance with the description given by their founder,
but rather in accordance with the idea, grounded in reason itself, of the
natural unity of the parts that have been brought together. For the
founder and even his most recent successors often fumble around with
an idea that they have not even made distinct to themselves and that
therefore cannot determine the special content, the articulation (sys­
tematic unity) and boundaries of the science.
It is too bad that it is first possible for us to glimpse the idea in a
clearer light and to outline a whole architectonically, in accordance with
the ends of reason, only after we have long collected relevant cognitions
haphazardly' like building materials and worked through them technically with only a hint from an idea lying hidden within us. The systems
seem to have been formed, like maggots, by a generatio aequivoca39 from
the mere confluence of aggregated concepts, garbled at first but com­
plete in time, although they all had their schema, as the original seed,
in the mere self-development of reason, and on that account are not
merely each articulated for themselves in accordance with an idea but
are rather all in turn purposively united with each other as members of
a whole in a system of human cognition, and allow an architectonic to
all human knowledge, which at the present time, since so much materlWenge
b Principien
, rhapsodistisch

a

692

The architectonic of pure reason

ial has already been collected or can be taken from the ruins of col­
lapsed older edifices, would not merely be possible but would not even
be very difficult. We shall content ourselves here with the completion
of our task, namely, merely outlining the architectonic of all cognition
from pure reason, and begin only at the point where the general root
of our cognitive power divides and branches out into two stems, one of
which is reason. By "reason" I here understand, however, the entire
higher faculty of cognition, and I therefore contrast the· rational to the
empirical.
If I abstract from all content of cognition, objectively considered,
then all cognition, considered subjectively, is either historical or ratio- A836/ B 864
nal. Historical cognition40 is cognitio ex datis,a rational cognition, however, cognitio ex principiis.b However a cognition may have been given
originally, it is still historical for him who possesses it if he cognizes it
only to the degree and extent that it has been given to him from elsewhere, whether it has been given to him through immediate experience
or told to him or even given to him through instruction (general cognitions). Hence he who has properly learned a system of philosophy,
e.g., the Wolffian system, although he has in his head all of the principles, explanations, and proofs together with the division of the entire
theoretical edifice, and can count everything off on his fingers, still has
nothing other than a complete historical cognition of the Wolffian philosophy; he knows and judges only as much as has been given to him. If
you dispute one of his definitions, he has no idea where to get another
one. He has formed himself according to an alien reason, but the faculty of imitation is not that of generation, i.e., the cognition did not
arise from reason for him, and although objectively it was certainly a
rational cognition, subjectively it is still merely historical. He has
grasped and preserved well, i.e., he has learned, and is a plaster cast of
a living human being. Rational cognitions that are objectively so (i.e.,
could have arisen originally only out of the reason of human beings
themselves), may also bear this name subjectively only if they have been
drawn out of the universal sources of reason, from which critique, in- A 8 3 7 / B 865
deed even the rejection of what has been learned, can also arise, i.e.,
from principles.c
Now all rational cognition is either cognition from concepts or cog­
nition from the construction of concepts; the former is called philo­
sophical, the latter mathematical. I have already dealt with the inner
difference between the two in the first chapter.4' A cognition can ac­
cordingly be objectively philosophical and yet subjectively historical, as
a

cognition from data, or from what is given.

b cognition from principles
, Principien

693

Doctrine of Method. Ch. III

A 8 3 8 / B 866

A 8 3 9 / B 86 7

is the case with most students and with all of those who never see be­
yond their school and remain students their whole lives. But it is
strange that mathematical cognition, however one has learned it, can
still count subjectively as rational cognition, and that the difference pre­
sent in the case of philosophical cognition is not present in this case.
The cause of this is that the sources of cognition on which alone the
teacher can draw lie nowhere other than in the essential and genuine
principles a of reason, and consequently cannot be derived from any­
where else by the student, nor disputed in any way, precisely because
reason is here used in concreto though nevertheless a priori, founded, that
is, in pure and therefore error-free intuition, and excludes all deception
and error.4" Among all rational sciences (a priori), therefore, only math­
ematics can be learned, never philosophy (except historically); rather, as
far as reason is concerned, we can at best only learn to philosophize.
Now the system of all philosophical cognition is philosophy. One
must take this objectively if one understands by it the archetype for the
assessmentb of all attempts to philosophize, which should serve to as­
sess" each subjective philosophy, the structure of which is often so man­
ifold and variable. In this way philosophy is a mere idea of a possible
science, which is nowhere given in concreto, but which one seeks to ap­
proach in various ways until the only footpath, much overgrown by sen­
sibility, is discovered, and the hitherto unsuccessful ectype, so far as it
has been granted to humans, is made equal to the archetype. Until then
one cannot learn any philosophy; for where is it, who has possession of
it, and by what can it be recognized? One can only learn to philoso­
phize, i.e., to exercise the talent of reason in prosecuting its general
principlesd in certain experiments that come to hand, but always with
the reservation of the right of reason to investigate the sources of these
principles themselves and to confirm or reject them.43
Until now, however, the concept of philosophye has been only a
scholastic concept,!namely that of a system of cognition that is sought
only as a science without having as its end anything more than the sys­
tematic unity of this knowledge, thus the logical perfection of cogni­
tion. But there is also a cosmopolitan conceptg (conceptus cosmicus) that
has always grounded this term, especially when it is, as it were, personified and represented as an archetype in the ideal of the philosopher.
From this point of view philosophy is the science of the relation of all
Principien
b Beurtheilung
beurtheilen
d Principien

a

C

, Added in Kant's copy of the first edition: "Idealist, idea" (E CLXXXII, p. 54; 23: 50).

f
g

Schulbegriff
Weltbegriff

694

The architectonic of pure reason

cognition to the essential ends of human reason (teleologia rationis hu­
manae),a and the philosopher is not an artist of reason but the legislator
of human reason. It would be very boastful to call oneself a philosopher
in this senseb and to pretend to have equaled the archetype, which lies
only in the idea.
The mathematician, the naturalist, the logician are only artists of rea­
son, however eminent the former may be in rational cognitions and
however much progress the latter may have made in philosophical cog­
nition. There is still a teacher in the ideal, who controls all of these and
uses them as tools to advance the essential ends of human reason. Him
alone we must call the philosopher; however, since he himself is still
found nowhere, although the idea of his legislation is found in every
human reason, we will confine ourselves to the latter and determine
more precisely what philosophy, in accordance with this cosmopolitan
concept,* prescribes for systematic unity from the standpoint of ends.
Essential ends are on this account not yet the highest, of which (in
the complete systematic unity of reason) there can be only a single one.
Hence they are either the final end,c or subalternate ends, which neces­
sarily belong to the former as means. The former is nothing other than
the entire vocation d of human beings, and the philosophy of it is called
moral philosophy. On account of the preeminence which moral philos­
ophy had over all other applications of reason, the ancients understood
by the name of "philosopher" first and foremost the moralist, and even
the outer appearance of self-control through reason still suffices today
for calling someone a philosopher after a certain analogy, in spite of his
limited knowledge.
Now the legislation of human reason (philosophy) has two objects,
nature and freedom, and thus contains the natural law as well as the
moral law, initially in two separate systems but ultimately in a single
philosophical system. The philosophy of nature pertains to everything
that is; that of morals only to that which should be.
All philosophy, however, is either cognition from pure reason or ra­
tional cognition from empirical principles.e The former is called pure
philosophy, the latter empirical.
* A cosmopolitan concept here means one that concerns that which necessarily interests everyone; hence I determine the aim of a science in accordance
with scholastic concepts if it is regarded only as one of the skills for certain
arbitrary ends.
a

teleology of human reason

b Bedeutung
, Endzweck
d Bestimmung
, Principien

695

A 840 / B 868

A 8 3 9 / B 867

Doctrine of Method. Ch. III

A 84I / B 869

A 84z 1 B 870

Now the philosophy of pure reason is either propaedeutic (preparation), which investigates the faculty of reason in regard to all pure a pri­
ori cognition, and is called critique, or, second, the system of pure
reason (science), the whole (true as well as apparent) philosophical cog­
nition from pure reason in systematic interconnection, and is called
metaphysics; this name can also be given to all of pure philosophy in­
cluding the critique, in order to comprehend the investigation of every­
thing that can ever be cognized a priori as well as the presentation of
that which constitutes a system of pure philosophical cognitions of this
kind, but in distinction from all empirical as well as mathematical use of
reason.
Metaphysics is divided into the metaphysics of the speculative and
the practical use of pure reason, and is therefore either metaphysics of
nature or metaphysics of morals. The former contains all rational
principleso from mere concepts (hence with the exclusion of mathe­
matics) for the theoretical cognition of all things; the latter, the prin­
ciplesb which determine action and omission a priori and make them
necessary. Now morality is the only lawfulness of actions which can be
derived entirely a priori from principles. C Hence the metaphysics of
morals is really the pure morality, which is not grounded on any anthropology (no empirical condition). The metaphysics of speculative
reason is that which has customarily been called metaphysics in the
narrower sense;d but insofar as the pure doctrine of morals neverthe­
less belongs to the special stem of human and indeed philosophical cog­
nition from pure reason, we will retain this term for it, although we set
it aside here as not now pertaining to our end.
It is of the utmost importance to isolate cognitions that differ from
one another in their species and origin, and carefully to avoid mixing
them together with others with which they are usually connected in
their use. What chemists do in analyzing materials, what mathemati­
cians do in their pure theory of magnitude, the philosopher is even
more obliged to do, so that he can securely determine the proper value
and influence of the advantage that a special kind of cognition has
over the aimless use of the understanding. Hence human reason has
never been able to dispense with a metaphysics as long as it has thought,
or rather reflected,e though it has never been able to present it in a man­
ner sufficiently purified of everything foreign to it. The idea of such a
science is just as old as speculative human reason; and what reason does
Principien
b Principien
, Principien
d Verstande
, nachgedacht

d

696

The architectonic of pure reason

not speculate, whether in a scholastic or a popular manner? One must
nevertheless admit that the distinction of the two elements in our cognition, one o f which is in our power completely a priori but the other of
which can be derived only from experience a posteriori, has remained
very indistinct, even among professional thinkers, and hence the determination of the bounds of a special kind of cognition, and thus the genuine idea of a science with which human reason has so long and so
intensively occupied itself, has never been accomplished. When it was
said that metaphysics is the science of the first principlesa of human
cognition,44 an entirely special kind of cognition was not thereby
marked off, but only a rank in regard to generality, through which,
therefore, it could not be clearly differentiated from empirical cognition; for even among empirical principlesb some are more general and
therefore higher than others, and in the series of such a subordination
(where one does not differentiate that which can be cognized completely a priori from that which can be cognized only a posteriori), where
is one to make the cut that distinguishes the first part and highest members from the last part and the subordinate members?45 What would
one say if chronology could designate the epochs of the world only by
dividing them into the first centuries and the rest that follow them?
One would ask, Do the fifth century, the tenth century, and so on also
belong among the first ones?; likewise I ask, Does the concept of that
which is extended belong to metaphysics? You answer, Yes! But what
about that of body? Yes! And that of fluid body? You are stumped, for if
it goes on this way, then everything will belong to metaphysics. From
this one sees that the mere degree of subordination (the particular
under the universal) cannot determine any boundaries for a science, but
rather, in our case, only the complete heterogeneity and difference of
origin can. But what obscured the fundamental idea of metaphysics
from yet another side was that, as a priori cognition, it shows a certain
homogeneity with mathematics, to which, as far as a priori origin is concerned, it is no doubt related; but the comparison between the kind of
cognition from concepts in the former with the manner of judging a
priori through the mere construction of concepts in the latter requires
a difference between philosophical and mathematical cognition - thus a
decided heterogeneity is revealed, which was always felt, as it were, but
was never able to be brought to distinct criteria. Thus it has been the
case until now that since philosophers themselves erred in the development of the idea of their science, its elaboration could have no determinate end and no secure guideline, and philosophers, with such
arbitrarily designed projects, ignorant of the path they had to take, and
Principien
b Principien
a

697

A 843 / B 87 1

A 844/ B 872

Doctrine of Method. Ch. III

A 845 I B 873

A 8461 B 874

always disputing among themselves about the discoveries that each
would like to have made on his own, have brought their science into
contempt first among others and finally even among themselves.
Thus all pure a priori cognition, by means of the special faculty of cognition in which alone it can have its seat, constitutes a special unity, and
metaphysics is that philosophy which is to present that cognition in this
systematic unity. Its speculative part, to which this name has been espe­
cially appropriated, namely that which we call metaphysics of nature
and which considers everything insofar as it is (not that which ought to
be) on the basis of a priori concepts, is divided in the following way.a
Metaphysics in this narrower senseb consists of transcendental phi­
losophy and the physiology of pure reason. The former considers only
the understanding and reason itself in a system of all concepts and
principles that are related to objects in general, without assuming ob­
jectsC that would be given (Ontologia); the latter considers nature, i.e.,
the sum total of given objects (whether they are given by the senses or,
if one will, by another kind of intuition), and is therefore physiology
(though only rationalis).46 Now, however, the use of reason in this ra­
tional consideration of nature is either physical or hyperphysical, or,
better, either immanent or transcendent. The former pertains to na­
ture so far as its cognition can be applied in experience (in concreto), the
latter to that connection of the objects of experience which surpasses all
experience. Hence this transcendent physiology has either an inner
connection to its object or an outer one, both of which, however, go
beyond possible experience; the former is the physiology of nature in its
entirety, i.e., the transcendental cognition of the world, the latter
that of the connection of nature in its entirety to a being beyond nature,
i.e., the transcendental cognition of God.47
Immanent physiology, on the contrary, considers nature as the sum
total of all objects of the senses, thus considers it as it is given to us, but
only in accordance with a priori conditions, under which it can be given
to us in general. There are, however, only two sorts of objects for this.
1 . Those of outer sense, thus the sum total of these, corporeal nature.
2 . The object of inner sense, the soul, and, in accordance with the fun­
damental concepts of this in general, thinking nature. The meta-

a

Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition:

"I would divide it in accordance with the classes of the categories, so that in each class
the third category, which contains the other two, yields the idea of the science:

"1.

General ontology [Allgemeine Wesenlehre]; 2. Theory of namre; 3. Cosmology [Welt­
wissenschaftl ; 4. Theology." (E CLXXXIIl, p. 54; 2 3 :43). This is the last emendation Kant
made in his copy of the first edition.

b Verstande
c

Objecte
698

The architectonic of pure reason

physics of corporeal nature is called physics, but, since it is to contain
only the principles of its a priori cognition, rational physics. The meta­
physics of thinking nature is called psychology, and because of the
cause that has just been adduced only the rational cognition of this is
here meant.
Accordingly, the entire system of metaphysics consists of four main
parts. I. Ontology. 2. Rational Physiology. 3 . Rational Cosmology.
4. Rational Theology. The second part, namely the doctrine of nature
of pure reason, contains two divisions, physica rationalis* and psychologia
rationalis.48
The original idea of a philosophy of pure reason itself prescribes this
division; it is therefore architectonic, in conformity with its essential
ends, and not merely technical, in accordance with contingently per­
ceived affinities and, as it were, established by good luck; and for that
very reason it is unchangeable and legislative. However, there are sev­
eral points here which could arouse reservations and weaken the con­
viction of its lawfulness.
First, how can 1 expect an a priori cognition and thus a metaphysics
of objects that are given to our senses, thus given a posteriori? And how
is it possible to cognize the nature of things in accordance with a priori
principles a and to arrive at a rational physiology? The answer is: We
take from experience nothing more than what is necessary to give ourselves an object, b partly of outer and partly of inner sense. The former
is accomplished through the mere concept of matter (impenetrable
lifeless extension), the latter through the concept of a thinking being
(in the empirically inner representation "1 think"). Otherwise, we must
in the entire metaphysics of these objects abstain entirely from any empirical principles' that might add any sort of experience beyond the
concept in order to judge something about these objects.
* One should not think, indeed, that I understand by this what is commonly
called physica generalis, which is more mathematics than philosophy of nature.
For the metaphysics of nature abstracts entirely from mathematics, and has
nowhere near as many ampliative insights to offer as the latter, yet it is still
very important with regard to the critique of the pure cognition of understanding that is to be applied to nature in general; in its absence even mathematicians, depending on certain common but in fact metaphysical concepts,
have without noticing it burdened the doctrine of nature with hypotheses that
disappear in a critique of these principlesd without doing the least damage to
the use of mathematics in this field (which is entirely indispensable).
Principien
b Object
, Principien
d Principien

a

699

A 847 / B 875

A 848 / B 876

A 847 / B 875

Doctrine of Method. Ch. III

A 849 /B 877

A 8so/ B 8 7 8

Second: Once one gives up the hope of achieving anything useful a
priori, where does that leave empirical psychology, which has always
asserted its place in metaphysics, and from which one has expected such
great enlightenment in our own times?49 I answer: It comes in where
the proper (empirical) doctrine of nature must be put, namely on the
side of applied philosophy, for which pure philosophy contains the a
priori principles,a which must therefore be combined but never con­
fused with the former. Empirical psychology must thus be entirely
banned from metaphysics, and is already excluded by the idea of it.
Nevertheless, in accord with the customary scholastic usage one must
still concede it a little place (although only as an episode) in metaphysics, and indeed from economic motives, since it is not yet rich
enough to comprise a subject on its own and yet it is too important for
one to expel it entirely or attach it somewhere else where it may well
have even less affinity than in metaphysics. It is thus merely a long-ac­
cepted foreigner, to whom one grants refuge for a while until it can es­
tablish its own domicile in a complete anthropology (the pendant to the
empirical doctrine of nature).
This is, therefore, the general idea of metaphysics, which, since we
initially expected more from it than could appropriately be demanded
and long amused ourselves with pleasant expectations, in the end fell
into general contempt when we found ourselves deceived in our hopes.
From the whole course of our critique we will have been sufficiently
convinced that even though metaphysics cannot be the foundation of
religion, yet it must always remain its bulwark, and that human reason,
which is already dialectical on account of the tendency of its nature,
could never dispense with such a science, which reins it in and, by
means of a scientific and fully illuminating self-knowledge/ prevents
the devastations that a lawless speculative reason would otherwise in­
evitably perpetrate in both morality and religion. 'Ve can therefore be
sure that however obstinate or disdainful they may be who know how
to judge a science not in accord with its nature, but only from its con­
tingent effects, we will always return to metaphysics as to a beloved
from whom we have been estranged, since reason, because essential
ends are at issue here, must work without respite either for sound in­
sight or for the destruction of good insights that are already to hand.
Thus the metaphysics of nature as well as morals, but above all the
preparatory (propaedeutic) critique of reason that dares to fly with its
own wings, alone constitute that which we can call philosophy in a gen­
uine sense.' This relates everything to wisdom, but through the path of
n

Principien

b Selbsterkenntnis
, Verstande
700

/

The architectonic of pure reason

science, the only one which, once cleared, is never overgrown, and
never leads to error. Mathematics, natural science, even the empirical
knowledge of humankind, have a high value as means, for the most part
to contingent but yet ultimately to necessary and essential ends of hu­
manity, but only through the mediation of a rational cognition from
mere concepts, which, call it what one will, is really nothing but meta­
physics.
Just for this reason metaphysics is also the culmination of all culture
of human reason, which is indispensable even if one sets aside its influence as a science for certain determinate ends. For it considers reason
according to its elements and highest maxims, which must ground even
the possibility of some sciences and the use of all of them. That as
mere speculation it serves more to prevent errors than to amplify cognition does no damage to its value, but rather gives it all the more dignity and authority through its office as censor, which secures the
general order and unity, indeed the well-being of the scientific community, and prevents its cheerful and fruitful efforts from straying from the
chief end, that of the general happiness.

701

A 8 S I / B 879

The Transcendental Doctrine ofMethod
Fourth Chapter
The history ofpure reason

A8S3 / B 88 1

This title stands here only to designate a place that is left open in the
system and must be filled in the future. I will content myself with cast­
ing a cursory glance from a merely transcendental point of view, namely
that of the nature of pure reason, on the whole of its labors hitherto,
which presents to my view edifices, to be sure, but only in ruins.
It is remarkable enough, although it could not naturally have been
otherwise, that in the infancy of philosophy human beings began where
we should now rather end, namely, by studying first the cognition of
God and the hope or indeed even the constitution of another world.
Whatever crude concepts of religion the old customs, which were left
over from the rude state of the nations, may have introduced, these still
did not prevent their more enlightened part from dedicating themselves
to free investigations of this object, and it was readily understood that
there could be no more fundamental and reliable way of pleasing the in­
visible power who rules the world, in order to be happy at least in another world, than the good conduct o f life. Hence theology and
morality were the two incentives, or better, the points of reference for
all the abstract inquiries of reason to which we have always been de­
voted. The first, however, was really that which gradually drew purely
speculative reason in its train, which subsequently became so famous
under the name of metaphysics.
I will not now distinguish the times in which this or that alteration of
metaphysics occurred, but will present in a cursory outline only the dif­
ference of the ideas which occasioned the chief revolutions. And here I
find three points of view on which the most notable changes on this
stage of conflict have been founded.
I. With regard to the object of all of our rational cognitions, some
were merely sensual philosophers, others merely intellectual phi­
losophers. Epicurus can be called the foremost philosopher of sensi­
bility, and Plato that of the intellectual. This difference of schools,
a

Beziehullgspullkte
702

The history of pure reason

however, as subtle as it is, had already begun in the earliest times, and
has long preserved itself without interruption. Those of the first school
asserted that reality is in the objects of the senses alone, and that every­
thing else is imagination; those of the second school, on the contrary,
said that in the senses there is nothing but semblance,a and that only the
understanding cognizes that which is true. The former, however, did
not on this account dispute the reality of the concepts of the understanding, but they were only logical for them, though they were mystical for the others. The former admitted intellectual concepts, but
accepted only sensible objects. The latter demanded that the true objects be merely intelligible, and asserted an intuition through pure understanding not accompanied by any senses, which in their opinion only
confused it.
2. With regard to the origin of pure cognitions of reason, whether
they are derived from experience or, independent of it, have their
source in reason. Aristotle can be regarded as the head of the empiri­
cists, Plato that of the noologists. Locke, who in recent times fol­
lowed the former, and Leibniz, who followed the latter (although with
sufficient distance from his mystical system), have nevertheless not
been able to bring this dispute to any decision.50 Epicurus on his part
at least proceeded more consistently in accord with his sensual system
(for in his inferences he never exceeded the bounds of experience) than
Aristotle and Locke (especially, however, the latter), who, after he had
derived all concepts and principles from experience, goes so far in their
use as to assert that one can prove the existence of God and the im­
mortality of the soul (though both objects lie entirely outside of the
bounds of possible experience) just as self-evidently as any mathematical theoremY
3 . With regard to method. If something is to be called a method, it
must be a procedure in accordance with principles. Now one can divide
the methods currently dominant in this department of natural inquiry
into the naturalistic and the scientific. The naturalist of pure reason
takes as his principle that through common understanding without sci­
ence (which he calls "healthy reason") more may be accomplished with
regard to the most sublime questions that constitute the task of meta­
physics than through speculation. He asserts, therefore, that one can de­
termine the magnitude and breadth of the moon more securely by eye
than by mathematical rigmarole. This is mere misology brought to
principles, and, what is most absurd, the neglect of all artificial means is
recommended as a method of its own for expanding cognition. For
one cannot with good cause blame the naturalists for what follows from
the lack of greater insight. They follow common reason, without boasta

Schein
703

A854/ B 882

A8S S / B 883

Doctrine of Method. Ch. IV

ing of their ignorance as a method that would contain the secret of
drawing the truth out of the deep well of Democritus. Quod sapio, satis
est mihi; non ego curo, esse quod Arcesilas aerumnosique Solond' is their
motto, with which they can lead a contented and praiseworthy life with­
out troubling themselves with science or confusing their business.
Now as far as the observers of a scientific method are concerned,
they have here the choice of proceeding either dogmatically or skep­
tically, but in either case they have the obligation of proceeding sys­
tematically. If! here name with regard to the former the famous Wolff,
and with regard to the latter David Hume, then for my present pur­
poses I can leave the others unnamed. The critical path alone is still
open. If the reader has had pleasure and patience in traveling along in
my company, then he can now judge, if it pleases him to contribute his
part to making this footpath into a highway, whether or not that which
many centuries could not accomplish might not be attained even before
the end of the present one: namely, to bring human reason to full satis­
faction in that which has always, but until now vainly, occupied its lust
for knowledge.
a

"What I know is enough for me; I don't care for the labors of Arcesilas or Solon"
(Persius, Satires, iii, 78-9).

704

E D I T O R IAL N O T E S

Editors' introduction
References to Kant's works other than the Critique of Pure Reason will be
cited throughout this volume by giving the volume and page number of
their location in the standard German edition of Kant's works, Kant's gesam­
melte Schriften, edited by the Royal Prussian (later German) Academy of
Sciences (Berlin: Georg Reimer, later Walter de Gruyter & Co., 1 900- ) ,
the so-called Akademie edition, will b e given b y parenthetical citation of vol­
ume and page numbers. Throughout these notes, the abbreviation "R"
refers to Kant's Reflexionen, the notes from his Handschriftliche Nachlafi
(handwritten remains), as printed in Vols. 14- 1 9 of the Akademie edition
(edited by Erich Adickes and Friedrich Berger from 1 9 1 I to 1 934). Unless
otherwise noted, all translations will be our own. References to the Critique
of Pure Reason will be given by the pagination of the first ("A") and/or sec­
ond ("B") edition, which are reproduced in the margins of the present trans­
lation. The present citation is at 5 : 1 5 I .
2 For a general characterization of the philosophies of Wolff and Baumgarten,
see Lewis White Beck, Early German Philosophy: Kant and his Predecessors
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1 969), chs. XI and XII, pp.
2 5 6-96. For an account of the continuing viability ofWolffianism and its re­
action to Kant, see Frederick C. Beiser, The Fate of Reason (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1 987), ch. 7, pp. 1 93-2 2 5 .
3 In the twentieth century, Hume has often been held not to have advocated
skepticism, but rather to have used skepticism about traditional metaphysics
to prepare the way for his own naturalistic explanation of central human be­
liefs. See Norman Kemp Smith, The Philosophy of David Hume (London:
Macmillan, 1 941), and Barry Stroud, Hume (London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul, 1977).
4 On both Lockean and popular philosophers - there was some overlap be­
tween the philosophers Kant characterizes in these two ways - see Beiser,
The Fate of Reason, ch. 6, pp. 1 6 5-92 . For the influence of the "common
sense" philosophy of Thomas Reid in Germany during Kant's lifetime, see
Manfred Kuehn, Scottish Common Sense in Germany, r768-r800 (Kingston
and Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press, 1 987).
5 To borrow a metaphor from Lewis White Beck; see his article "Kant's
Strategy," in his Essays on Kant and Hume (New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1978) , pp. 3-19.
70 5

Notes to pages 3-9
6

7

8

9
IO

II
I2
I3

I4

I5

I6

I7

See Giorgio Tonelli, Kant's Critique of Pure Reason within the Tradition of
Modern Logic, ed. David H. Chandler (Zurich and New York: Georg Olms,
1 994), p. 6.
See Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten, Meditationes philosophicae de nonnullis
ad poema pertinentibus ( I 7 3 5), §§ I I 5-I6; Metaphysica (I7 39), § 5 3 3 ; and
Aesthetica (I 750-58), § I . The first text may be found in A. G. Baumgarten,
Philosophische Betrachtungen iiber einige Bedingungen des Gedichtes, ed. Heinz
Paetzold (Hamburg: Felix Meiner, I 983), pp. 84-7, and the other two in
A. G. Baumgarten, Texte zur Grundlegung der Asthetik, ed. Hans Rudolf
Schweizer (Hamburg: Felix Meiner, I983), pp. I 7, 79.
See Kant's note at A 2 I / B 3 5-6. Kant tacitly retracted this criticism of
Baumgarten when he decided, after I 787, that there was an a priori prin­
ciple if not science for judgments of taste, and characterized judgments of
natural and artistic beauty and sublimity as "aesthetic judgments" in his
I 790 Critique ofJudgment. This work made Baumgarten's original term
"aesthetics" the canonical name for the philosophical discussion of natural
and artistic beauty and related properties.
See Tonelli, p. 6.
Kant used this traditional distinction, found in such texts as Georg
Friedrich Meier's Auszug aus der VeruunJtlehre (I 752), on which he lec­
tured, in his own logic lectures; see the text published from his logic by
Gottlob Benjamin Jiische, Immanuel Kant's Logic: A Manual for Lectures
(I 800), in Immanuel Kant, Lectures on Logic, ed. J. Michael Young (Cam­
bridge: Cambridge University Press, I 992), especially pp. 589-629.
On the origins of these terms, see again Tonelli, passim.
See Locke's Essay concerning Human Understanding, book I, chs. 2-4.
A century ago, the great Kant scholar Hans Vaihinger published a two­
volume commentary of ro66 pages that deals only with the introduction
and the "Transcendental Aesthetic" of the Critique! See Hans Vaihinger,
Commentar zu Kants Kritik der reinen VeruunJt, 2 vols. (Stuttgart: Spemann
and Union Deutsche Verlagsgesellschaft, I 8 8 I-92).
The classical presentation of this dispute is in the correspondence between
Leibniz and the Newtonian Samuel Clarke, published by Clarke in I 7 I 7
after Leibniz's death the previous year; see H. G . Alexander, ed., The Leibniz­
Clarke Correspondence (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1 956).
For recent alternative interpretations, see Henry E . Allison, Kant's Tran­
scendental Idealism (New Haven: Yale University Press, I 983) and Paul
Guyer, Kant and the Claims of Knowledge (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer­
sity Press, I 987).
Early critiques of Kant's "metaphysical deduction" came from successors
such as J. G. Fichte and G. W. F. Hegel. A classical modern critique of the
metaphysical deduction can be found in J. F. Bennett, Kant's Analytic
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, I 966). Recent defenses of the
metaphysical deduction can be found in Beatrice Longuenesse, Kant et la
pouvoir de juger (Paris: PUF, I993) and Reinhard Brandt, The Table of
Judgment, trans. Eric Watkins, North American Kant Society Studies in
Philosophy, Volume 4 (Atascadero, Cal.: Ridg'eview, I995)'
For some discussion of the complexities of the "Transcendental Deduc706

Notes to pages 1 2-2 5

18
19

20
2I

22

23

24

tion," see Paul Guyer, "The Transcendental Deduction of the Categories,"
in Paul Guyer, ed., The Cambridge Companion to Kant (Cambridge Univer­
sity Press, 1 992), pp. 1 2 3-60.
See Prolegomena, Remarks I I and III following § 1 3 , 4:288-94.
Richard Rorty used this phrase in a well-known attack upon the essentially
pre-Kantian conception of human knowledge in his Philosophy and the
Mirror o/Nature (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1 979).
See Lewis White Beck, The Actor and the Spectator (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1 975).
Prolegomena, 4: 2 60. Lewis White Beck has conjectured that this "recollec­
tion" of Hume - a recollection because Kant had read Hume before this
time but not previously felt his full impact - must have occurred in 1 77 2
(see his edition o f the Prolegomena [Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1 9 50] , p.
8n., and his Early German Philosophy: Kant and His Predecessors [Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1969], p. 457). In a note in his own copy
of his classroom metaphysics text, Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten's Meta­
physica, which has been widely cited for at least a century, Kant also wrote
that "The year '69 gave me great light" (R 5037, 1 8:68). This remark sug­
gests that Kant's intellectual revolution may have begun in 1 769 and only
culminated in 1 7 7 2 . There has been much discussion about just how Kant's
thought changed during those years (see Lothar Kreimendahl, Kant - Der
Durchbruch von 1769 [Cologne: jUrgen Dinter Verlag, 1 990]). We will re­
turn to some of the issues involved below.
A selection from these manuscripts has been edited by Eckart Forster and
translated by Forster and Michael Rosen in Immanuel Kant, Opus postu­
mum (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1 993).
This phrase is borrowed from the title o f Leibniz's essay "The Principles
of Nature and Grace, based on Reason," written in 1 7 14 and posthumously
published in 1 7 1 8 . When considering the influence of Leibniz on his con­
temporaries and on most of the eighteenth century, it must be kept in mind
that he was not known by the works that have been most influential in the
twentieth century, the "Discourse on Metaphysics" and other writings
from the period around 1686, but was instead known almost exclusively by
the Theodicy of 1 7 1 0, "The Principles of Nature and Grace," and the con­
temporary "Monadology" (first published in 1 7 20), and by the posthu­
mously published Leibniz-Clarke Correspondence ( 1 7 1 7) . Thus what Leibniz
was best known for in his own time and through the first half of Kant's life
was his vision of the preestablished harmony of the monads on the one
hand and his dispute with the Newtonians about the nature of space and
time on the other. The New Essays concerning Human Understanding, Leib­
niz's lengthy commentary on Locke's Essay concerning Human Understand­
ing, was left unpublished when Locke died in 1 704 and not published until
1 765. Although it then certainly became of great interest to Kant, it did not
change Kant's fundamental image of Leibniz or the basic character of
Leibniz's lasting influence on Kant.
Nova dilucidatio, 1 : 388. Translation by David Walford from Immanuel
Kant, Theoretical Philosophy 1755-1770 (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1 992), p. 6.
7 07

Notes to pages 2 5-3 3
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39

40
41
42
43
44
45

46
47
48
49
50
51

52
53

Nova dilucidatio, 1 : 3 89; Walford, p - 7 Nova dilucidatio, 1 : 397; Walford, p - 19.
Nova dilucidatio, 1 : 393-4; Walford, pp. 1 3-14Nova dilucidatio, 1 : 3 94-5; Walford, p . 1 5 .
See the section entitled "The Ideal o f Pure Reason," particularly
A 567-8 3 / B 595-6 1 I .
Nova dilucidatio, 1 :410; Walford, p. 3 7 .
Nova dilucidatio, I :4I I-I 2 ; Walford, p. 39.
Nova dilucidatio, 1 : 398-4°6; Walford, pp. 20-3 1 .
See Nova dilucidatio, 1 : 3 98; Walford, p. 20.
Nova dilucidatio, 1 :402 ; Walford, p. 2 5 ·
Critique ofPractical Reason, 5:97·
Nova dilucidatio, I :41 2-1 3 ; Walford, p. 40.
False Subtlety, 2 : 58-9; Walford, pp. 102-3.
False Subtlety, 2 :59; Walford, p . 103.
The argument from design was already criticized briefly in Hume's pub­
lished works, e.g., the Enquiry concerning the Human Understanding (1 748),
section XI, and was criticized extensively in Hume's as yet unpublished
Dialogues concerning Natural Religion (originally drafted as early as 1 7 5 I, but
not to be published until 1 7 79)' But although the Enquiry had been trans­
lated into German as early as 1 75 5 , it does not seem to have had a major
impact on Kant by 1 76 2 , and of course the Dialogues were not yet known
to Kant at this point. When they were published and translated into
German, they had a tremendous influence on him, and are constantly al­
luded to though not explicitly cited in the Critique ofJudgment.
Only Possible Basis, 2 : 79; Walford, p. I 26.
Only Possible Basis, 2 : 8 3-7; Walford, pp. 1 2 8-3 1 .
Only Possible Basis, 2: 1 10; Walford, p. 1 5 2 .
Only Possible Basis, 2 : 1 1 3 ; Walford, p. 1 55 .
See Critique ofJudgment, introduction, IV; 5 : 1 80.
A translation of the Academy's official abridgement of Mendelssohn's essay
can be found in Walford, pp. 2 76-86. The full essay can be found in Moses
Mendelssohn, Gesammelte Schriften, ed. Fritz Bamberger and Leo Strauss,
vol. 2 (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1 93 1), pp. 2 67-3 30. A detailed contrast
between Mendelssohn's and Kant's essays can be found in Paul Guyer,
"Mendelssohn and Kant: One Source of the Critical Philosophy,"
Philosophical Topics 19 (1991): I I 9-5 2 .
Inquiry, 2 :2 76; Walford, p . 248.
Inquiry, 2 : 2 85-6; Walford, pp. 2 5 8-9.
Inquiry, 2 : 2 89; Walford, p. 2 6 2 .
Inquiry, 2 : 2 9 2 ; Walford, p. 265.
Inquiry, 2 :295; Walford, p. 268.
Inquiry, 2 : 2 97; Walford, p . 2 7 1 . As suggested above, Kant was later to re­
verse this assessment, arguing that only morally necessary predicates could
be determinately attributed to God (A 8 I4/B 84z).
Inquiry, 2 : 2 98-300; Walford, pp. 2 7 2-4See, for instance, Hobbes's explanation o f the difference in D e Corpore, ch.
6, § 7.

�.

708

Notes to pages 34-3 8
54 Thus Kant's detailed discussion of the contrast between mathematics and
philosophy in the Critique, which is found not just in the "Transcendental
Aesthetic" but also in the "Doctrine of Method" (especially A 7 I 2-38 1
B 740--66), should b e carefully compared to but not identified with his
treatment of the distinction in the earlier Inquiry.
5 5 Negative Magnitudes, 2 : 202; Walford, p . 2 39.
56 Negative Magnitudes, 2:203; Walford, p. 240.
5 7 Negative Magnitudes, 2:203-4; Walford, p . 24I.
58 See Walford, p. lxxii, and Kant's correspondence with ]. H. Lambert in let­
ters 3 3 and 34, 1 3 November and 3 1 December 1 765, 10:51-7.
59 Kant uses the Latin word intuitus to signify the immediate and singular rep­
resentations offered by the senses; see the inaugural dissertation, De mundi
sensibilis atque intelligibilisforma et principiis (On the Form and Principles of
the Sensible and Intelligible World), § I, 2:387; § 1 0, 2 : 396; § 1 4- 3 , 2 : 3 99;
and § I 5.C, 2 :402. In the Critique ofPure Reason, he will employ the analo­
gously formed German word Anschauung for the same purpose. In view of
Kant's original Latin word, his German word has traditionally been trans­
lated as "intuition. " Some have objected to this because of some of the con­
notations of "intuition" in English, but it seems better to us to preserve the
traditional Latinate translation, reminding the reader that whatever asso­
ciations this and other terms might suggest, their meaning in Kant's ar­
gument must be defined by what he says about them and not by such
antecedent associations.
60 De mundi, § I , 2 : 3 88; Walford, p. 3 78 .
6 1 D e mundi, § § 3-4, 2 : 3 9 2 ; Walford, p. 3 8462 Thus Kant originally uses the term "noumena" in what the Critique pro­
scribes as its "positive" rather than permissible "negative" sense (B 307).
Whether Kant fully purges the positive sense of "noumena" from the Cri­
tique, especially from his argument in the "Antinomy of Pure Reason," is a
difficult question of interpretation.
6 3 Pierre Bayle had made a number of such paradoxes prominent i n his arti­
cle on "Zeno of Elea" in his widely read Historical and Critical Dictionary,
first published in 1687 (a translation can be found in Pierre Bayle, Historical
and Critical DictionalY, trans. Richard H . Popkin [Indianapolis: Hackett
Publishing Co., 1991], pp. 3 50-88). Bayle's article was influential for
Berkeley; see his Principles ofHuman Knowledge, e.g., § 1 1 8 (in The Works of
George Berkeley, ed. A. A. Luce and T. E. ]essup [Edinburgh: Thos. Nelson,
1949), Vol. 2, pp. 94-5). Berkeley's treatment of the paradoxes of the infi­
nite may in turn have influenced Hume; see Enquiry concerning Human
Understanding, section XII, part II (in Hume's Enquiries, ed. L. A. Selby­
Bigge, 3rd. ed. revised by P. H. Nidditch [Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1975], pp. 1 55-7)·
64 See especially B xxiv-xxx in the second-edition preface to the Critique.
65 De mundi, § 1 , 2 : 387; Walford, p. 377
66 De mundi, § I , 2 :388; Walford, p. 3 78.
67 De mundi, § 3, 2 : 3 9 3 ; Walford, p. 3 84.
68 De mundi, § 5, 2 : 3 93 ; Walford, p. 3 8 5 .
69 De mundi, § 4, 2 :393; Walford, p. 3 84.
7 09

Notes to pages 3 9-46
70
71
72
73
74

75

76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
8S

86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97

98

De mundi, § 4, 2 : 3 92-3; Walford, pp. 3 84-5 .
De mundi, § 5 , 2 : 3 94; Walford, p. 3 86.
De mundi, §§ 8-9, 2 : 3 95-6; Walford, p. 3 88.
It will b e used i n a s late a passage a s the "Refutation of Idealism" added to
the second edition; see B 276-7n.
In the Critique ofJudgment, Kant will add the power of judgment, which it­
self has both determinant and reflective forms, as another fundamental
cognitive faculty; see Critique ofJudgment, Introduction, IV; 5 : 1 79.
See Critique �fPure Reason, A 6 3 3-7 / B 661-S. I t i s important to recognize
that the inaugural dissertation represents a milestone in the development
of Kant's moral philosophy in its suggestion that the paradigm of moral
perfection is a product of pure rationality; see Manfred Kuehn, "The
Moral Dimension of Kant's Inaugural Dissertation," in Hoke Robinson,
ed., Proceedings of the Eighth International Kant Congress (Milwaukee: Mar­
quette University Press, 1 995), vol. I, part 2, pp. 3 7 3-89. However, it is
also important to recognize that he had not yet arrived at his mature view
that the practical use of reason is the only legitimate pure yet real use of
reason.
De mundi, § 1 3 , 2 : 3 98; Walford, p. 3 9 1 .
E.g., De mundi, § 14.7, 2 :4°2; Walford, p. 395·
E.g., D e mundi, § 14. 3 , 2 : 399; Walford, p. 3 9 2 .
De mundi, § I 2 , 2 : 397-8; Walford, p. 390.
De mundi, § 1 3 , 2 : 398; Walford, p. 3 9 1 .
All in D e mundi, § 1 4, 2 : 3 98-4°2; Walford, pp. 39 1-5.
See A 3O-2 / B 46-8.
See A46-9 / B 64-7·
These are all to be found in De mundi, § 1 5 , 2 :402-5; Walford, pp. 3 95-8.
In the Critique, Kant will explain the ideality o f space and time by referring
both to their subjectivity and to their universality and l1ec,essity; see
.
A 2 8 / B 44 for both senses.
De mundi, § 16, 2 :407; Walford, p. 402 .
D e mundi, § 19, 2 :4°8; Walford, pp. 402-3.
De mundi, § 2 2 , 2 :409; Walford, pp. 403-4.
A 2 I I- I S / B 2 S6-62.
De mundi, § 2 3 , 2 :4 I O-I I ; Walford, pp. 406-7.
D e mundi, § 24, 2 :4 1 2 ; Walford, p . 407.
D e mundi, § 2 6 , 2 :4 1 3 ; Walford, p . 409.
De mundi, § 27, 2:2 1 3-14; Walford, pp. 409-10.
De mundi, § 2 8 , 2 :4 1 5 ; Walford, p. 41 I .
D e mundi, § 2 9 , 2 :4 1 7; Walford, p . 4 1 3 .
De mundi, § 30, 2 :418; Walford, pp. 414- 1 5 .
These include one book review, a brief essay on the "Different Races of
Mankind" that was an advertisement for Kant's lectures on physical geog­
raphy, and a pair of essays appearing in a local journal promoting a pro­
gressive school in Dessau.
Herz published a little book in 1 772 that was an odd amalgam of what he
had learned from Kant's dissertation and more Wolffian views he was then
acquiring from Moses Mendelssohn; see Marcus Herz, Betrachtungen aus
710

Notes to pages 46-49

99

100

lOI

102

103
l O4
105
106
107
108
lO9
IlO
III
Il2
Il3
1 14

l I5
I l6

der spekulativen Weltweisheit, ed. E. Conrad, H. P. Delfosse, and B. Nehren
(Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 1 990).
The primary sources are notes in Kant's copy of Baumgarten's Meta­
physica, which was the basis for his course on metaphysics, that were tran­
scribed first by Benno Erdmann in Reftexionen Kants zur Kritik der reinen
Vernunft (Leipzig: Fues, 1 884) and then by Erich Adickes in volumes 1 7
and 1 8 of the Akademie edition, which first appeared in 1926 and 1928
(Reflections 42 73-5635 in Adickes's numbering, plus a few subsequent
ones, cover the period of the 1 7 7os). Adickes's edition also includes a
number of loose sheets or drafts which tend to be more informative than
the marginalia. The most important of these come from the so-called
Duisburg Nachlafl, named after a nineteenth-century owner; the material
from this group pertaining to the development of the Critique is found in
Reflections 4674-84 in the Akademie edition. There is no evidence that
Kant preserved all his notes at any time in his life, and many papers that
did survive the remainder of his life after the publication of the Critique
may have been dispersed upon his death in 1 804 and thereafter lost. So
our information about the 1 7 70s remains fragmentary.
Kant was finally to publish the Groundwork for the Metaphysics ofMorals in
1 785, and the work actually entitled The Metaphysics ofMorals, his detailed
exposition of political and moral duties, not until 1797.
Letter 57, 2 September 1 770, lO:96-9; translation in Arnulf Zweig, Kant:
Philosophical Correspondence [ 759-99 (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1 967), pp. 5 8-60.
See letter 6 1 from Lambert, 13 October 1 770, lO:I03-I I ; letter 62 from
Sulzer, 8 December 1 7 70, lO: I I I-I 3 ; and letter 63 from Mendelssohn,
25 December 1 770, l O: I I 3- 1 6; translations of the letters from Lambert
and Mendelssohn in Zweig, pp. 60-70.
10:105; Zweig, p . 6 1 .
lO: lO7; Zweig, p. 6 3 ·
10: 1 1 2 .
lO: I I 5 ; Zweig, p. 69.
1 0: 1 2 1-4, at 1 2 l .
lO: I 2 3 .
10:1 29; Zweig, p. 7 1 .
A 36-7 / B 5 3-4.
lO:1 30; Zweig, p . 7 1 .
lO:1 30-I; Zweig, p . 7 2 .
lO: I 3 2 ; Zweig, p. 7 3 .
lO: 143-6; Zweig, pp. 76-9. This is the next surviving letter to Herz;
Kant's tone suggests he had not written to Herz for some time, so the let­
ter is probably the first one he wrote to Herz after the letter of February
1 77 2 .
10:144-5; Zweig, pp. 77-8.
10:198-200; Zweig, p. 86. In this letter Kant thanks Herz for sending
him a copy of Herz's newly published Essay on Taste and the Causes of its
Diversity (Berlin: F. C. Vof3, 1 7 76), but then rather lamely apologizes for
not discussing some points in more detail on the ground that he cannot
711

Notes to pages 50-62
remember to whom he has lent the book ( 1 0: 1 98). This would suggest
that Herz's book had no influence on the later development of Kant's
own aesthetic theory in the period from 1 7 8 7 to 1 790, culminating in the
publication of the Critique ofJudgment in 1 790 (a second edition ofHerz's
book was also published in 1 790, too late to be available to Kant during
his own composition). In fact, Kant's criticism of the "empirical interest
in the beautiful" in § 41 of the Critique ofAesthetic Judgment may have
been a veiled attack upon Herz's theory, which Kant had by no means
forgotten.
I I 7 R 467 3 , 1 7:636-7.
l I 8 R 467 3 , IT638.
I I 9 R 467 3 , I T640.
1 2 0 R 4676, 1 7:65 3-4.
1 2 I R 4676, 1 7:654.
1 2 2 R 4674, 1 7:644.
1 2 3 R 4676, 1 7:65 5 .
1 2 4 R 4674, 1 7:645-6.
1 2 5 R 4684, 1 7:67 1 .
1 2 6 R 4674, 1 7:643.
1 2 7 R 4678, 1 7:660.
1 2 8 R 4677, 1 7:658.
1 29 See A 80/ B 106.
1 30 R 4674, 1 T646-7.
1 3 1 R 4675, IT652.
1 3 2 R 46 8 1 , I T665-6.
1 3 3 R 4756, 1 7:698-702 .
1 3 4 R 4756, 1 7:701.
135 R 4756, 1 7:699-7 0 1 .
1 36 R 4756, 1 7:699-700.
1 3 7 R 4756, 1 7 : 7°0.
1 3 8 R 4756, 1 7:702.
1 39 R 4757, 1 7:703-4 '
140 A426-601 B 454-88.
14I R 4757, 1 7:704-5.
1 42 R 4758, 1 7 : 706.
1 43 R 4759, 1 7 : 7 °9-10.
144 R 5203, 1 8 : I I6-1 7 .
1 4 5 A I 3 7-47 / B I 76-87·
1 46 In the note immediately preceding the one just cited, Kant states that
"Principium rationis is the principle of the determination of things in tem­
poral sequence" (R 5 302, 1 8: 1 1 6).
1 47 R 5 5 5 2 , 1 8 : 2 2 0.
148 Prolegomena, §§ 14-2 3 , 4:294-3 °6.
149 Metaphysical Foundations, introduction, 4:474-6n.
1 50 See especially R 592 3 , 1 8: 3 85-7, and R 593°-4, 1 8 : 3 9°-3'
15 I Real Progress, 20: 2 7 1 -7 .
1 52 The problem lies behind the "patchwork theory" asserted by Hans
Vaihinger in 1 902 - see his "The Transcendental Deduction of the Cate7 12

Notes to pages 62-69

153
I 54
ISS

1 56
1 57
158
159
1 60
161
162
163
1 64
165
166
167

1 68
1 69
1 70
171
1 72
1 73
174
1 75
1 76
177

gories in the First Edition of the Critique of Pure Reason, " translated by
Moltke S. Gram in his Kant: Disputed Questions (Chicago: Quadrangle
Books, 1 967), pp. 2 3-6 1 - and carried over into English-language schol­
arship by Norman Kemp Smith, A Commentary to Kant's 'Critique ofPure
Reason, ' second ed. (London: Macmillan, 192 3)' It was resisted by H. J .
Paton, i n articles such a s "Is the Transcendental Deduction a Patchwork?"
(1929) and "The Key to Kant's Deduction of the Categories" (I93 I), both
reprinted in Gram, pp. 62-91 and pp. 247-68, and in his Kant's Metaphysic
of Experience (London: Allen and Unwin, 1 9 3 6). But versions of it have
been revived in Robert Paul Wolff, Kant's Theory ofMental Activity (Cam­
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1 963) and Paul Guyer, Kant and
the Claims of Knowledge (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987).
The question of whether or not Kant had a unitary strategy for the de­
duction remains open.
R 5553, 18:223,
R 5553, 18:22 1 .
R 5 5 5 2 , 1 8 : 2 20.
R 5 5 5 2 , 1 8:2 20.
R 5 5 5 3 , 1 8 : 2 2 2-3 . :En the Critique, see A 3 07-8/B 364.
R 5 5 5 3 , 1 8 : 2 2 6.
E.g., A 306/ B 3 6 3 .
A 3 2 3 / B 3 80.
R 5 5 5 3 , 1 8 : 2 2 6.
See again R 4747, 1 7: 705.
R 5 5 5 3 , 1 8: 2 2 3 -4R 5637, 1 8 : 2 7 3 .
Letter 164, 10:266-7; Zweig, p . 9 3 .
Letter 1 66, 10:268-70; Zweig, p. 95.
For an account of Feder's transformation of Garve's draft, see Frederick
C. Beiser, The Fate ofReason: German Philosophy from Kant to Fichte (Cam­
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1 987), pp. 1 72-7. A translation
of the Gottingen review appears in Johann Schultz, Exposition of Kant's
Critique of Pure Reason, trans. James C. Morrison (Ottawa: University of
Ottawa Press, 1 995), pp. 1 7 1-7. After attempting to pacify Kant, Garve
published his original version of tire review in the friendlier Allgemeine
deutsche Bibliothek in 1 78 3 ; translation in Morrison, pp. 1 79-99.
See Prolegomena, § 1 ), remarks II and III (4: 288-93), and appendix,
4:3 74-5·
Prolegomena, § 1 3 , remark 111, 4:290-1 .
Prolegomena, appendix, 4 : 3 7 3n.
Prolegomena, appendix, 4:3 74-5, and § 1 3 , remark 1, 4: 287-8.
Prolegomena, appendix, 4: 3 8 1 .
Prolegomena, preface, 4:263-4'
See Prolegomena, § 4, 4: 274-5.
Prolegomena, §§ 1 8-20, 4:297-302; see especially p. 300.
Metaphysical Foundations ofNatural Science, preface, 4:475n.
See especially R 5 6 3 7, 1 8 : 2 7 1-6; R 5643, 1 8: 2 8 2-4; R 5 9 2 3 , r8:385-7;
and R 5929-34, 1 8 : 3 89-94.
71 3

Notes to pages 69-I 00
1 78
1 79

1 80
181

For this chronology, see the notes by Benno Erdmann at 3 : 5 5 5-8.
Garve's original and altogether more sympathetic review, which had in
the meantime been published in its original form, also raised the concern
that Kant's theory of the positive use of only practical reason would "find
acceptance in the heart and mind of only a few men" (Morrison, p. 193)'
B 14-19; cf. Prolegomena, 4:267-9.
See R 565 3-4, 1 8 : 3 ° 6-1 3 ; R 5 7°9, 1 8 : 3 3 2 ; R 6 3 I I-1 7, 1 8:607-29; and R
6 3 2 3 , 1 8:643-4'
Dedication

I

Karl Abraham Baron von Zedlitz ( 1 7 3 1-1 793) was an important educational
reformer in the government of Frederick the Great. He joined the justice
ministry in 1 75 5 , and in 1 770 (the same year Kant was appointed to his
professorship at the University of Konigsberg) Zedlitz became Minister of
Justice in charge of ecclesiastical and scholastic affairs. He held this post
until 1 788 (two years after Frederick's death). Because Zedlitz had the rep­
utation of being a religious freethinker, Frederick William II then replaced
him with J. C. Wollner, with whose attempts to enforce religious orthodoxy
among clergy and educators Kant soon came into conflict. As minister in
charge of education, Zedlitz was important in establishing new schools
throughout Prussia in the late eighteenth century. He was also author of Sur
Ie patriotisme, considere comme oijet d'iducation dans les hats monarchiques (On
patriotism considered as an object of education in monarchical states) (Ber­
lin, 1 776). In 1 778, Zedlitz offer,ed Kant a professorial chair at the Univer­
sity of Halle (letter of 2 8 Febru�ry 1 778, ro: 2 24-5), which, however, he
declined.

�!

____

Prefaces
I

This preface was omitted in the second edition of 1 787.
Christian Wolff (1 679-1 754) was the central figure in the German Enlight­
enment. Wolff's most prominent follower, Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten
( 1 7 14- 1 762), was author of Metaphysica (Halle, 1 7 3 8 ; fourth edition, 1 75 7 ;
seventh edition, 1 779), the text used most often i n Kant's academic lectures
(2 : 308-ro). Baumgarten's text is reprinted in the Akademie edition at
1 7: 5-226.
3 Notably, of course, David Hume (1 7 I I-I 776), who had a considerable fol­
lowing in Germany.
4 The avowed aim ofJohn Locke (163 2-1 7°4) was to discover "the original,
certainty and extent of human knowledge" by tracinz t4�enesis of all
krlQ�edge to its . origin in experience (An Essay concerning Human Under­
standing [ 1690] book I, chapter I, § 2) . Additional references to Locke as
"physiologist of reason" may be found at R 4866 ( 1 7 76-78, 18:2 I ) . See also
R 4894 ( 1 7 76-78, 1 8 : 2 1-2) for a related comment.
5 This is a reference to popular Enlightenment philosophy, such as that of
Johann August Eberhard (1 7 39-1 8°9), J. G. Feder ( 1 740-182 1), Christian
Garve (1 742-1798), Christoph Friedrich Nicolai (1 7 3 3-1 8 I I), and Moses
2

7 14

Notes to pages I O I -I I O
(1729-1 786). It emphasized appeals to healthy common
sense over rigorous argument, and the popular dissemination of progres­
sive ideas with practical import over the investigation of metaphysical ques­
tions, toward which they often expressed contempt.
The term "critique" or "criticism" (Kritik) was apparently first derived by
Kant from Henry Home, Lord Kames ( 1696- 1 762), Elements of Criticism
( 1 762), in which he referred to judgments in matters of beauty or taste (see
9: I 5)· Kant's first use of it is in an announcement of lectures for 1 765-66
(see 2 : 3 1 1). As early as 1 769, Kant defines "critique as a science not for
bringing forth but for assessing certain things in accordance with rules of
perfection; thus metaphysics is a science for assessing cognitions from pure
re-ason" (R 4148, 1 7 :434).
To this paragraph, compare R 4945 ( 1 7 76-78, 1 8 : 3 7).
See R 4900-1 ( 1 776-78, 1 8:2 3).
Jean Terrasson ( 1 670- 1 750), Philosopl ie nach ihrem allgemeinen Eillflusse auf
aIle Gegenstiinde des Geistes und der Sitten, tr. Frau Gottsched (Berlin, 1 762),
p. I 1 7 . The original (French) edition was: La philosophie explicable it tous les
objets de l'esprit et de la raison. Precede des rejlexions de M. d'Alembert, d'une let­
sur la personne et les ouvrages
tre de M. Moncrif & d'une autre lettre de M.
de l'auteur. Paris: Chez Prault & Fils, 1 754See also Kant's comments about the length and style of his work at R 5 0 1 5
( 1 776-78, 1 8:60- 6 1 ) and R 503 1 (1 776-78, 1 8:67).
The Cape of Good Hope, the southernmost point in Africa.
In his letter to Schutz o f 2 5 June 1 787, Kant says h e has in mind the
demonstration in Euclid, Elements, bk. I, prop. 5 (10:466). Diogenes
Laertius actually reports that Thales learned geometry from the Egyp­
tians, but also that he taught them to measure the height of the pyramids
using the lengths of their shadows (Lives ofEminent Philosophers [London:
Heinemann, 1 924] 1 . 24,2 7) .
Galileo Galilei ( 1 5 64-1647) described these experiments concerning ac­
celeration in his De Motu Accelerato and the "Third Day" of Dialogues on the
Two World Systems (163 2).
Evangelista Torricelli (1608- I 647), a follower of Galileo, invented the baro­
meter, described here, in 1643 . His findings were first published posthu­
mously in the edition of his academic lectures (1 7 1 5).
Georg Ernst Stahl (1 660-1 7 34) performed experiments with combustion
and the smelting of metals which led to his formulation of the phlogiston
theory in 1 702 . Antoine Lavoisier's discoveries, which eventually led to the
replacement of the phlogiston theory, were first made in 1 777, but were un­
available to Kant in 1 78 I . The phlogiston theory was still accepted by many
chemists, such as Joseph Priestley, for many years afterward. Kant followed
the revolution in chemistry very closely and in 1 796 attended a replication
of Lavoisier's crucial experiments by his colleague Carl Gottfried Hagen (as
reported by A. F. Gehlen, Neues allgemeines Journal der Chemie 2 [ 1 804] ,
p. 240). Kant's acceptance of Lavoisier's oxidation theory is evident in the
Opus postumum (2 2 :508).
"All apprehended change of place i s due to movement either of the ob­
served object or of the observer, or to differences in movements that are
Mendelssohn

6

7
8
9

***

10
11
12

13

14

IS

16

71 5

Notes to pages I I 5- 1 2 7

17

18
19

occurring simultaneously in both. For i f the observed object and the ob­
server are moving in the same direction with equal velocity, no motion will
be detected. Now it is from the earth that we visually apprehend the revo­
lution of the heavens. If, then, any movement is ascribed to the earth, that
motion will generate the appearance of itself in all things which are exter­
nal to it, though as occurring in the opposite direction, as if everything
were passing across the earth. This will be especially true of the daily rev­
olution. For it seems to seize upon the whole universe, and indeed upon
everything that is around the earth, though not the earth itself . . . As the
heavens, which contain and cover everything, are the common locus of
things, it is not at all evident why it should be to the containing rather than
to the contained, to the located rather than to the locating, that motion is
ascribed" (Nicolaus Copernicus [1473-1 543], De revolutionibus orbium coeles­
tium [Nuremberg, I S43] 1 :5)·
The claim that metaphysics has only a negative theoretical use but a posi­
tive practical use will be one of Kant's most fundamental philosophical the­
ses. In addition to the "Canon of Pure Reason" below and the Critique of
Practical Reason and Critique ofJudgment, see the following notes: R 4284
(1 770-7 1 ? 1 773-7S? 1 776-78? 1 8:4S); R 4892 ( 1 7 76-78, 1 8 : 50); R 5 1 1 2
( 1 7 76-78, 1 8:93), where Kant uses the same metaphor as the present pas­
sage and says that "Metaphysics is as it were the police of our reason with
regard to the public security of morals and religion"; R S073 ( 1 776-78 ,
1 8 :79-80), where Kant uses instead a medical metaphor; R 5 1 1 9 (1 776-78,
1 8:96-7); and Kant's important comment on the character of his own ide­
alism, perhaps written shortly after the publication of the first edition of
the Critique, R 5642 ( 1 7 80-8 1 , I�:2 79-82).
For further discussion o f what is means, see R 5962 (1 785-89, 1 8:401-5)
at p. 401 .
Kant's dissatisfaction with the exposition o f the new "Refutation of Ideal­
ism," which he had added to the second edition of the Critique (B 2 74-9) is
evident from this further attempt at getting it right. This footnote is in fact
only the beginning of further attempts, in 1 788 and 1 790, to perfect this
crucial argument; see the note to B 2 74 for references to these attempts.

!li

Introduction

2

3

In R 2 740, Kant defines experience as "perception with rules." In R 2 74 1 ,
h e defines experience a s "the agreement o f perceptions (of empirical repre­
sentations) to the cognition of an object" (both notes from 1 775-79; at
16:494). These two definitions may seem distinct, but will turn out to be
identical when cognition of an object is subsequently reduced to agreement
with rules (e.g., A 1 04, B 1 3 7) '
An argument that the distinction between a priori and a posteriori cognition
precedes all other philosophical distinctions can be found in R 485 1
(18:8-10), from 1 776-78, which also offers a sketch of the systematic divi­
sion of the whole of philosophy as Kant saw it at this point.
At R 485 1 (1776-78), Kant asserts that the distinction between a priori and
a posteriori precedes that between the sensible and intelligible, giving rise to
716

Notes to pages 1 3 0-1 3 7

4

5
6

7
8
9

10

the distinction between two different types of a priori knowledge that es­
caped Plato and Leibniz (18:8-10).
Although Kant had introduced a distinction between the analytic method
of philosophy and the synthetic method of mathematics as early as the
Inquiry concerning the distinctness ofthe principles ofnatural theology and moral­
ity, written in 1 762 and published in 1 764 (see its First Reflection, § I ,
2 : 2 76), his distinction between analytic and synthetic judgments was pub­
licly introduced for the first time in the following passage of the Critique of
Pure Reason. However, the appearance of the distinction in the Critique was
the product of a long gestation. The distinction appears in Kant's margin­
alia to his copy of Baumgarten's Metaphysica as early as 1 764-66, e.g., R
3 7 3 8 (17:278-<) , and recurs throughout the years in which the Critique was
evolving, as in 1 769, e.g., R 3 9 2 3 (1 7: 348) and R 3928 ( 1 7 : 3 50-1), and
again in 1 772, e.g., R 4477 (1 7:566). An extensive discussion of the distinc­
tion appears in R 4634 (1 7:6 16-19), a note from 1 77 3-76. Extensive use of
the distinction is also to be found in the loose sheets of the so-called
Duisburg Nachlafi of 1 7 74-75, e.g., R 4674 ( 1 7:643-7), R 4675 ( 1 7:648-53),
R 4767 (1 7:653-7), R 4683 ( 1 7 :669-70), and R 4684 ( 1 7:670-3). In Kant's
notes in Georg Friedrich Meier's logic textbook (Auszug aus der Vernunft­
lehre), see also R 3 1 2 7 (1764-68) and 3 1 2 8 ( 1 769-70) (1 6:67 1), R 3042
(1 773-75 ? ; 1 6:629) and 3 1 3 6 (1 776-78 or 1 7 80s, 16:674). After the publi­
'
cation of the Critique, the distinction was at the center of the debate be­
tween Kant and the neo-Leibnizian J. A. Eberhard; see Henry E. Allison,
The Kant-Eberhard Controversy (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1 973), especially his translation from Kant's On a discovery according to which
any new Critique of Pure Reason has been made superfluous by an earlier one,
20:2 2 8-3 3 (Allison, pp. 141-5). Even in his latest writings, Kant was still ex­
ploring the distinction; see, e.g., Opus postumu11l, VII.rv. I , 2 2 =40-1 (in
Immanuel Kant, Opus postumum, edited by Eckart Forster [Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1 993], pp. 1 7 7-78).
With this paragraph, compare specifically R 4634 ( 1 77 2-76, 1 7:616- 1 9)
and R 4676 ( 1 7 73 -7 5 , 1 7:65 3-7).
Compare this with the definition at R 485 1 (1 7 76-78, 1 8 : 1 0): "Cognition
is called transcendental with regard to its origin, transcendent with regard
to the object [Objects] that cannot be encountered in any experience." See
also R 4890 ( 1 7 76-78, 1 8:20).
R 2 740 and 2 741 (16:494).
See R 485 1 (18:8-1 0).
In Metaphysik Mrongovius, Kant draws a similar distinction between the a
priori simpliciter and the a priori secundum quid, where the latter is "cognized
through reason but from empirical principles" (29:75 1).
Compare R 3955 ( 1 7 : 3 64), from 1 769. At R 4993 ( 1 776-78; 1 8 :54-5), Kant
suggests that philosophy has both pure and empirical parts, a claim crucial
to his eventual distinction between the critiques of theoretical and practi­
cal reason on the one hand and the metaphysics of nature and morals on
the other, so the present suggestion that there is such a thing as impure but
a priori cognition should not be overlooked. See also R 5048 (1 776-78;
1 8:72).
717

Notes to pages 1 3 7-145
11

12
13

14
15
16

17

18

19

Compare the ensuing discussion with Leibniz's comments in the preface to
the New Essays concerning Human Understanding, translation by Jonathan
Bennett and Peter Remnant (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1981), pp. 49-5 1 .
For a similar suggestion, see Kant's inaugural dissertation, "On theform and
principles ofthe sensible and intelligible worlds," § 29 (2:41 7).
Kant refers, of course, to Hume's famous discussion of causation in the
Enquiry concerning Human Understanding (1 748). Hume discusses "skepti­
cal doubts" about causal reasoning in section IV, and provides his "skeptical
solution" to these doubts in section V; he then discusses "the idea of nec­
essary connexion" and provides his psychological account of the origin of
that idea in section VII. Kant's reference to the concepts of "cause" and of
a "necessity of connection" would seem to refer primarily to the latter sec­
tion. The first Enquiry was translated into German as early as 1 7 5 5 .
See note 4 to the first-edition introduction, above.
See note 5 above.
Kant's attempt to characterize the difference between mathematical and
philosophical propositions goes back to his response to the 1 762 Berlin
Academy of Science essay competition, his Inquiry concerning the distinctness
of the principles of natural theology and morality, written in 1 762 and pub­
lished in 1 764 (2:2 73-30 1 ; Theoretical Philosophy I755-I770, ed. Walford,
pp. 243-75)' The synthetic character of mathematical propositions was
also a central issue in Kant's polemics with Eberhard; see On a Discovery,
8 : 1 9 1-3, 2 10-1 3 (Allison, Kant-Eberhard Controversy, pp. I lO-1 2 , 1 2 6-8).
Kant refers to Johann Andreas Se� er, Elementa Arithmeticae, Geometriae et
Caluculi (Halle, 1 756; second editipn, 1 767), translated into German by
J. W Segner, AnfangsgrUnde der 4fithmetik, Geometrie und der geomtrischen
Berechnung (Halle, 1 764; second edition, 1 77 3). Hans Vaihinger refers
Kant's example specifically to figures on pp. 2 7 and 79 of the 1 773 edition
of Segner's work; Hans Vaihinger, Commentar zu Kant's Kritik der reinen
VernunJt, Vol. I (Stuttgart: W Spemann, 1 88 1), p. 299.
For another example, see R 492 2 (18: 29), from the early 1 780s: "That the
radius can be carried over into the circumference 6 times cannot be derived
from the concept of the circumference" ("6 times" is obviously Kant's ap­
proximation for 2Jtr).
Vaihinger argues (Commentar, vol. I, pp. 303-4) that the following sen­
tences, which continue the paragraph just concluded, should actually com­
plete the previous paragraph, and Kemp Smith accordingly transposes it.
However, the disputed lines occur in the same position in the Prolegomena,
so in order to make this transposition here one must also make it in the
Prolegomena (as does Lewis White Beck in his edition of that work [Kant,
Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysics (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1 950),
p. vi]), thereby assuming that Kant twice allowed the same misprint to
stand. Given the rapidity with which Kant made his revisions for the sec­
ond edition of the Critique, this is hardly impossible; but we leave the text
as originally printed, although it does seem that what follows should be
read as a comment on the whole discussion of mathematical propositions
rather than on the first part of the present paragraph.
718

Notes to pages I46- I 5 5
20
2I

22

23

For several earlier formulations o f this point, see R 5 I I 5 and 5 I I 6
(1 776-78, 18:94-6).
The first five paragraphs of this section are loosely based on Prolegomena,
§ 5 (2 : 2 75-80), but, unlike the preceding paragraphs on mathematics, not
directly copied from it.
I n the Treatise ofHuman Nature, Hume does argue that "the ideas which are
most essential to geometry, viz. those of equality and inequality, of a right
line and a plain surface, are far from being exact and determinate . . . As
the ultimate standard of these figures is deriv'd from nothing but the
senses and imagination, 'tis absurd to talk of any perfection beyond what
these faculties can judge of . . . " (book I, part II, section IV; in the edition
by L. A. Selby-Bigge, revised by Ph. H. Nidditch [Oxford, 1 978], pp.
50-I). In other words, he here denies the possibility of pure mathematics,
precisely what Kant supposes his "sound understanding" would have pre­
vented him from doing. Kant's ignorance of Hume's assertion of the em­
pirical foundation and limitation of mathematics in the Treatise, which is
not repeated in the first Enquiry, is good evidence for the traditional as­
sumption that Kant had no firsthand acquaintance with most of the
Treatise, which was not translated into German until I 79 ! .
See note 6 to the first-edition introduction, above.
Transcendental aesthetic

I

2

After having begun to distinguish the methods of mathematics and philoso­
phy in the Inquiry concerning the distinctness of the principles of natural theology
and morality written in 1 762 and published in 1 764, Kant first publicly dis­
tinguishes between the cognitive faculties of sensibility and intellect in his
inaugural dissertation, "On the form and principles of the sensible and in­
telligible world," defended and published in 1 770. His argument there an­
ticipates the argument of the present section of the Critique that space and
time are the necessary conditions of outer and inner sense, and as such are
principles of "phenomena" or things as they appear rather than of "nou­
mena" or things as they are in themselves (§ 1 3 , 2 :398). The detailed argu­
ments that space and time are a priori forms of intuition are anticipated in
§§ 14 and I S of the inaugural dissertation (2:399-405), However, Kant did
not begin to use the name "Transcendental Aesthetic" as his term for the sci­
ence of the a priori conditions of sensibility until several years after 1 770.
The term "aesthetic" is used as the designation for the "philosophy of sen­
sibility" as early as I 769 in R 1 584 (16:2 5), but the term "transcendental aes­
thetic" seems to appear first in R 4643 ( 1 7 :62 2-3), a note ascribed to the
period 1 772-76. Other important anticipations of the "Transcendental
Aesthetic" include R 4673 , notes Kant made on a letter dated 28 April 1 774
(1 ]:636-42), and the loose sheet R 4756 ( 1 7:699-703), an important draft of
an outline for the emerging Critique in which Kant deals with the matter of
the "Transcendental Aesthetic" under the rubric of a "Transcendental
Theory of Appearance," and also heads other sections of his outline as a
"Transcendental Theory of Experience" and a "Dialectic of Sensibility."
Elsewhere, Kant defines an intuition as the "immediate relation of the
7 19

1

Notes to pages 1 55-1 59
power of representation to an individual object" (R 5643, 1 780-88, 18:2 82).
For earlier accounts of intuition, see R 3955, 3 957, 3958, and 3961 (1 769,
1 7 = 364-7).
3 On the contrast between intuition and sensation, see R 463 6 ( 1 772-76,
1 7:619-20). More generally, on Kant's classification of the various forms of
cognitive states, see the inaugural dissertation, § 5 (2 : 3 94); R 6 1 9-20
(1 769, 1 5: 2 68); R 2 8 3 5-6 ( 1 773-77, 16:536-40); and the scheme given at
A 3 20/B 367 below, as well as the further reflections noted there.
4 Kant refers in this note to Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten ( 1 7 1 1-1 762),
who was not only the author of the textbooks on metaphysics and ethics
on which Kant based his lecture courses in those subjects, but also the au­
thor of the two works which introduced and gave currency to the term
"aesthetics" used in its modern sense, i.e., as the name for the philosophy
of art and/or beauty; these works were Baumgarten's dissertation Medi­
tationes philosophicae de nonnullis ad poema pertinentibus (Halle, 1 73 5), and
the two-volume though uncompleted Aesthetica (Halle, 1 75 0 and 1 758). It
is not clear whether Kant was acquainted with Baumgarten's aesthetic the­
ory firsthand or through the three-volume work in German published by
Baumgarten's disciple Georg Friedrich Meier, Die Anfangsgriinde alter
schijnen Kiinste und Wissenschaften (Halle, 1 748-50) (Meier was also the au­
thor of the textbook used in Kant's logic courses). In any case, although in
the present footnote Kant evinced a hostility to Baumgarten's new usage
which he modified only slightly in the revisions of this note in the second
edition, by 1 790 Kant had accepted Baumgarten's usage, and so entitled
the section of the Critique ofJudgment of that year dealing with what he
here says should be called the "critique of taste" the "Critique of Aes­
thetic Judgment." For comments on :B aumgarten, see R 508 1 ( 1 776-78,
1 8:8 1-2). For further critical comm6nts about the status of aesthetics in
Baumgarten's (and the modern) sense, see R 1 578, 1 5 79, 1 587, 1 588
( 1 760s, 16: 1 6-2 3 , 26-7), R 42 76 ( 1 770-7 1 , 1 7 :492), and R 5063 (1 776-78,
1 8 :76-7).
5 Compare R 5298 ( 1 776-78 or 1 780s, 1 8 : 1 46-8).
6 With this paragraph compare R 4188 and 4 1 89 ( 1 769-70, 1 7:449-50).
7 See R 4 1 99 (1 769-70, 1 7:45 3).
8 Compare R 5 3 1 5 ( 1 776-1 780s, 1 8 : 1 5 1).
9 For a contrasting assertion, see R 45 I I (1 772-75, 1 7:578). For further dis­
cussion, see R 5636 ( 1 780s, 1 8 : 267-8).
1 0 See R 563 7 ( 1 780s, 1 8 : 2 7 1-6, especially p. 2 7 1).
II
See R 4071 (1 769, 1 7:404), R 43 1 5 (1 769 -7 1 , 1 7 : 503-4), R 4425 ( 1 7 7 1 ,
I 7 =541), and R 4673 ( 1 773-75, 1 7:636-42 , especially p. 6 3 8) .
1 2 Kant suggests a quite different argument for this point in the Opus postu­
mum, where he states that it is because space is a form of intuition that it
must be infinite; the unstated premise is presumably that no matter how
much is given to us, we must always be able to represent it spatially because
space is the form of intuition of outer objects. Of course, this might be
thought to presuppose the proof that space is a form of intuition which is
still being given here. See Opus postumum, 2 2 : 1 2 , 43-4, 415, 4 1 7, 4 1 9-20;
in Kant, Opus postumum, edited by Eckart Forster (Cambridge: Cambridge
720

Notes to pages 159-165
University Press, 1993), pp. 170-1, 178-9, 1 8 1- 3 . See also R 6338 and
13

6338a (1794-98, 18:658-65).
A large number of reflections bear on the argument of this paragraph. See

R 4077-8 (1769, 17:4°5-6), R 4191 (1769-70, IT451), R 4673 (1773-75,
Q536-42), R 4674 (1773-75, Q643-7, especially p. 645), R 5329
(1776-78, 18:153),R 5552 (1778-79? 1780s?,18:218-20, especially p. 220),

R 5637 (1780s, 18:271-6, especially pp. 271-2), R 5876 (1783-84,
18:374-5), and, even as late as 1797, R 6342 (18:667), R 6346 (18:670-1),

R 6348 (18:671-2), R 6349 (18:672-5), R 6350 (18:676-7), R 6351
(18:677-8), and 6352 (18:678-9). Kant's interest in this long-settled matter

may have been revived at this late date by an essay competition of the Royal
Academy of Sciences intended to call forth defenses of the anti-Kantian po­
sition that all knowledge is of empirical origin; see R 635I.
14

Kant describes this as hypothetical correctness at R 4976 (1776-78,

15

For alternative versions of the metaphysical exposition of time, see, in ad­

18:46-7).

dition to the inaugural dissertation § 14, R 4673 (1774, 17:636-42, espe­
16
17

cially pp. 636-7) and R 4756 (1775-77, 17:699-703,especially p. 700).
See R 4°71 (1769, 17:404).
Compare R 4319 (177°-71, IT504-5)·

18

See note 13 above.

19

See R 5317,5319,5320 (1776-78,18:151), and R 5325 (1776-78,18:152).
Kant refers here to objections that had been br ought against his inaugural

20

dissertation by two of the most important philosophers of the period,

Johann Heinrich Lambert and Moses Mendelssohn, as well as by the then
well-known aesthetician and member of the Berlin Academy of Sciences,
Johann Georg Sulzer. Lambert objected that even though Kant was correct
to maintain that "Time is indisputably a conditio sine qua non" of all of our
representations of objects, it does not follow from this that time is unreal,
for "If alterations are real then time is also real, whatever it might be" (letter
61 to Kant, of 18 October 1770, 10:103-11, at 106-7). Mendelssohn also

wrote that he could not convince himself that time is "something merely
subjective," for "Succession is at least a necessary condition of the repre­
sentations of finite spirits. Now finite spirits are not only subjects, but also
objects of representations, those of both God and their fellow spirits.
Hence the sequence [of representations] on one another is also to be re­
garded as something objective" (letter 63 to Kant, of 25 December 1770,
10:113-16, at 1I5). (The objection that time cannot be denied to be real

just because it is a necessary property of our representations, since our rep­
resentations themselves are real, has continued to be pressed against Kant;
see, for instance, P. F. Strawson, The Bounds of Sense [London: Methuen,
1966], pp. 39 and 54.) Sulzer took an only slightly more conciliatory line:

he insisted that "Duration and extension are absolutely simple concepts,
which cannot be explained, although they have in my opinion a true real­
ity," even though he was prepared to concede that "Time and space, how­
ever, are composite concepts," which may thus be regarded as subjective
although grounded in an objectively valid experience of duration and ex­
tension (letter 62 to Kant, of 8 December 1770, 10:110-12,at I I I ) . Sulzer
721

Notes to pages 166-176

21
22

23
24

25

26
27

28

29

describes himself as having been an adherent of Leibniz's view of time and
space, but his view that time is a composite concept grounded on the sim­
ple concept of duration is also reminiscent of Locke's treatment of the idea
of time as a complex idea (specifically, a simple mode) formed from the ex­
perience of duration (Essay concerning Human Understanding, book II, chap­
ter XIV).
See again R 5320 (1776-78, 18:151).
This is somewhat disingenuous: Lambert at least made it clear that his
reservations about Kant's account of time apply equally to the case of space.
He wrote: "The reality of time and of space appears to have something so
simple and so heterogeneous from everything else that one can only think
it but not define it . . . I therefore cannot say that time and also space are
merely an aid in behalf of human representation" (letter of 13 October
1770, at 10:107).
To the whole of this paragraph, compare R 4673 (1773-75, 17=636-42).
Here Kant refers to the theory of absolute space of Newton and his fol­
lowers such as Samuel Clarke. Newton's view of absolute space and time is
presented in Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica (London, 1687),
Scholium to Definition VIII, book I, and discussed by Clarke in his con­
tributions, beginning with Clarke's First Reply, to the Leibniz-Clarke cor­
respondence, A Collection of Papers which Passed between the Late Learned
Mr. Leibnitz and Dr. Clarke, in the Years I7I5 and I7I6 (London, 1717); a
German edition of the correspondence, translated by Heinrich Kohler,
with an introduction by Christian Wolff and a posthumous reply to Clarke's
fifth letter by L. P. Thiimmig, was published in 1720 (Frankfurt and
Leipzig), as was a French edition, edited by Des Maiseaux (Amsterdam).
There is no doubt labout Kant's familiarity with this famous controversy.
Here Kant refers to the view of Leibniz and his followers. He had already
anticipated his striking objection, which focuses on this epistemological
problem with Leibniz's position rather than its ontology (which Kant es­
sentially shares), in the inaugural dissertation, § 15D (2:404). See also R
5298 (1776-1780s, 18:146-7), R 5327 (1776-1780s, 18:153), and R 5876
(1783-84, 18:374-5)·
See R 4652 (1772-78, 17:626). See also Metaphysical Foundations ofNatural
Science, 4:476-7.
For a classical statement of the view to which Kant is objecting, see G. W
Leibniz, New Essays on Human Understanding, book I, chapter I, § 11: "But
the ideas that come from the senses are confused; and so too, at least in
part, are the truths which depend on them; whereas intellectual ideas, and
the truths depending on them, are distinct, and neither [the ideas nor the
truths] originate in the senses; though it is true that without the senses we
would never think of them" (translation by Jonathan Bennett and Peter
Remnant [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981], p. 81).
For a parallel passage, also using the example of a triangle, see Kant's let­
ter to Marcus Herz of 26 May 1789 (letter 362, II:48-55; translation in
Arnulf Zweig, Kant: Philosophical Correspondence I759-99 [Chicago: Uni­
versity of Chicago Press, 19671, pp. 150-6).
Compare to this whole section R 5637 (1780-83 or 1785-88, 18:268-76),
722

Notes to pages 180-197

30

31
32
33
34
35
36

37
38

39

probably a draft for the first edition of the Critique but possibly a draft for
the second edition.
On the argument of this section, see also R 5805 (1783-84, 18:358-9);
R 58II (1783-84, 18:360); R 5813 (1785-89, 18:361); R 6329 (1793,
18:650-1); and Metaphysik Volckmann, 28419-20. In the first draft of the
introduction to the Critique ofJudgment, however, Kant suggests that there
is little content to the "general theory of time" (20:237).
See note 3 above.
See note 4 above.
See note 5 above.
See note 6 above.
See note 7 above.
For related arguments, see R 5655 (1788-89, 18:313-16, especially pp.
314-15); Kant's essay "Some remarks to Ludwig Heinrich Jakob's Exami­
nation ofMendelssohn 's Morgenstunden" (8:149-55, at pp. 153-4); and the ar­
gument against Leibniz's monadology in Metaphysik Mrongovius, 29:827.
On the contrast between appearance and illusion, see also R 4999
(1776-78, 18:56).
Berkeley typically attacks the reality of matter rather than of space and time
themselves; thus Kant would appear to be closer to the mark in the last part
of this sentence than in the earlier part, in which he seems to suggest that
Berkeley's idealism results from the supposition that there are contradic­
tions inherent in the idea of space and time themselves as self-subsisting
entities.In The Principles of Human Knowledge §§ 98-9, however, Berkeley
does object to the "attempt to frame a simple idea of time, abstracted from
the succession of ideas in my mind, which flows uniformly, and is partici­
pated in by all beings," and likewise to the attempt to "abstract extension
and motion from all other qualities" (The Works ofGeorge Berkeley, Bishop of
Cloyne, ed. A. A. Luce and T E. Jessop [Edinburgh: Nelson, 1949], vol.II,
pp. 83-4). Here Berkeley comes closer to the reasoning Kant imputes to
him.
On the argument of this paragraph, see also R 5781 (17805, 18:353), R
5797 (1780s, 18:357), R 5962 (1785-89, 18:401-5), and R 6317 (1790-91,
18:623-9, especially p. 626).

Transcendental analytic (''Analytic of concepts '')
I
2

3

For related comments, see R 5087 and 5089 (1776-78, 18:83-4).
early account of the restrictions on what Kant was later to call "general
logic" may be found at R 1599 (1769-70, 16:29-30); see also R 1608
(1776-78, 16:34). Other precursors of the present passage from the same pe­
riod are R 3946 (17:350-60) and R 3949 (17:361). For later comments, see R
1624 (1780s, 16:42) and R 1647 (179os, 16:43). See also Kant's Logic, edited
by Benjamin Gottlob Jasche, introduction I (9:12; in Immanuel Kant,
Lectures on Logic, tr. ]' Michael Young [Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1992], p. 528).
Kant would appear to have derived this figure from the Greek satirist
Lucian of Samosata (b. ca. 120 A.D.), who writes in his dialogue Demonax,

An

723

Notes to pages 198-220

4

5
6
7
8
9
10
II

12

13
14

15

section 28, line 5: "Once when he [Demonax, a supposed Cynic sage] came
upon two uncouth philosophers inquiring and wrangling with one an­
other - one of them putting absurd questions, the other answering per­
fectly irrelevantly - he said 'Don't you think, my friends, that one of these
guys is milking a he-goat and the other putting a sieve underneath it?' "
(reference and translation by John M. Cooper). Kant cites "Lucians
Schriften. Erster Theil. Zurich bey Gefiner. 1769. " at R 5553 (1778-79?
1780 - 81? 18:221-9, at p. 225)'
See R 2129 (1769-70, 16:245-6); R 2131-3 (1772-78, 16:247); R 2147
(1776-78, 16:252); R 2155 (1776-78, 16:254); R 2162 (1776-78, 16:256);
and R 2177 (1780s, 16:259). See also the Jasche Logic, introduction VII
(9:50-7; Lectures on Logic, pp. 557-64).
For earlier statements of this doctrine, see R 3920-1 (1769, 17:344-6).
For an earlier sketch, see R 3063 (1776-78, 16:636-8).
On this paragraph, see R 3063 (1776-78, 16:636-8, especially p. 638); R
3065-6 (1776- 1780s, 16:639); R 3069 (I780s, 16:640).
See R 3104-6 (1776-78, 16:660-1).
Compare R 4288 (1770-71? 1776-78? 17:497) and R 5228 (1776-78,
18:125-6).
See R 4679 (1776-78, 17=662-4, especially p. 664: "All appearances belong
under titles of understanding").
For related claims, see R 4285 (1770-71? 1776-78? 17:496) and R 4520
(1772-76,17=580).
The history of the evolution of Kant's list of categories is long and com­
plicated, and only a selection of the relevant documents can be listed here.
T he main feature of this development was the only gradual connection of
the three categories of!relation, on which Kant focused early and often, es­
pecially in the docunients of 1774-75, with the quadripartite scheme re­
flected in the previous table of the logical functions of judgment. A prime
example of the latter tendency is R 3941 (1769, 17:356-7); an early exam­
ple of the former tendency is R 4493 (1772-76, 17:571-2). One of the first
clear statements of the conjunction of the two analyses is R 4656 (1772-76,
17:623-4); see also R 5055 (1776-78, 18:74). Among other early state­
ments, see also R 4276 (1770-71, 17:492-3) and R 4215 (1775-78,
17:684-5)' For an interesting late restatement of the whole doctrine, see R
6338a (1794-95, 18:659-65). Among the large number of notes focusing
primarily on the categories of relation, see R 4385 (1771, 17:528); R 4496
(1772-76, 17:573); R 5284 and 5286 (1776-78, 18:143); R 5289-90
(1776-78, 18:144); and R 5854 (1783-84, 18:369-70).
See, however, R 4276 (1770-71, 17:492-3), where the categories are de­
fined as "the general actions of reason."
For Kant's first formulations of the problem of a transcendental deduction
of the categories, see his famous letter to Marcus Herz of 2 I February
1772 (letter 70, 10:129-35; translation in Zweig, Philosophical Correspon­
dence, pp. 70-6). For contemporaneous reflections, see R 4473 (1772,
17:564-5) and R 4633-4 (1773-76, 17:615-19).
For other passages using the same distinction, see R 5636 (1780-81,
18:267-8) and Metaphysik Mrongovius, 29:764.
724

Notes to pages 221-241
16
17

18
19
20

2I

22

23

24
25
26

27
28
29

30

31

Kant calls Locke a "physiologist of reason" at a number of places, includ­
ing R 4866 (1776-78, 18:14-15) and R 4893 (1776-78, 18:21).
For a similar passage, in which Kant formulates a possibility he ultimately
means to reject without using the subjunctive mood, but then more ex­
plicitly rejects it, see R 5221 (1776-78, 18:I22-3).
See R 4634 (1776-78, 17:616-19)'
In addition to R 4634, just cited, see also R 4383 (1776-78, 17:527-8) and
R 5184 (1776-177os, 18:11I-I2).
There are a number of notes in which Kant uses this formulation; see
R 4672 (1773, 17:635-6), R 5643 (1780-84, 18:282-4), R 5854 (1783-84,
18:369-70), and R 5931-2 (1783-84, 18:390-2).
An anticipation of this doctrine of threefold synthesis, which clearly shows
that its importance is to explain how appearances are subject to the laws of
both intuition and understanding, can be found at,R 5216 (1776-78, 18:12I).
Although Kant will not explicitly refer to this doctrine in the second-edition
deduction, R 6358, a major sketch of "the whole of the critical philosophy"
from as late as the end of 1797 (18:682-5), shows that he continued to hold
the view then (see especially p. 684) and presumably had never given it up.
For other statements of the claim of this paragraph, see R 4676 (1773-75,
17=653-7, at p. 656); R 4678 (1773-75, 17= 660-2, at p. 660); R 5221
(1776-78, 18:122-3), R 5390 (1776-78? 1778-79? 18:169-70); and R
5636-7 (1780-81, 18:266-76, especially pp. 267-8 and 271).
For similar treatments of the significance of the thought of an object, see
R 4642 (1772-76, 17:622), R 4679 (1773-75, 17:662-4, at p. 663), R 4681
(1773-75, 17:665-8, at pp. 666-7), R 5213 (1776-78, 18:120), and R 5643
(1780-88, 18:282-4, at p. 283). For an early statement that gives this
analysis of relation of cognition to an object and then takes the next step
by adducing the "unity of the mind" as its ground, see R 5203 (1776-78,
18:II6-17). See also R 4679, at 17=664.
In addition to R 5203, cited in the previous note, see also R 4674 (1773-75,
17:643-7) and R 4677 ( 1773-75, 17:657-60).
Compare R 4678 (1773-75, 17:660-2, at p. 660), R 5203 (1776-78,
18:II6-17), R 5213 (1776-78, 18:120), and R 5216 (1776-78,18:121).
On the concept of the transcendental object, see the important R 55 54
(1778-81, 18:229-3 I), where Kant states that the transcendental object "is
no real object or given thing, but a concept, in relation to which appear­
ances have unity" (p. 230).
See the parallel passage at R 5636 (1780-81, 18:267-8, at p. 257)'
Compare R 4676 (1773-75, 17:653-7, at p. 656). See also the loose sheet
B 12 (undated) (23:17-20, at p. 19).
For further comments on the contrast between productive and reproduc­
tive imagination and on the relation between apperception and productive
imagination, see the undated loose sheet B 12 (23:17-20, at p. 18).
Compare the accounts given at R 4674 (1773-75, 17:643-7, at p. 647),
R 4676 (17:653-7, at p. 656), and R 4677 (1773-75, 17:657-60, especially
p. 658).
On the concept of nature, see R 5 607-8 (1778-81, 18:248-51) and R 5904
(I780s? 1776-78? 18:380).
72 5

Notes to pages 245-25 r
32 Kant's thought about the best way to accomplish the task of the "Transcen­
dental Deduction" was in constant ferment between 1781 and 1787; and al­
though he claims in the preface to the second edition that he changed
nothing fundamental in his proofs, only in the style of his exposition, it is
clear that he considered a number of alternative strategies for the deduc­
tion in the period between the two editions and that the version finally
published in 1787 differs from that of 1781 in many ways. Two published
documents from the intervening period are Prolegomena to any future Meta­
physics (1783), §§ 16-22, in which the argument turns on a distinction be­
tween mere judgments of perception and judgments of experience, with the
latter but not the former being held to have a priori concepts of the under­
standing as necessary conditions; and the long footnote in the preface to
the Metaphysical Foundations ofNatural Science (1786) (4:474-6n.), in which
Kant suggests by contrast that the deduction could be grounded entirely on
the "precisely determined definition of a judgment in general" C4:475n.). It
is notable that there is no reference to the unity of apperception or self­
consciousness in either of these attempted deductions. Other important
documents on the development of the deduction, many of which date from
the period 1783-84, would thus seem to postdate the composition of the
Prolegomena, which Kant seems to have finished in the summer of 1782,
and would thus be either afterthoughts on the Prolegomena or notes toward
the next edition of the Critique. Several notes including extensive sketches
of a deduction which may or may not postdate the first edition of the
Critique include: R 5637, which may be from 1780-81 or later (18:271-6);
R 5642, which is univocally assigned to 1780-81 (18:279-82); and R 5643,
which may be from anywhere between 1780 and 1788 (18:282-4). T hose
univocally assigned to the period 1783-84 include: R 5923 ( 18:385-7), R
5926 ( 18:388), R 5927 (18:388-9), and R 5930-4 (18:390-3).
33 Although he presumably presents here only an outline of the strategy for
the ensuing deduction, in a later manuscript Kant suggested that the in­
ference that any combination requires an a priori concept is virtually the
whole of the deduction. See the manuscripts, written in 1793 or later, en­
titled What Real Progress Has Metaphysics Made in Germany since the Time of
Leibniz and Wolff? (20:271, 275-6; in the translation by Ted Humphrey
[New York: Abaris Books, 1983], pp. 75, 83-5)·
34 To this note compare especially R 5930 (1783-84, 18:390).
35 To this paragraph compare also the loose sheet B 12 (23:18-20, especially
P·19)·
36 T he singularity or unity of space and time play no role in the argument of
§ 25, but do play a crucial role in that of § 26. Kant's reference to § 25 here
should therefore presumably be replaced by a reference to § 26.
37 T his is the key premise in a number of Kant's sketches of the deduction
from 1783-84, including R 5927 ( r 8:388-9) and R 5932 (18:391-2), as well
as R 5643, assigned to the broader period 1780-88 (18:282-4). From the
same period, see also Metaphysik Volckmann, 28:405-6. For Kant's later
thought on the concept of an object, see R 6350 (1797, 18:675-7)'
38 To the argument of this and the following section, compare especially R
5923 (18:385-7).
726

Notes to pages 2 5 1-265

39 Kant is here summing up the argument of his 1762 essay Die folsche Spitz­
findigkeit der vier sytlogistischen Figuren; translated as "The False Subtlety of
the Four Syllogistic Figures" in David Walford, ed., Immanuel Kant: Theo­
retical Philosophy, [755-[770 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1992), pp. 85-105.
40 Compare especially R 5933 (18:392-3).
41 Erdmann, following Vaihinger, substitutes "§ 10" for the original "§ 13.

42

This reflects the fact that Kant derives the table of categories from the table
of the logical functions of judgment in § 10 (as numbered in the second edi­
tion). However, it is in § 1 3 that Kant raises the question of whether the cat­
egories necessarily apply to all of our possible experience in the way that
space and time as the forms of intuition do; his reference to § 1 3 here is pre­
sumably intended to show that here is where he has finally answered the
question raised in that earlier section. Thus we leave Kant's reference as it
stands.
For an important note on the problem of inner sense, see R 5 65 5 (1788-89,

18:3I3-16).
43 Kant continued to worry about the problem of inner sense until the end
of his career; for late reflections, see R 6349 (1 797, 18:672-5), R 6350
(1797, 18:67 5-7, especially p. 675), and R 6354 (1797, 18:680). The claim
that the unidimensionality of time must be represented by the spatial
figure of a line, although it does not figure in the "Refutation of Ideal­
ism" added at B 2 74-9 below, does figure in the version of the "Refu­
tation" found at R 5 65 3 (1788, 18:306-12 , at pp. 308-9). The distinct
claim that changes in time and the determinate duration of intervals be­
tween changes in time can only be empirically known on the basis of
periodic changes in objects in space is emphasized throughout the drafts
of the "Refutation" found in R 631 1-17 (1790, 18:607-29). See also B
288-92 below.
44 To this note, compare the draft of an essay entitled "Answer to the ques­
tion, Is it an experience mati think?" at R 5 661 (1788-9°, 18:318-20). See
also A 402 and Kant's long footnote at B 42 2-3n., below.
45 By this term, here first introduced, Kant refers back to the derivation of
me categories from the logical functions of judgment (§§ 9-12). This new
designation for mat argument is widely used in me literature on Kant.
46 To mis note, compare R 5926 (1783-84, 18:388).
47 On mis conception of nature, see R 5406-1I (I776-I780s, 1 8 :174-5) .
4 8 This term alludes t o the biological meory that the germ cells o f the two
parents give rise to the embryo as a new product, rather than as me
evolution of something preformed; the theory of epigenesis is the an­
tithesis of the theory of preformation, and not just a contrast to the con­
cept of generatio aequivoca. For another instance of Kant's use of this and
the related biological terms to classify philosophical theories, see his
classification of theories of reproduction at Critique of Judgment, § 8 1

(5:42 1-4).

49

This alludes to the biological theory, the antithesis of epigenesis, mat the
embryo exists completely formed in me germ cell of one parent and mat
the other parent's germ cell only stimulates it to growm.

7 27

Notes to pages 269-285

Transcendental analytic (''Analytic ofprinciples ' ')
50

5I

52

53
54
55

56
57
58

59

Kant's view that judgment may b e taught b y examples but that there i s a
limit to the efficacy of principles has deep roots in this thought; see R 1580
( 1 769-70, 1 6: 2 3) . This paragraph's opening suggestion that there would be
an infinite regress if judgment needed rules to apply rules becomes even
more prominent in Critique ofJudgment, preface, 5:169.
The first mention of the doctrine of schematism seems to be at R 5552
( 1 7 78-79, 1 8:2 1 8-2 I, at p. 2 20). This late origin of the concept is consis­
tent with the absence of any separation between the tasks of a transcenden­
tal deduction and of a theory of principles of judgment in the reflections of
the mid-I770s, especially R 4674-84 from the Duisburg Nachlafl; only once
the two tasks had been separated would it have been necessary to invent the
bridge between them, and so the final form of the "Transcendental Analy­
tic," in which the "Schematism" forms a bridge between the "Analytic of
Concepts" and "Analytic of Principles" ("Doctrine of Judgment"), though
it is formally the first chapter of the latter, does not appear to have taken
shape in Kant's mind before I 7 78. The next mention of the "schematistic"
is from the immediate period of the composition of the first edition of the
Critique, in R 5636 ( 1 780-8 1 , 18:267-8). The doctrine of the schematism
is also prominent in three reflections from the period 1 78 3-84, R 593 2-4
( 1 8 : 3 9 1 -4), although it is mentioned by name only in R 5933 ( 1 8 : 392-3).
Finally, there is a late note in which Kant holds the chapter on the schema­
tism "for one of the most important" even though his own disciple Jakob
Sigismund Beck could not understand it; see R 6369 (1 797, 1 8 :685-7).
The distinction between a mere image and a rule which Kant will make in
this paragraph in order to undermine any empiricist criticism of abstract
mathematical ideas such as Berkeley's (see A Treatise concerning the Principles
of Human Knowledge, introduction, § 1 8) had already been suggested by
Leibniz in his discussion of Locke's resolution of the Molyneux problem;
see New Essays on Human Understanding, book II, chapter IX, § 8, where
Leibniz says "how essential it is to distinguish images from exact ideas which
are composed of definitions" (Bennett and Remnant, p. I 3 7).
For several reflections clarifying Kant's concepts of quantity, see R 5583,
5585, and 5589 (I778-1 780s, 1 8 :240-2).
To these three paragraphs, compare R 5763 ( 1 7 83-84, 1 8 :347). See also R
5764 ( 1 78 3-84, 1 8: 347-8).
O n the distinction between the principles of analytic and synthetic judg­
ments in this and the following section, see R 3 9 1 9- 2 3 (1 769,17 : 344-8),
R 3925-6 (1 769, 1 7 : 349), and especially R 3928 (1 769,17= 3 5°- 1).
In addition to the reflections cited in the previous note, see also R 4476-8,
4480, and 4482 ( 1 772, 1 7:565- 9).
Compare with this Critique ofJudgment, introduction V, 5 : 1 84-5.
See R 5 5 8 5 ( 1 779-8 1 , I8:241-2), where Kant suggests that the mathemat­
ical principles are so called because they are the conditions of the possibil­
ity of applied mathematics.
For some light on these terms, see R 4675 ( 1 7 7 5, 1 7:648-5 3, at pp. 648-9)
and R 468 1 (1 773-5 , 1 7:665-8 , at pp. 667-8).
72 8

Notes to pages 285-303
60 This distinction is already well worked out in R 5758 (1775-77, 17:7°5-8,
at p. 706).
61 On this section, see R 5583, 5585, and 5589 (1778-80s, 18:240-2). See also
Opus postumum, 21:454-7.
62 See R 5726-7 (1785-89, 18:336-8) and R 5832-50 (1780s, 18:365-9). See
also Metaphysik Volckmann, 28:424-5'
63 On Kant's definition of intensive magnitude, see R 5331 (1776-78,
18:154)· See also R 5582 (1778-79, 18:239-40) and R 5587 (1778-1780s,
18:241).
64 See R 4719 (1773-79, 17:686) and especially R 5341 (1776-1780s, 18:156).
See also Metaphysik Mrongovius, 29:834.
65 Thought to have been introduced by Epicurus, a preconception in the
form of a general concept or notion, formed from prior experience, used
to anticipate properties of newly encountered objects; not an entirely apt
comparison for Kant, since there is nothing clearly a priori in the Epi­
curean conception.
66 See note 15 above.
67 Although the principle of their proof was suggested as early as 1769-70 in
R 4174 (17:444), the "Analogies of Experience" were at the heart of Kant's
original argument for the a priori objective validity of the relational cate­
gories as well as the forms of intuition in the mid-I770s, and there are nu­
merous anticipations of the following material among Kant's notes from
this period, especially among the so-called Duisburg Nachlafl from 1774-75
(R 4674-84, 17:643-73)' Among other passages, see R 4674 (at pp. 646-7),
R 4678 (at pp. 660-I), R 4681 (at p. 666), and R 4684 (at pp. 670-I). See
also R 4756, where Kant introduces the theses of the three analogies under
the title of a "Transcendental T heory of Experience" (1775-77, 17=699703, at pp. 702-3). See also R 5088 (1776-78, 18:84), R 5214 (1776-78,
18:120), and especially R 5221 (1776-78, 18:I22-3), where Kant argues
that the rules furnished by the analogies are the basis for distinguishing ob­
jective truth from merely subjective play or fiction in a way that seems
most closely related to the following exposition of the second analogy.
68 A quite different explanation for the use of the term "analogy" as the des­
ignation for the principles of substance, causation, and community is given
at R 4675 (1775, 17:648-53, at p. 648).
69 For some of the more important of Kant's notes on the concept of sub­
stance and the arguments for its permanence, see R 4039 (1769, 17:393-4);
R 4052-60 (1769, 17=398-4°1); R 4681 (1773-75, 17:665-8, at p. 666);
R 4684 (1773-5, 17:67°-3, at p. 671); R 4699-703 (1773-n, 17:679-81);
R 5278-98 (1776-78, 18:141-7); R 5348 (1776-78, 18:158), which clearly
anticipates the opening argument of both versions of the first analogy; and
R 5871 (1780-81, 18:373), which more clearly bears on the argument of
the final three paragraphs of the first analogy. For interesting comments on
the empirical use of the concept of substance, see Metaphysik L1 (28:208-9)·
70 The point at which Kant is driving here, that accidents are not something
separate from the substance but rather simply the positive determinations
of the substance and therefore the way in which it is known, would appear
to be directed against Locke's concern that even if we know the qualities of
729

Notes to pages 303-32I

71

72
73

74

75
76

77

78

a substance something about it necessarily still remains unknown (Essay
concerning Human Understanding, book II, chapter XXIII, §§ 3-4)' Kant re­
curs to this point often: see R 4053 (1769-70, IT399), R 5855 (1780s,
18:370), R 5861 (1783-84, 18:371), and Metaphysik Volckmann, 28:429-30.
See R 5291 (1776-78, 18:144). In several places, Kant suggests that the ar­
gument for the permanence of substance can be derived from the present
definition of substance; see R 5297 (1776-77, 18:146), R 5791 (1783-84,
18:356), and R 5873 (1783-84?, 18:373). A later reflection, however, makes
it clear that a synthetic a priori proposition like the principle of conserva­
tion cannot be derived from a mere definition; see R 6305 (1790-98,
18:706), and tries to construct an argument for the permanence of sub­
stance different from any suggested in the text.
To this epistemological argument for the permanence of substance, com­
pare R 5871 (1780-81? 18:373).
As this remark suggests, permanence and therefore substantiality is not it­
self something that is directly perceived. See R 4054 (1769, 17:399) and R
5358 (1776-77, 18:160). The later discussion to which Kant refers is at
A 204-61 B 249-51.
The earliest statement of the underlying principle of Kant's argument for
this principle appears to be R 4174 (1769, 1T444), which states quite ex­
plicitly that things need to stand in a "real connection" in order to be
placed in a series of succession because there is no perception of their po­
sition in absolute ti'lle. In the Duisburg Nachlafl of 1774-75, there are im­
portant anticipations of the argument of the second analogy at R 4675
(17=648-53, at p. 648), R 4682 (17:668-9), and R 4684 (IT670-3, at pp.
670-1). Important later reflections include R 5189 (1776-78, 18:II2-13),
R 5202 (1776-1780s, 18:rr6), and R 5699 (1780-84, 18:329), where Kant
explicitly says, "The principium rationis is valid only of experience." See also
the discussion in Metaphysik Volckmann, 28:407-9.
On the connection between substance and action, see R 5289-90
(1776-78? 18:144), and the later R 5650 (1785-88, 18:298-302, at p. 298).
This thesis can be considered the capstone of Kant's long struggle against
the idea that distinct substances are related merely by preestablished
harmony, which began in his New Elucidation of the Primary Principles of
Metaphysical Cognition (1755), proposition XII (2:39; in Theoretical Philosophy
I 755-I770, p. 39). An important note on this theme from the early 1760s
is R 3730 (1T272). From the 1770s, relevant notes include R 4704
(1773-n, 17=681), R 5429 (1776-79, 18:179), and R 5598 (1778-79
18:246). From approximately the same period, see also the discussion in
Nletaphysik LT, 28:212-13.
To this paragraph, compare similar discussions in several of Kant's versions
of the "Refutation ofIdealism" from 1790, especially R 6312 (18:612-13)
and R 6313 (18:613-15, at p. 614).
The following postulates and their discussion bring to a head Kant's con­
trast between logical and real relations, especially between logical and real
possibility, which had been the basis of his critique of rationalism since the
1763 Attempt to Introduce the Concept of Negative Magnitude into Philosophy.
For an anticipation of the mature doctrine from as early as 1764-66, see R
730

Notes to pages 32 1-329

79

80

81

82
83

84
85
86
87
88

3756 ( 17:284-5), For notes from the 1770s, see R 4288 ( 177 1-72, 17:497),
R 4298-9 ( 1770-71, 17:499-500), R 4302 ( 1770-75, 17:500), and R 4682
( 1773-75, 17:668-9). For notes from the 1780s, see R 5710-23 (various
dates, 18:332-5), R 5754 and 5757 ( 1785-89, 18:345), R 5763 ( 1783-84,
18:347), and R 5772 ( 1785-89, 18:349)' From the 1780s, see also Metaphysik
Volckmann, 28:412-13 and 4 16- 18.
For Kant's contrast between non-contradictoriness as the condition of
merely logical or "analytical" possibility and the stronger notion of the ob­
jective reality of the concept or real or "synthetic" possibility of the object,
see also R 5 184 ( 1776-1780s, 18:II 1-I2), R 5556 ( 1778-81, 18:232), R
5565 ( 1778-1780s, 18:235), R 5569 ( 1778- 1780s, 18:235-6), R 5572
( 1778-1780s, 18:237), and R 5772 ( 1785-89, 18:349-50).
This could appear to be a reference to the existence of an ether as the con­
dition of the possibility of perception which Kant argues for in his Opus
postumum, especially in the sections known as Ubergang I-[4 (see 22:
609- 15). However, since Kant goes on to say that the possibility of this
third thing is entirely groundless because it has no basis in experience
while he subsequently argues that the existence of the ether is actually a
condition of the possibility of experience, it would seem that he is here
considering (and denying) the possibility of a third kind of substance in ad­
dition to matter and mind, rather than the extremely refined form of mat­
ter, which is how he later conceives of the ether.
This would appear to b e a reference to the Swedenborgian supposition of a
world of spirits capable of communicating with each other without the ben­
efit of any material medium that Kant lampooned in the Dreams ofa Spirit­
Seer ( 1766); see 2:329-34, in Theoretical Philosophy, I755-[770, pp. 3 16- 2 1.
See R 5 18 1 ( 1776-78, 18:IID-II) and R 5 185-6 ( 1776- 17805, 18: 1 12).
Kant was obviously dissatisfied with this new section of the second edition,
for in addition to the modification of the argument already suggested in
the preface at B xxxix-xli, numerous sketches of the argument from the
years after the publication of the second edition also survive. These in­
clude, from late in 1788, R 5653-4 ( 18:305-13) and the related R 5655
( 18:3 13-16), and from 1790, apparently written in conjunction with a visit
by Kant's disciple]. G. C. Kiesewetter, R 63II ( 18:606-I2, in Kiesewetter's
hand) and R 630-17 ( 18:6 13-29). Other relevant notes include R 5709
( 1785-89, 18:332) and R 6323 ( 1793, 18:641-4, at p. 643). From the period
prior to the publication of the first edition of the Critique, two interesting
notes are R 5399 and 5400 [ 1776-78?, 18: 172].)
Kant already made this distinction between problematic and dogmatic ide­
alism in the later 177os; see Metaphysik L1, 28:206-9.
See also R 5661, the draft of an essay entitled "Answer to the question, is
it an experience that we think?" ( 1788-90, 18:3 18-20).
See B 156 above and B 288-94 below.
�n addition to the reflections cited in note 83, on this paragraph see also
the late R 6345 ( 1797, 18:670).
On this contrast, see among other notes R 4030-9 ( 1769, 17:390-4),
R 5 196 ( 1776-78, 18: 1 15), R 5565-72 ( 1778-8 1, 18:235-7), R 5755-6 1
( 1783-84, 18:345-7), and R 5768 ( 1783-84, 18:348-9).
731

Notes to pages 332-361
89

To this paragraph, compare R 5719 (1780s? 18:334), R 5723 (1785-89,
18:335), and R 5769 (1783-84, 18:349).
90 Kant may be referring here to Johann Heinrich Lambert, who made much
use of the term "postulate" in his philosophy and was generous in his con­
ception of the grounds on which postulates could be admitted, apparently
believing that if a proposition was of use in a scientific inquiry its mere pos­
sibility was adequate for postulating its truth; for example, he writes that
"that which, considered in itself, is possible, can be presupposed as a pos­
tulate in a practical problem" (Dianoiologie, § 530, in Neues Organon, oder

Gedanken iiber die Erforschung und Bezeichnung des Wahren und dessen Un­
terscheidung vom Irrthum und Schein, vol. I (Leipzig, 1764; in the edition

91

92

93

by Gunter Schenk (Berlin: 1990), vol. I, p. 263]). By "practical," here,
Lambert means experimental, not moral; but in spite of his criticism in the
present context, Kant's later use of "postulate" as a term in his practical
philosophy may not be unconnected to Lambert's use of the term.
Here again Kant refers to the distinction between real and logical opposi­
tion first introduced in The Attempt to Introduce the Concept of Negative
Magnitudes into Philosophy, where the relation between motions in opposite
directions is one of his primary examples of real rather than logical oppo­
sition, and where rest is thus treated not as a logical contradiction but
as a real state resulting from real opposition between equal motions or
forces in opposite directions. See Negative Magnitudes, 2:171-2, 179-80; in
Walford, ed., Theoretical Philosophy, I755-I770, pp. 2lI, 218.
For statements of this Leibnizian thesis that would have been known to
Kant, see P1'inciples of Natul'e and Grace, § 13; Monadology, §§ 78-90; and
Leibniz-Clarke Correspondence, Leibniz's Fifth Paper, § 87. A classical state­
ment of the doctrine not available to Kant is in Discourse on Metaphysics, § 14.
Kant alludes here to the section of the "Transcendental Dialectic" entitled
"The Paralogisms of Pure Reason," A 341-404 and B399-432.

Transcendental analytic ("Phenomena and Noumena" and "Amphiboly'')
94

Kant's geographical imagery goes back a long way: see R 4458 (1772,
17:559). This note is found in a series of interesting notes (R 4445-76,
17:552-66), which show Kant working out the situation of his emerging
philosophy in both historical (R 4446-51) and systematic (R 4452-76)
terms; Kant's mature position that pure reason has only a negative use in
the theoretical context and a positive use only in the practical context can
already be seen emerging (R 4453, 4457, 4459). The present chapter's dis­
tinction between negative and positive senses of the concept of the
noumenon is an important step in Kant's larger argument for this position.
95 See R 5554 (1778-81, 18:229-30), where Kant writes that "Noumenon
properly signifies something which is always the same, namely the tran­
scendental object [OijectJ of sensible intuition. However, it is not a real
object [object] or given thing, but rather a concept, in relation to which ap­
pearances have unity" (p. 230).
96 Here Kant refers to B 288-9 in the "General Remark on the System of
Principles" added in B.
732

Notes to pages 366-3 7 1

97 The view that "pure ideas of reason are ideas of reflection" that "do not
represent objects, but only laws for comparing the concepts which are
given to us through the senses" goes back to 1 769; see R 3 9 1 7 ( 1 7 :342-4).
More immediate precursors of the present section can be found at R 505I
(1776-78, 1 8:73); R 5552 ( 1 778-8 1 , 1 8 : 2 1 8-2 1 ), clearly a draft for the
present section, which lists the specific pairs of concepts discussed below
at A 2 63-6/ B 3 19-22 as well as the classification of concepts of something
and nothing (A 290-2 / B 346-9); and R 5554 (1 778-8 1 , 1 8: 2 2 9-30). See
also R 5907 ( 1 785-88? 1 776-79? 1 8:3 8 1). On the critique of Leibniz, see

98
99

Real Progress, 20:28 1-5.
See also Metaphysik Mrongovius, 29:838-43 .

Leibniz illustrated his principle of the identity of indiscernibles, the prin­
ciple that two things could never differ solely in spatiotemporal location
without also having internal differences, which Kant is here attacking,
with the example of two drops of water or milk, in his Fourth Letter to
Samuel Clarke, § 4, first published in the Leibniz-Clarke correspondence
in 17 I 7, the year after Leibniz's death.
100 For us, evidence for the ascription of such a view to Leibniz would be an
essay like "Primary Truths," in which Leibniz infers the identity of indis­
cernibles from the analytical nature of all proof of truth, an inference
which depends upon the assumption that the analysis of concepts is the
source of all truth (in G. W Leibniz, Philosophical Essays, ed. Roger Ariew
and Daniel Garber [Indianapolis
Kant could not have been familiar with this essay, not published until
1 905, he must have based his characterization of Leibniz's reasoning on
other sources, such as the derivation of the identity of indiscernibles from
the claim that all differences in nature are founded on "intrinsic denom­
inations" at Monadology, § 9. Leibniz's discussion of the principle in his
Fifth Paper in the Leibniz-Clarke Correspondence, §§ 2 1-5, does not make
its origins as opposed to its implications particularly clear, although the
following §§ 2 6-9 do suggest that the principle is connected with
Leibniz's denial of the fundamentality of spatial and temporal predicates,
which by implication leaves only conceptual considerations as the basis of
truth.
101
The introduction of an arithmetical example in this context is another
reference to the argument of Negative Magnitudes, where Kant uses the
mathematical concept of subtraction rather than the logical notion of
contradiction to provide a framework for understanding opposition in
real entities such as forces, emotions, and so on. See 2 :1 7 2-4; in Theoreti­
cal Philosophy, I75)-I770, pp. 2 I 2-14.
102 Among sources available to Kant, see, e.g., A New System of Nature, in
Ariew and Garber, p. 1 39; Principles ofNature and Grace, § 2; and Monad­

ology, §§ 3-1 I.
I03 See the Leibniz-Clarke Correspondence, Leibniz's Fifth Paper, § 47.
1 04 Aristotle's Topics begins with the proposal "to find a line of inquiry
whereby we shall be able to reason from reputable opinions about any
subject presented to us, and also shall ourselves, when putting forward an
argument, avoid saying anything contrary to it" (IOoa2o -3; translation by

733

Notes to pages 372-374

105

106
107

108

109

I10

W. A. Pickard-Cambridge, in The Complete Works ofAristotle, ed. Jonathan
Barnes [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984], vol. i, p. 167). In
the words ofW. D. Ross, the object of the Topics "is to study the dialecti­
cal syllogism," where "The dialectical syllogism is distinguished from the
scientific by the fact that its premises are not true and immediate but are
merely probable, i.e., such as commend themselves to all men, to most
men, or to wise men" (Aristotle, fifth edition, revised [London: Methuen,
1949], p. 56). Kant seems to be suggesting that the Topics was used to sug­
gest arguments that would appear credible because of their form without
regard to the plausibility of their premises at all.
Presumably Kant here has in mind Locke's claim that sensation and
reflection are the two sources of all our ideas (Essay concerning Human
Understanding, bk. II, ch. i, §§ 3-4), and is understanding Locke's reflec­
tion to be reflection on ideas of sensation only. This would be a misun­
derstanding of Locke, since Locke says that we can get simple ideas from
reflection on the "operations of our own Mind," a doctrine which is ac­
tually a precursor to Kant's view that the laws of our own intuition and
thinking furnish the forms of knowledge to be added to the empirical
contents furnished by sensation, although of course Locke did not go
very far in developing this doctrine; in particular, he did not see that
mathematics and logic could be used as sources of information about the
operations of the mind.
See Negative Magnitudes, 2:176-7; in Theoretical Philosophy, I755-I770,
pp. 216-17·
Here Kant is referring to Leibniz's doctrine that all the properties of
things are perfections in virtue of which they have a claim to existence,
with those that actually exist being those that have the most perfection
and thus comprise the most perfect world; on this account, there are no
actually negative properties, but only limitations to the positive perfec­
tions of things (see, e.g., The Principles ofNature and Grace, §§ 9-10). This
was a doctrine with which Kant had been arguing since the essay on
Negative Magnitudes; see especially its section 3, 2:189-93; in Theoretical
Philosophy, I755-I770, pp. 227-30.
Here Kant is alluding to Leibniz's emendation of Descartes's ontological
argument, where Leibniz argued that the latter is sound as long as it
is preceded by a proof that the concept of God is internally non­
contradictory, a proof easily supplied since the concept of an all-perfect
being contains nothing but positive determinations which cannot conflict
with each other (see the third paragraph of Meditations on Knowledge,
Truth and Ideas, originally published in 1684, as well as many later expo­
sitions of the claim).
For some of the many statements of this doctrine with which Kant would
have been familiar, see A New System of Nature (1695) (in Ariew and
Garber, eds., Philosophical Essays, pp. 143-4); Principles ofNature and Grace,
§§ I2-13; and Monadology, §§ 56-9.
See Leibniz-Clarke Correspondence, Leibniz's Third Letter, § 4, and -Leib­
niz's Fifth Letter, §§ 29, 33.

734

Notes to pages 375-384
III

This is a misquotation from the poem "Die Falschheit menschlicher Tu­
genden" by Viktor Albrecht von Haller, Gedichte (Bern, 1732); Haller's
lines are:
Ins Innere der Natur dringt kein erschaffener Geist.
Zu gliicklich, wenn sic noch die auflere Schale weist.

I I2

II3
114

I

15

(No created spirit penetrates into the inner in nature. / It is already too
much good luck if it knows the outer shell.)
In his Logic, Kant defines this as the rule that "VVhat belongs to or con­
tradicts the genus or species belongs to or contradicts all the objects that
are contained under that genus or species," a rule which in turn he derives
from the "Principle of categorical inferences of reason," namely "VVhat
belongs to the mark of a thing belongs also to the thing itself; and what
contradicts the mark of a thing contradicts also the thing itself" (Jasche
Logic, § 63; in]. Michael Young, ed., Lectures on Logic [Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press, 1992], pp. 617-18). The inference from the gen­
eral principle of categorical inferences to the dictum de omni et nullo is
based on the fact that a concept is a subset of the marks of an object, typ­
ically a proper subset since the Leibnizian idea of a complete concept of
a particular is only an ideal of reason.
See, e.g., Leibniz's Principles ofNature and Grace, § 2.
Here Kant refers to the fact that Wolff's and Baumgarten's systems of
general ontology begin by defining the distinction between the possible
and the impossible, excluding from the sphere of the possible only that
which is logically self-contradictory; see e.g. Baumgarten, Metaphysica,
Pars I, Caput I, Sectio I, §§ 7-18, 17:24-30.
As noted above, there is a draft of the following material at R 5552 (177879? 178o-81? 18:218-21, at pp. 218-19). See also R 5726 (1785-89,
18:336-8, at p. 336).

Transcendental dialectic
I

Kant introduced very early the term "dialectic" as the title for "the theory
of the subjective laws of the understanding, insofar as they are held to be ob­
jective" (see R 1579, 1760-64? , 1769-70? 16:17-23 at p. 23). Kant appears
to have discovered the antinomies of pure reason in particular, which he ex­
pounded in the middle of the three sections of the second book of the
"Dialectic," "The Dialectical Inferences of Pure Reason," by 1769; see, for
example, R 3922 (1769, 17=346-7), R 3928-9 (1769, 17:350-2), R 3936-7
(1769, 17=354-5), R 3942 (1769? 1764-8? 17=357), R 3954 (1769, 17=363),
R 3974 (1769, 17:371-2), and R 3976 (1769, 17=372-3). It may be the dis­
covery of the antinomies that Kant refers when he later says that "the year
' 69 gave me great light," R 5307 (1776-78, 18:69)' However, in Kant's first
published treatment of some of the material of the "Dialectic," §§ 23-9 of
the inaugural dissertation of 1770, he argues that metaphysical error arises
from unduly restricting pure reason by the conditions of sensibility rather
than from failing to recognize that ideas of pure reason alone cannot give
theoretical knowledge, as the notes of the 1769 and the comments of R 5307

735

2

3
4
5

6

7
8
9

already suggest. T he first extensive outlines for the eventual "Dialectic" of
the published Critique are found at R 4756-60 (1775-77, 17:699-713). A
striking feature of these outlines is that at this point Kant foresaw the pre­
sentation of the "Dialectic" in terms of a tripartite contrast between "im­
manent principles of the empirical use of the understanding" and
"transcendent principles of the pure use of reason" (R 4757, 1T703) or a
quadripartite contrast between "the principles of the exposition of appear­
ances" and the "principles of rationality" (R 4759, 17:709-ro), in which, in
particular, competing claims about the simplicity of the self would be treated
under the general issue of the decomposition of the complex into the sim­
ple, and all issues about God would be treated under the heading of neces­
sity; in other words, at this point the subject matter of the eventual
"Paralogisms of Pure Reason" and the "Ideal of Pure Reason" were to be
treated under the second and fourth antinomies respectively, and there was
no division of the "Dialectic" into three main parts. R 5 109 (1776-78,
18:9°-92) does not yet suggest any departure from this plan, although
R 4849, from the same period, does suggest the division between the
"Paralogisms" and the "Antinomies" (18:5-8). By the time of the important
R 5553 (1778-79, 18:221-9), however, the threefold division of the whole
"Dialectic" and the fourfold subdivision of each of its three main parts was
clearly in place (see 18:223); this note is the single most important draft of
the "Dialectic." For later comments, see also R 5642 (dated 1780-81, but
clearly written after the publication of the first edition of the Critique;
18:279-82) and R 5962 (1785-89, 18:401-5).
For Kant, "probability" is the holding of a proposition for true on insuffi­
cient ground, whether the insufficiency is objective or subjective. See
A820-31B848-51 and Logic 9:81-6.
Kant discusses the understanding as a law-governed power, comparing the
laws of the understanding with the rules of grammar in the Logic 9:I1-13.
Compare Kant's discussion of sensory illusion in the Anthropology § 8, 7:146.
See R 4930 (1776-78, 18:31-2), where Kant draws a distinction between
Amrhein or apparentia as error due to lack of judgment and unavoidable
naturliche Schein or species, of which transcendentale Schein is an instance.
Inference is the derivation of one judgment from another (Logic § 41,9:114).
In immediate inferences, which Kant calls "inferences of the understand­
ing," the judgment is derived directly, without the aid of any other infer­
ence. Such inferences include those from the universal affirmative to the
particular affirmative (Logic § 46, 9:II6), the denial of the contradictory,
contrary, and subcontrary (Logic §§ 47-50, 9:II6-18), the rules of conver­
sion (Logic §§ sr-3, 9:118-9), and contraposition (Logic §§ 54-5, 9:119).
Mediate inferences, or "inferences of reason," infer one proposition from
another by means of a third. Under this heading, Kant includes the theory
of syllogisms (Logic §§ 56-9, 120-1).
This contrast between understanding and reason is anticipated at R 5553
(1778-79, 18:221-9, at p. 224).
See previous note.
Kant's threefold division of syllogisms according to the form of the major
premise is presented in Logic §§ 60-I, 9:I21-2.
736

Notes to pages 391-412
10
II

12

13

14

IS
16

17
18
19

20

2I

22

In addition to the passage previously cited from R 5553 (18:224), see also
R 5596 (I778-79? 1780-81, 18:245)·
For further comments on Plato, see R 6050 (I780s? I776-79? 18:434-7)
under the title "On philosophical enthusiasm"; R 6051 (I780s? I776-79?
18:437-9); and R 6055 (1783-84, 18:439) ·
On Plato's doctrine of recollection (anamnesis), see Meno 8I, Phaedo 73-7,
Phaedrus 243-57. Also see an allusion to it at Republic 5I8c, which speaks of
turning the eye of the soul toward the forms.
Johann Jakob Brucker (1696-177°), author of Historia critica philosophica
(Leipzig: Breitkopf, 1742-44); the section on Plato is volume I, pp.
627-728, and the disparaging remarks about the political applications of
Plato's theory of ideas are on p. 726.
Plato never asserts that punishment would be unnecessary in the perfect
state, in the Republic or anywhere else. On the contrary, he often empha­
sizes the educational value of punishment in making people more just (Re­
public 59Ib; cf. Gorgias 476-9).
Plato did hold that forms or ideas are causes (aitiai) of natural things. See
Phaedo roOC-IOza, Republic 508e, Timaeus 29a-30b.
There are a number of reflections that should be compared to this classi­
fication of kinds of representation. T hese include R 1705 (1776-79, 16:889); R 2834-6 (I769-70? I764-68? 16:536), R 2835 (I773-75? I762-64?
I769? 16:536-7), and R 2836 (I775-77? I776-78? 16:538-9), and R 4073
(1769, 17:404-5)'
To this paragraph, compare R 5093 (1776-78, 18:85)·
T he foundation of the ideas of reason in the categories of relation is clearly
sketched at R 5555 (1778-1780s, 18:231-2).
The argument of the preceding paragraph, which differs from that of the
previous section by grounding the tripartite division of the "Dialectic" on
a tripartite division of kinds of objects rather than on the three relational
categories (as at A 323 1 B 379), is anticipated at R 5553 (I778-79? 1780-81?
221-9, at pp. 225-6 and 229)' In R 5642 (1780-81, 18:279-82), Kant not
only uses this new foundation but even connects it instead of the three re­
lational categories to the three forms of rational inference (categorical, hy­
pothetical, disjunctive; see 18:281).
T he Wolffian system of metaphysics, as expounded by Baumgarten in
Metaphysica (Halle, 1738), is divided into the general science of "ontology"
(Metaphysica §§ 4-350), followed by the three special sciences of "cosmol­
ogy" (Metaphysica §§ 351-5°0), "psychology" (Metaphysica §§ 501-799),
and "natural theology" (Metaphysica §§ 800-rooo).
Kant defines a paralogism as "an inference which is false in its form (al­
though its matter (the premises) are correct)" at R 5552 (I778-79? 1780s?
18:218-21, at p. 218).
Kant expounds in several places the traditional rational psychology which
is criticized here: Among them are R 4230 (I769-70? 17:467-69), Meta­
physik L[ (28:265-8); the lengthiest treatment in the later Metaphysik Mron­
govius (29:9°3-20) refers to many criticisms made in the Critique. Kant
treats the subject of rational psychology as part of the antinomies at R
4758-9 (1775-77, 17:705-II). He is clearly working out further details of
737

Notes to pages 4 16-422
his critique of rational psychology at R 545 1-6r ( 1 7 76-78, 18:186-9). He
finally outlines the critique of rational psychology at R 5 5 53 ( 17 78-79,
18:22 1-9 at pp. 227-8).
23 Compare Kant's account of the "subreption of the power of judgment" at
R 5059 ( 1776-78, 18:75). The foundation of Wolffian rational psychology
was the doctrine of the soul as a "monad" or simple substance (Baumgarten,
Metaphysica §§ 4°2-5, 742, 755). Compare also Leibniz, Principles ofNature
and Grace §§ 1-2. Leibniz, Die philosophische Schriften, ed. C. ]. Gerhardt
(Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1875-90), 6:509-606. (References to Leibniz will
be to the Gerhardt edition, cited either by section [§} number within a given
work or by volume:page.)
24 Here Kant refers to the arguments for the soul's simplicity put forward in
the Wolffian tradition. The simplicity of the soul was also central to its
claim to immortality, since natural perishability was taken to consist in the
dissolution of a composite. See Wolff, Psychologia rationalis § 3, Gesammelte
Werke (Hildesheim: Olms, 1972) II.6; Baumgarten, Metaphysica §§ 745-7,
756-7. At this point vVolff and Baumgarten were following Leibniz, Mo­
nadology (6:607-23) §§ 1-6, 14. But Adickes and Kemp Smith (A Commen­
tary to Kant's Critique of Pure Reason [New York: Humanities, 1962],
pp. 45 8-9) have argued that Kant was thinking of the arguments used by
Moses Mendelssohn ( 1729-1786) in his dialogue Phiidon ( 1767), Gesam­
melte Schrifte. Jubilaumsausgabe. (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1932) 3:69-73.
See note 40 below.
25 For other treatments of this argument, see R 4234 ( 1769-70? 17:470- 1)
and Metaphysik Mrongovius, 29:905.
26 Important discussions of the immortality of the soul include R 4238-40
( 1 769-70, 17:472-5) and Metaphysik Mrongovius, 29:9 10 -20.
2 7 For a precursor of Kant's sense of "person" here, see Leibniz, New Essays
Concerning Human Understanding, preface G 6:58, and James Beattie, An
Essay on the Nature and Immutability of Truth, chapter II, section 2 (Edin­
burgh: WIlliam Creech, 1776), p. 50. Because the German translation of
the latter work was the source for Kant's knowledge of Hume's views about
the self, he can be presumed to be familiar with this passage. A clear state­
ment of the paralogism here analyzed can be found at R 4933 (1776-78,
18:32). R 5646 (1785-88, 18:295) suggests that only morality can provide
a secure basis for identity of the self. The most famous modern discussion
of personal identity wasJohn Locke, Essay concerning Human Understanding
(1690), ed. P. Nidditch (Oxford: Clarendon, 1975) Book II, ch. 27, §§ 9-29,
pp. 335-48. Locke held that personal identity depends on "sameness of
consciousness," but distinguished this from sameness of substance. A purer
example of the position Kant is criticizing is articulated by Leibniz in his
discussion of Locke in the New Essays on Human Understanding (first pub­
lished in 1765). Leibniz agrees with Locke that "consciousness or the sense
of I proves moral or personal identity," but criticizes Locke for holding
that it proves only "apparent identity" and thinking that "apparent identity
could be preserved in the absence of any real identity," i.e. identity of sub­
stance (Leibniz, New Essays on Human Unde1�ftanding, G 6:236). Leibniz in­
sists that immaterial beings or spirits necessarily perceive their existence
73 8

Notes to pages 42 2-436
through time and hence that the memory which provides an epistemic
guarantee of personal identity also provides a guarantee of substantial
identity as well. Awareness of the substantial continuity of oneself is for
him so immediate that doubting the veracity of memory regarding it would
be tantamount to skepticism about every matter of fact, a doubt so extreme
as to render skepticism itself pointless (Leibniz, New Essays on Human
Understanding 6:2 3 8-9). Baumgarten presents two accounts of personal
identity, the first grounding it on "intellectual memory" (Metaphysica § 641 ),
the second on free will (Metaphysica § 756).
28 See the related argument at R 5650 ( 1 785-89, 1 8: 298-302).
29 T he reference is to those, such as Cratylus, who followed the famous say­
ings of Heraclitus, panta rhei ("Everything flows") (Fragment 40) and "You
can't step into the same river twice, for other waters are always flowing on"
(Fragment 48). Cf. Plato, Cratylus 402a; Aristotle, Metaphysics 1 O Ioa7.
30 T his refers to Descartes's thesis that objects of the senses may be doubted
though my existence as a thinking thing cannot be (Oeuvres de Descartes, ed.
C. Adam and P. Tannery [Paris: Cerf, 1 897-1 9 1 3] 6: 1 7-2 1 , 2 5-6). But
Kant may also have in mind Descartes's insistence that he does not perceive
bodies with his senses, but with his mind (Meditations, Oeuvres de Descartes

6:3 1-3).
3 1 Compare this analysis with R 5400 (I 776-78? I 773-75? 1 8: 1 89).
32 This is the postulate of empirical thought regarding actuality (A 2 1 8 /
B 2M).
3 3 According t o the second-edition "Refutation of Idealism" ( B 2 74), Kant as­
sociates "dogmatic" idealism with Berkeley and "skeptical" or "problem­
atic" idealism with Descartes. Cf. also Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics,
4:375. Baumgarten defines an "idealist" as someone "admitting only spirits
into this world" (Metaphysica § 402, cf. § 438).
34 A reference to the antinomies, probably in particular to the second antin­
omy, which threatens us with a contradiction regarding the divisibility of
matter (A4 34-45 / B 462-73).
3 5 See R 5457 ( 1 7 76-78, 1 8 : 1 87-8) and especially R 546 1 (I 776-78 ? 1 8 : 1 89).
36 Regarding mind-body interaction, there were three main systems dis­
cussed in the Wolffian tradition, and mentioned here by Kant. (I) The sys­
tem of physical influence held that minds and bodies causally influence one
another by their natural powers. It was associated with Descartes, adopted
by Locke, and endorsed by Wolff (Psychologia rationalis [ 1 7 2 8] , Gesammelte
Schriften 11.6 §§ 5 5 8-88) and Baumgarten (Metaphysica §§ 763-6); it was
defended by Kant's teacher, Martin Knutzen, in Commentatio philosophica de
commercio mentis et corporis per injluxum physicum explicando (Philosophical
Treatise concerning the Interaction between Mind and Body Explained by
Physical Influence) ( 1 7 3 5)' Kant criticizes this system in the inaugural dis­
sertation ( 1 770) §§ 1 6-22 (2:406-10). (2) T he system of preestablished
harmony is that of Leibniz; it maintains that bodies and minds each follow
their own laws, but their actions are coordinated by God in his choice of a
maximally harmonious world (see Monadology §§ 78-8 1). It is critically dis­
cussed by Wolff (Psychologia rationalis §§ 6 1 2-42) and Baumgarten
(Metaphysica § 768). (3) T he "system of supernatural assistance" probably

739

Notes to pages 439-449
refers to the occasionalism of some later Cartesians, such as Arnold
Geulincx (1624-1 669) and Geraud Cordemoy (d. 1 684), but developed
most fully and originally by Nicolas Malebranche (1638-1 7 1 5) (On the
Search for Truth [(1 675)], tr. T. M. Lennon and P. J. Olscamp [Columbus:
Ohio University Press, 1 980] 6.2.3, pp. 446-52). It holds that bodies and
minds have no natural power to influence one another, but each influences
the other through the mediation of God's causality. Occasionalism was re­
jected by Wolff (Psychologia rationalis §§ 589-6 1 1) and Baumgarten (Meta­

physica § 767).
37
38

"Pillars of Hercules" was the name commonly given in antiquity to the
headlands, Gibraltar to the north and Jebel Musa to the south, at the east­
ern end of the Strait of Gibralter, which opens on the Atlantic Ocean.
Reflections bearing o n the revision o f the "Paralogisms" for the second
edition include R 5 650 ( 1 785-88, 1 8:298-3°2) and R 5 8 1 I ( 1 783-84,

1 8:3 60).
39 See B 2 88-94 and A 2 3 5-60 / B 2 94-3 1 5 .
4 0 Moses Mendelssohn, Phiidon oder iiber die Unsterblichkeit der Seele (Berlin:
Fr. Nicolai, 1 767). Mendelssohn, Gesammelte Schriften. JubiHiumsausgabe.
(Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1 93 2) 3 : 5-1 2 9. In the first edition of this work,
Mendelssohn's reasoning in favor of immortality of the soul is presented
in the following representative passage:
"If we say, " Socrates went on, "that the soul dies, then we must suppose one of the
following: Either all its powers and faculties, its actions and passions, suddenly cease,
they vanish suddenly in an instant; or the soul, like the body, suffers gradual trans­
formations, countless changes of dress, proceeding in a constant series, and in this
series there is an epoch where it is no longer a human soul, but has become some­
thing other than that, becoming dust, air, plant or a part of another animal. Is there
a third case, another way in which the soul can die, besides

suddenly or gradually?"

"No," replied Cebes. "This division completely exhausts the possibilities."
"Good," said Socrates, "then those who still doubt whether the soul is mortal may
choose, if they care to, between its suddenly vanishing or its ceasing bit by bit to be
what it was . . .

"Perhaps the soul perishes suddenly, vanishes in an instant. In itself this kind of death is
possible. But can it be produced by nature?
"Not at all, if what we have admitted is true, that nature can produce no annihila­

being and non­
being there is a terrible gap, which can never be leapt over by nature, which works
tion. And have we rightly admitted this?" asked Socrates. "Between

gradually . . . No, Cebes, let us sooner fear that the sun will change into ice, than fear
a fundamentally evil action,

annihilation through a miracle, from the Self-sufficient

Good . . .
"But now we have seen that there is no determinate moment when one can say,
'The animal dies

now.' The dissolution of the animal machine has long since begun

before its effects become visible; for there never fail to be animal movements op­
posing the preservation of the whole; only they decrease bit by bit until finally the
movements of the parts no longer harmonize in a single final end, but each of them
has taken on its particular final end, and then the machine has dissolved . . .
"Thus if the death of the body is also to be the death of the soul, then there must
be no moment in which one can say 'Now the soul vanishes,' but the soul must de­
crease in force and effectiveness bit by bit, just as the movements in the parts of the
machine cease to harmonize to a single final end . . .

740

Notes to pages 449-454
"Thus we only have to investigate whether the inner powers of the soul could not
perish gradually, just as the parts of a machine separate . . .
"The body dies: that means, all movements now no longer appear to aim at life and
the preservation of the whole . . . And the soul? my Cebes, where will we put it? Its
machine is corrupted. The parts left over from it no longer belong to

it and do not

constitute a whole that could have a soul. Here there are no longer any organs for
sensing or tools for feeling, through which the soul could attain to any sensation. Is
everything in it therefore to be empty and desolate? Are all its sensations, imagin­
ings, desires and abhorrences, its inclinations and passions have vanished, without
leaving behind the least trace?"
"Impossible," said Cebes. "What would that be except complete annihilation? And
no annihilation, as we have seen, belongs to the faculties of nature . . . "

(Phiidon,

Gesammelte Schriften 3 :69-73)

Yet the precise argument against the annihilation of the soul which Kant
seems to have in mind was apparently added by Mendelssohn in an appen­
dix to the third edition of Phitdon in 1 769:
A natural action, it has been said from time immemorial, must have a beginning, a

middle and an end, that is, it must occupy a stretch of time before it is completed.
This part of time may be as small as you like, but to be consistent with the nature of
time, it must have moments following one after another. If the powers of nature are
to produce an effect, they must approach this effect gradually and prepare for it, be­
fore it follows. But an effect that cannot be prepared, which must follow in only one
instant, ceases to be natural, and cannot be produced by powers which must do
everything in time. All these propositions were not unknown to the ancients, and

about
opposed states and the transition from one to the other. Therefore I sought to put them

they appear to me to be present, not without clarity, in the reasoning of Plato

before my readers in Plato's way, but with the clarity suitable to our time. They are
quite evident to healthy reason; yet through the

doctrine ofcontinuity they achieve, in

my opinion, a high degree of certainty. It was not reluctantly that I embraced the
opportunity to acquaint my readers with this important doctrine, because they lead

to correct concepts concerning the alterations of the body and the soul, without
which death and life, mortality and immortality, cannot be considered from the right
standpoint.

41

42

(Phiidon, Gesammelte Schriften 3 : 147-8)

This is, however, the account of clarity given by Kant himself (Logic, 9:33).
But there he was expounding Georg Friedrich Meier ( 1 7 1 8-1 777), Auszug
aus der Vernunftlehre (Extract from the Theory of Reasoning) (Halle, 1 75 2),
which he had used as a text since 1 765 (2 : 3 I O- I I ) . Meier is presumably the
sort of logician Kant has in mind here.
In fact, Descartes denies that we may infer "I exist" from "I think" by way
of the general proposition "Whatever thinks exists," for precisely the rea­
son Kant mentions here. See "Reply to Second Objections," Oeuvres de

Descartes T I40.
43

To this note, compare R 5661 ( 1 788-9°, 1 8:3 1 8-20), Nachtrag CLXXX to
A592 / B 620 below (E 53, 2 3 :42-3), and the discussion of Descartes at
Metaphysik Mrongovius, 29:876-7. See also Leibniz's discussion of the cogito
in New Essays, book IV, chapter VII § 7, G 6:4I I , and the treatment
by Nicolaus Tetens (1 736 or 1 7 3 7-1 8°7), Philosophische Versuche iiber die
menschliche Natur und ihre Entwicklung ( 1 777-78; reprint Berlin, Kant­
Gesellschaft, 1 9 1 3), pp. 552, 555. Wolff divided psychology into psychologia
empirica and psychologia rationalis. Psychologia empirica begins by treating of

74 1

the soul's existence, which he grounds on the Cartesian cogito (Psychologia em­
pirica §§ 1 2- 1 5 , Gesammelte Werke 1I.5 [Hildesheim: Olms, 1968]). Psycholo­
gia rationalis deals with the "nature and essence" of the soul, and especially
the functions of the intellect (Psychologia rationalis, Gesammelte Werke 1I.6).
See also Baumgarten, Metaphysica §§ 504-18.
44

45
46

47
48

49
50
51

52
53

As mentioned in note I above, there are a number of Kant's reflections giv­
ing evidence of his discovery of the antinomies in 1 769 (e.g. R 3936-37,
1 7= 3 55) and the antinomies predominate in Kant's first outlines of the
"Dialectic" in R 4756-60 (1775-77, 1 7=699-7 1 3)' Other important notes
from this period are R 4742 ( 1 7:694) and R 4780 ( 1 7 : 7 2 5)' From the 1 780s,
important reflections on the antinomies include R 5959-6 1 ( 1 8 : 3 99-401),
R 5962 (1 785-89, 1 8 :401-5), R 5970 (1 783-84, 1 8 :408-9), R 5973
(1 783-84, 1 8:41 1-12) and R 5979 (1 785-88, 1 8:41 3-14) ,
With these two paragraphs, compare R 4454 ( 1 7 7 2 ? 1 773-75? 1 7= 5 5 7)·
"A WORLD is a series (multitude, whole) of actual finite things which are
not parts of one another" (Baumgarten, Metaphysica § 3 54); "In every world
there are actual parts, which are singulars connected into a whole" (Meta­
physica § 3 57).
For the source of this principle in Wolffian cosmology, see following note.
"Because the parts of the world are either simultaneous or successive, if they
are posited outside one another, they are connected in the world either by
time or by space or by both" (Baumgarten, Metaphysica § 3 74; cf. § 2 3 8) . In
four successive paragraphs, Baumgarten considers the parts of the world
connected in space and time (first antinomy) (Metaphysica § 3 74), connected
causally (third antinomy) (Metaphysica § 3 75), connected as actual parts (sec­
ond antinomy) (Metaphysica § 3 76), and as possibles forming a contingent
whole (fourth antinomy) (Metaphysica § 377). He concludes that either
there is no world, or that it must consist in a multitude or series forming a
unity (Metaphysica § 3 79). This says, in effect, that if the (conditioned)
members of each of the identified series are given, then the whole (the un­
conditioned) must also be given. At the same time, Baumgarten notes that
because it is so constituted, the unity of the world is a "hypothetical unity"
(Metaphysica § 362) as distinct from an "absolute" unity (Metaphysica § 76).
"A PROGRESS (regress) TO INFINITY is a series of contingent entities
posited outside one another, of which one is the cause of the other" (Baum­
garten, Metaphysica § 3 80).
Baumgarten argues that the world must consist of simple parts or monads
(Baumgarten, Metaphysica §§ 3 92-4°5). Compare Leibniz, Monadology § 1 .
Compare Baumgarten, Metaphysica § § 3 8 8-90, which argues (no doubt
with Spinoza in mind) that the world is not a substance, its parts are not
accidents, and an infinite substance is not a unique substance.
Compare Baumgarten, Metaphysica § § 3 5 8 , 380-1.
Baumgarten emphasizes the contingency both of the parts of the world and
of the world as a whole (Metaphysica §§ 3 6 1-64). He argues that if we sup­
pose the world to be necessary, then we must suppose that the determina­
tion of its parts is also necessary, hence that the parts themselves must be
necessary and therefore infinite (which contradicts the nature of parts)
(Metaphysica § 36 1).

742

Notes to pages 470-473

54 In addition to the reflections already cited in notes I and 44, see also R
4090 (1 769-7°, 1 7:41 2), R 4134 (1 769-7°, 1 7:428-3°), R 42 10 ( 1 7 7°-77,
1 7:457), R 45 2 2 ( 1 772-76, 1 7 =580- 1), R 4525 (1772-76, 1 7=582), R 4529
(1772 ? 1 773-75? 1 7=583-4), R 4708 ( 1 773-79, 1 7:682-3) and R 47 1 7
(1773-75 ? 1 775-77 ? 1 7 :685).
55 This argument has a long history in the Western philosophical-theological

tradition, where a number of Christian philosophers used it to demon­
strate the origin of the world at a finite past time, contrary to the pagan
(especially Aristotelian) view that the world had no beginning in time. But
it is not clear from what source Kant derived it (or whether he reinvented
it himself). The argument appears to have been first invented by John
Philoponus (c49Q-c. 570). In the middle ages, it was most closely associ­
ated with the name of St. Bonaventure (C. 1 2 1 7- 1 2 74). But Bonaventure
seems to have gotten it from his older Franciscan contemporary Richard
Rufus of Cornwall (d. after 1 2 59), who does not seem to have known the
works of Philoponus and may have devised the argument anew around
1 2 3 5 . The argument was criticized by a number of medieval philosophers
(notably St. Thomas Aquinas and WIlliam of Ockham) who held that the
creation of the world at a finite past time was indemonstrable by reason
and knowable only through revelation. Kant, however, does not appear to
have been directly acquainted with any of these medieval sources, nor do
we know of any specific source through which such knowledge might have
been mediated. One early modern proponent of the argument with whose
works Kant might have been (directly or indirectly) acquainted was the
Cambridge theologian Richard Bentley (1662-1 742): "For, consider the
present revolution of the Earth . . . God Almighty, if he so pleaseth, may
continue this motion to perpetuity in infinite revolutions to come; because
futurity is inexhaustible, and can never be spent or run out by past andpres­
ent moments. But then, if we look backwards from this present revolution,
we may apprehend the impossibility of infinite revolutions on that side; be­
cause all are already past, and so were once actually present, and conse­
quently are finite . . . For surely we cannot conceive a preteriteness (if I
may say so) still backwards in infinitum, that never was present, as we can
endless futurity that never will be present. So that one is potentially infi­
nite, yet nevertheless the other is actually finite" (Bentley, Sermons Preached
at Boyle 's Lecture [ 1692], ed. A. Dyce [London, 1 83 8] , p. 1 34).
56 Compare Kant's argument for the "First Analogy " (especially A 1 8 8 / B 2 3 I)
and the second-edition "Refutation of Idealism" (B 275-8 and B xxxix-xli
note). The conclusion of this argument is the same as that of an ad hominem
argument Leibniz presents against the Newtonian concept of absolute
space (Leibniz, Correspondence with Clarke, 7:3 73).
57 "Absolute space" is an allusion to the Newtonian theory of space (cf.
"Transcendental Aesthetic," A 2 3 / B 38, B 69-72 , and Metaphysical First

Grounds ofNatural Science, 4:48 1).
5 8 This "dogmatic" formulation i s close t o the negation o f Baumgarten's de­
finition of "comparative magnitude" at Metaphysica § 1 6 r .
59 Leibniz criticized the apparent implication ofthe Newtonian view, that there
could be infinite empty space (Leibniz, Correspondence with Clarke, 7:368).
743

Notes to pages 476-505
60 On the second antinomy, see especially R 4534 (1 772-78, 1 7:585-6).
6 1 This argument bears close comparison with the opening sections of
Leibniz's Monadology: " 1 . The Monad, which we shall discuss here, is noth­
ing but a simple substance that enters into composites - simple, that is,
without parts. 2 . And there must be simple substances, since there are com­
posites; for the composite is nothing more than a collection, or aggregate,
of simples" (Leibniz, Monadology §§ 1-2).
62 This term is no doubt intended to include Leibniz (see the two previous
notes) and the Wolffians (see Baumgarten, Metaphysica §§ 2 3 0-45 , 3 96405). It might also be applied to the view put forward in the Theoria
philosophiae naturalis (Vienna, 1 758) by the Ragusan Jesuit Rudjer Boscovic
( 1 7 I I- 1 787). But the view criticized here actually seems closest to that
held by Kant himself in his Physical Monadology of 1 756 (1 :473-88; see also
Metaphysical First Grounds ofNatural Science, 4:504).
63 The term "monad" had been used earlier by Henry More ( 1 6 1 4-1 687).
But it is likely that Leibniz's most direct source was More's student Lady
Anne (Finch), Viscountess Conway (163 1 - 1 679), with whose philosophy
Leibniz was acquainted through her physician and publicist, and Leibniz's
correspondent, Francis Mercurius van Helmont ( 1 6 1 4- 1 698).
64 Numerous reflections bear specifically on the third antinomy. These in­
clude R 3 9 2 2 ( 1 7 = 346-7), R 3976 ( 1 769, 1 7= 3 72-3), R 42 2 5-7 ( 1 769-70,
1 7:464-6), R 43 3 8 ( 1 770-7 1 , 1 7= 5 I O- I I), R 472 3 (1 773-75, 1 7:688), R
54 1 3 ( 1 7 76-78, 1 8: 1 76), R 5 6 1 2 - 1 9 ( 1 778-79, r 8 : 2 5 2 -8), R 5829
( 1 783-84, 1 8 : 3 65), R 5964 (1 783-84, 1 8:405-6), R 5972 (1 780s, 1 8:410),
and R 5976-8 ( 1 78 3 -84, 1 8:41 2-1 3).
65 The best-known doctrine of a first mover was that of Aristotle (Physics,
book 8 (2 56al-267b27), Metaphysics, book 1 2 (I071b3-I076a5» . Compare
Baumgarten, Metaphysica § 300.
66 See R 4039 (1 769-70, 1 7=393 -4), R 4I I 7 (1 769, 1 7:42 3), R 4 1 79-80
(1 769-70, 1 7:445-6), R 4242 - 5 3 (1 769-70, 1 7:476-83), R 5263 (1 776-78,
1 8: 1 3 5-6) and R 5949 (1 780s, 1 8: 3 97).
67 Jean-Jacques Dortous de Mairan (1 678-1 7 7 1) succeeded Fontenelle as
perpetual secretary of the Royal Academy of Sciences in Paris in 1 740 and
remained in that post until his death. He wrote on a variety of subjects in
physics and natural sciences, including his Dissertation on Ice ( 1 7 1 5), Physical
and Historical Treatise on the Aurora Borealis ( 1 7 3 3), Dissertation on the Esti­
mation of Moving Forces of Bodies ( 1 741), and Letter to Mme Chatelet on the
Question of Living Forces ( 1 741). Mairan also published many papers in the
Journal des Scavans and the Recueil de l'Academie royale des sciences, both of
which he also edited. According to Ferdinand Alquie, Oeuvres philosophiques
de Emanuel Kant (Paris: Gallimard, 1 980-86), 1 : 1 692, the treatise referred
to here was published in the Recueil in 1 747. However, we have been un­
able to verify this reference.
68 One of the first reflections to connect theoretical propositions and the in­
terest of practical reason in this way is R 5 1 09 ( 1 7 76-78, 1 8:90-2).
69 Kant opposes Plato and Epicurus again regarding the object of knowledge
(A 853-4/B 88 1-2). Cf. Logic, 9:29-30.
70 J. H. Lambert ( 1 7 2 8- 1 7 77), "Memoir to the Berlin Academy on Transcen744

Notes to pages 508-5 5 1
dental Magnitudes" ( 1 768), in Beitrage zum Gebrauch der Mathematik und
deren Anwendung (Contributions to the Use of Mathematics and its Appli­
71
72
73

74
75

76
77
78

79
80
81
82

83

84
85

cation) (1 766-72).
Kant also uses this formulation at R 5639 ( 1 78o--8 1 ? 1 778-89? 1 785-88?
1 8 : 2 76-9).
To this paragraph, compare R 5961 (1 780s? 1 776-79? 1 8 :4°°-1) and R
5962 ( 1 78 5-89, 1 8:4°1-5)·
Zeno of Elea (c. 500-440 B.C.), reportedly a younger contemporary of
Parmenides of Elea (Plato, Parmenides I 2 7a-b). Zeno is best known for
the four paradoxes of continuity, infinity, and motion discussed by
Aristotle (Physics 9, 2 39b5-24oa9). For Plato's remark, referred to here by
Kant, see Parmenides 1 2 7d-I 2 8c (cf. Phaedrus 2 6 1 d).
See R 5902 (1 785-89, 1 8 : 3 79) and R 5903 (1 780s ? 1 776-79? 1 8 : 3 79-80).
The distinction between infinite and indefinite is drawn by Baumgarten
(Metaphysica § 248). Cf. Descartes, Principles of Philosophy 1 . 2 6-7 (Oeuvres
de Descartes 8 : 14- 1 5). For both Baumgarten and Descartes, the point is to
reserve the property of true infinity for God alone.
In addition to A 2 2 5 / B 2 73-4 above, see R 461 8 ( 1 772, 1 7:6 ra).
See Baumgarten, Metaphysica § 1 59·
The distinction between the mathematical and dynamical antinomies and
their solutions is discussed in a number of reflections: see R 5 368-9 ( 1 77678, 1 8 : 1 63), R 5608 ( 1 778-8 1 , 1 8: 249- 5 1), R 5 8 1 7 (1 783-84, 1 8 :3 62),
R 5962 (1 785-89, 1 8:401-5), R 5964 ( 1 7 8 3-84, 1 8:405-6), R 5967-8
(1 78 3-84, 1 8:4°7-8) , R 6 3 3 7 (1 794-95 , 1 8:657-8) and R 642 1 ( 1 790-95,
1 8 : 7 I I).
Compare Baumgarten on the brute soul (Metaphysica §§ 792-3) and the
free power of choice (Metaphysica §§ 7 I 2-19).
See note 64 above.
See R 541 3 ( 1 7 76-80s, 1 8 : 1 76).
See R 4548 (1 772-75, 1 7 :589), R 541 3 ( 1 7 76-80s, 1 8 : 1 76), R 5441 (1 77678, 1 8 : 1 82-3), R 5608 ( 1 779-8 1 , 1 8 :249-51), R 56I 2-14, 5 6 1 6 (1 778-79,
1 8: 2 5 2-6) and R 5 6 1 8-1 9 (1 778-79, 1 8 : 2 5 7-8).
This claim, which will be a major claim of Kant's Groundwork ofthe Meta­
physics ofMorals (1 785) and Critique of Practical Reason ( 1 788), is suggested
as early as R 4336 (1 770-7 1 ? 1 769? 1 7:509-ra). See also R 5441 ( 1 776-78,
1 8 : 1 8 2-3) and R 5608 ( 1 779-8 1 , 1 8 :249-5 1).
To this paragraph, compare R 5 368-9 ( 1 7 76-78, 1 8 : 1 63), R 5962
(1785-89, 4°1-5) and R 5968 ( 1 783-84, 1 8:407-8).
In his 1 763 work The Only Possible Ground of Prooffor a Demonstration of
the Existence of God (2:63-163, translation in Walford [ed.], Theoretical
Philosophy 1755-177°, pp. ra7-w1), Kant had already worked out much of
the criticism of the three arguments for the existence of God presented in
section III of this chapter. Section II, however, criticizes a theistic argu­
ment akin to one Kant had proposed in 1 76 3 . In spite of this early origin
of much of the material expounded in this chapter, however, Kant had ap­
parently intended to discuss rational arguments for the existence of God
only within the framework of the antinomies as late as the drafts of the
"Dialectic" from 1 775 (R 4756-60, 1 ]:699-71 3), which would have meant
745

Notes to pages 5 5 1-556
i n effect discussing only the cosmological argument. The extensive outline
of the "Dialectic" at R 5 5 5 3 (1778-79? 1 780-8 1 ? 22 1-9), however, shows
that by two years later Kant had formulated the idea of a tripartite dialec­
tic with a separate "Ideal of Pure Reason" (p. 2 2 3), thereby leading to the
reincorporation into the Critique of the 1 763 criticisms of the ontological
and physico-theological arguments. In addition to the many particular re­
flections, especially on the ontological argument, that will be mentioned
below, the reader interested in Kant's critique of rational theology should
also consult the extensive set of notes on Johann August Eberhard's
Vorbereitung zur natiirlichen Theologie, preserved as R 6206-3IO ( 1 783-88,
1 8:489-606), and the Lectures on the Philosophical Doctrine ofReligion, tr. A.
Wood, in Di Giovanni and Wood (eds.), Writings on Religion and Rational
Theology (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1 996), pp. 3 3 5-45 I .
86 I t was not Plato's doctrine that the ideas are the thoughts o f God, but this
doctrine did originate in syncretistic Platonism from the period of the
Middle Academy, through the combination of Platonism with Stoicism in
such thinkers as Albinus (second century B.C.). The theory of divine ideas
was later adopted by Platonists as diverse as Philo of Alexandria, Plotinus,
and St. Augustine, and became fundamental to later Christian interpreta­
tions of Platonism. See A. H. Armstrong (ed.), The Cambridge History of
Later Greek and Early Medieval Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer­
sity Press, 1 967), pp. 64-6, 142, 245, 62 I .
8 7 A large number of reflections bear on the argument of this section. Exposi­
tions of the argument that thoroughgoing determination of the concept of
any individual requires a thoroughly determinate ens realissimum, offered
largely without criticism, can be found at R 4244-9 (1 769-70, 1 7 =477-8 1),

R 4253 (1 769-70, 1 7:482-3), R 42 5 5 (1 769-70, 1 7=484) ' R 4262 (1 769-7°?
1 7 7 2-76? 1 7:486-7), R 42 55 (1 772-75, 1 7:695-6), R 4569-70 (1772-75,
1 7=597-8), R 4729 (1 773-75, 1 7:619-20), R 5 2 70-74 ( 1 7 76-78, 1 8 : 1 3 840), R 5 500 (1 776-78, 1 8 : 1 99-200), R 5 502-5 (1 776-78, 1 8 : 200-2) and
R 5 5 2 2 (1 776-78, 1 8:207-8). Criticisms of the argument turn up only in
reflections subsequent to the first publication of the Critique: see R 624856 ( 1 785-88, 1 8 : 5 30-3), R 6290 (178 3-84, 1 8:558-9), R 6293 (1783-84,
1 8:56 1-2) and R 6298 ( 1 783-84, 1 8:565).
Following Leibniz, the Wolffians held that each individual thing is indi­
viduated through its complete concept, which is determined by one and
only one of every possible pair of contradictorily opposed predicates. Thus
they distinguish a universal concept (which applies in principle to indefi­
nitely many individual things) frbm an individual concept (which indi­
viduates an individual thing) through the fact that the former is
undetermined with respect to some pairs of contradictorily opposed pred­
icates, whereas the latter is subject to what Baumgarten calls the "princi­
ple of thoroughgoing determination" (principium omnimodae determinatio)
(Metaphysica § 1 48). See also Wolff, Ontologia, Gesammelte Werke II.3, pp.
1 8 7-9; Baumgarten, Metaphysica §§ 5 3 , 1 5 1 , and Kant, Logic § 1 5 , 9:99.
89 See A 3041 B 360- 1 ; and recall that Vernunftschlufi, here translated as " syl­
logism," could also be translated (more etymologically) as "inference of
reason."
88

746

Notes to pages 5 58-570
90
91
92

See A 3 34-5/B 3 91-2 .
See A 2 2 0-4'B 266-7 2 .
This was the line of thinking Kant himself developed in The Only Possible
Ground ofProoffor a Demonstration of God's Existence ( 1 763), 2 : 77-8 3 .
93 In The Only Possible Ground of Proof Kant immediately follows his argu­
ment for a necessary being with arguments that a necessary being must be
unique and wholly simple, hence one in the highest degree (2 : 83-4)'
94 This was Kant's procedure in The Only Possible Ground ofProof 2 :87-9 2 .
95 This line of argument is a form of the standard modern cosmological ar­
gument and not the novel proof in Kant's 1 763 essay (see previous note).
It closely resembles the proofs of a necessary God from the contingency
of the world given by Wolff and his followers.
96 On this paragraph, see R 5 760---4 (1 783-88, 1 8: 3 46-7).
97 Kant's critique of the ontological argument is in a sense the oldest part of
his critical philosophy, already having been expressed in nuce in his 1 75 5
New Elucidation ofthe Primary Principles ofMetaphysical Cognition ( I : 3 94-5;
Theoretical Philosophy I75 5-I77D, p. 1 5). In addition to that discussion and
the one in The Only Possible Ground ofProof there are many reflections to
which the present section might be compared: see R 3 706 ( 1 760-64,
I P 40-3), R 4659 ( 1 772-76, 1 7:628-9), R 4729 ( 1 773-75, 1 7:689-90), R
5 2 3 1 (I 776-80s, 1 8: 1 26: "all existential propositions are synthetic"), R
5 2 5 5 (1 776-78, 1 8 : 1 3 3), R 5506 (1 776-78, 1 8:202, which refers explicitly
to "the Cartesian proof"), R 5507 (1 776-78, 1 8 : 203), R 5 5 2 3 (1 776-79,
1 8 : 207), R 5 7 1 6 ( 1 780s? 1 7 76-79? 1 8: 3 5 1-2), R 5783 ( 1 783-84,
1 8 : 3 5 3-4), R 6 2 76 ( 1 785-88, 1 8:543) and R 6389 ( 1 79°-95, 1 8 : 7°°-2).
See also Metaph)lsik Volckmann, 2 8:41 3 .
98 See note 9 1 above.
99 Leibniz attempted to prove that God is possible by arguing that impossi­
bility requires a contradiction between a reality and its negation, which
cannot occur in the case of a most real being. See Leibniz, Philosophischen
Schriften 4:295-6, 7 : 2 6 1 .
1 00 The ontological argument is found in Descartes, Meditations on First Phi­
losophy, meditation five. See Oeuvres de Descartes 6:65-7 1 , cf. 7: I 50, 1 66-7·
1 0 1 Like his criticism o f the ontological argument, Kant's criticism o f the cos­
mological argument is anticipated in The Only Possible Ground ofProof In
addition, see the following reflections: R 4 I I 7 ( 1 769, I T42 3), R 4587-8
(1 772-76, 1 7 :602-3), R 4597 (1772-78, 1 7:6°5), R 5 505 ( 1 776-78,
1 8: 2 02), R 5530 ( 1 776-79, 1 8: 2 09), R 6378 (1 785-88, 1 8:544-6; this is a
detailed critique of Mendelssohn's attempt to revive the cosmological
argument in his Morgenstunden [1 785] , section XII), R 6320 (1 792-94,
1 8:634-5) and R 6 3 2 2-4 ( 1 792-94, 1 8:63 7-47).
1 02 Leibniz comes close to stating this argument at times (for example, see
Monadology § 45). But it is more characteristic of him to argue for the ne­
cessity of God independently of the need to explain contingent things
(for example, Monadology § 44). Kant's source for the cosmological argu­
ment seems to be not Leibniz but Wolff and his followers: Wolff,
Theologia Naturalis (Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1 730) § 69, 1 :55, and Meta­
physik (Halle, 1 75 1) § 928, 1 :574-5; Baumgarten, Metaphysica §§ 308-10,
747

Notes to pages 5 7 1-579

103
104
1 05
1 06

107

108

1 09

I IO

Friedrich Christian Baumeister (1 7°9-1 78 5), Institutiones metaphysicae
(1738) § 78, and Joachim Georg Darjes (1 7 14-1 791), Elementa metaphys­
ica ( 1 754), Elementa theologiae naturalis § 44. Kant's first critique of this ar­
gument is to be found in The Only Possible Ground ofProof(2 : 1 5 7-9).
See R 63 3 1 (1 793-94, 1 8:65 1-4 at p . 653) .
See R 6297 ( 1 783-84, 1 8: 563-5).
See A 606 / B 634.
"But in that earnest place I Him who holds nothing back I Eternity holds
fast in its strong arms." Viktor Albrecht von Haller (1 7°8-1777), Swiss
physiologist and poet. "Unvollkommenes Gedicht tiber Ewigkeit"
(Imperfect Poem on Eternity) (1736), Hailers Gedichte, ed. Ludwig Hirzel
(Bibliothek iilterer Schriftwerke der deutschen Schweitz, 1 88 2), 3 : 1 5 I .
The above lines from the poem are quoted by Kant in "The End of All
Things" (1 794), 8 : 3 2 7 ; cf. also 2 : 1 5 I .
There are fewer reflections on the criticism of the argument from design
than on the others; see R 5 63 I ( I 778-80s, 1 8: 2 62-3). However, the Cri­
tique ofJudf!l1lent's discussion of moral theology is based on an antecedent
critique of physico-theology; see especially § 84 (5:436-42).
In The Only Possible Ground of Proof, Kant refuses to regard physico­
theology as any sort of demonstration of God's existence (2 : 1 59-62). He
rather considers physico-theology as a way of considering nature, and
subjects "the usual method of physico-theology" to extensive criticism
(2: I I 6-2 3), suggesting another method, better suited to the needs of nat­
ural science, in its place (2 : 1 2 3-37).
Compare Leibniz, Monadology §§ 66-9. In The Only Possible Ground of
Proof, Kant was also impressed by the microscopic researches of John
Hill (c. 1 7 1 6-1 775), which had discovered "numerous animal species in
a single drop of water, predatory kinds equipped with instruments of de­
struction, . . . ; when I contemplate the intrigues, the violence, the scenes
of commotion in a single part of matter, and when I direct my gaze up­
wards to the immeasurable spaces of the heavens teeming with worlds as
with specks of dust, . . . no human language can express the feelings
aroused by such a thought" (2 : I 1 7 note). Hill's chief work was A General
Natural History (1 748-5 2), but the research Kant would have known was
published in the Hamburger Magazin between 1 753 and 1 758.
Compare the presentation of the argument from design by Hume's
Cleanthes:
"Look round the world, contemplate the whole and every part of it: you will find
it to be nothing but one great machine, subdivided into an infinite number of
lesser machines, which again admit of subdivisions to a degree beyond what human
senses and faculties can trace or explain. All these various machines, and even their
most minute parts, are adjusted to each other with an accuracy which ravishes into
admiration all the men who have ever contemplated them." (Hume,

Dialog;ues con­
cerning Natural Religion, ed. A. W Colver and V V Price, part II [Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1 976), pp. 1 6 r )

Kant became acquainted with the German translation of Hume's

Dialogues about the time of the composition of the Critique ofPure Reason,
748

Notes to pages 5 80-604
but it is not clear whether he was acquainted with it by the time he wrote
this section. He was certainly acquainted with it by the time of his Lectures
on the Philosophical Doctrine ofReligion (probably 1 783), 2 7: 1062-4.
III
Surely this is an allusion to the title of Kant's own The Only Possible
Ground ofProof(I763), which, however, not only intends that the title de­
scribe an argument different from the ontological argument, but even
contains Kant's first statement of his critique of the ontological argument
(2 :72-7, 1 56-7).
I I2
See R 4 1 I 3 (1 769? 1 77o-7 1 ? 1 7:420-2) for an early sketch of the several
options for theology discussed in this section.
I 1 3 Of course, Kant will explore the idea of a practical foundation for the­
ology much more fully in the "Canon of Pure Reason" below, as well as
in the Critique of Practical Reason and Critique ofJudgment. But see also
R 5624 ( 1 778-79? 1 780-8 1 ? 2 5 9-60) and R 6086-1 1 7 ( 1 78 3-88,
1 8:445-60).
1 14 Kant's assessment of physico-theology now seems to agree more with that
found in The Only Possible Ground ofProof See note 1 08 above.
I 1 5 There are few notes bearing on this appendix; for one, see R 5602
(I 778-80s, 1 8: 2 47).
I16
This principle is now commonly called "Ockham's razor" after William of
Ockham (c. I 2 88- 1 3 50). Ockham certainly did employ some such princi­
ple often, but the closest formulation to the one Kant quotes is "pluralitas
non est ponenda sine necessitate" (plurality is not to be posited without ne­
cessity). The wording quoted by Kant is derived from the later scholastic
Ioannes Poncius (d. 1 660), who refers to "axioma vulgare . . . frequenter un­
untur Scholastici: Non sunt multiplicanda entia sine necessitate" (the common
axiom frequently enunciated by the scholastics: Entities are not to be mul­
tiplied without necessity), Commentarii Theologici quibus 10. Duns Scoti
Quaestiones in libros Sent. III d.34 (Paris, 1 661), IV: 3 87. As this citation (to
a commentary on John Dun Scotus) would suggest, the principle was
enunciated and employed by Scotus before it was ever used by Ockham.
But it became especially associated with Ockham's name, doubtless be­
cause he was well known for his ontological parsimony and reductionist
analyses - since he even frequently used the principle he derived from
Scotus to criticize Scotus himself. The original source of the principle was
Aristotle (Physics 1:4 [188aI7- 1 8] , 1:6 [1 89aI4- 1 51 , Topics VIIh I [162a245]). Cf. Rega Wood, Ockham on the Virtues (West Lafayette, In: Purdue,
1 997), pp. 20, 36.
I 17
Wit (Witz, ingenium) is an innate talent of the mind. It takes two forms:
ingenium comparans, a talent for comparing and assimilating things that
are superficially different, and ingenium argutans, a talent for making sub­
tle distinctions. In this passage, he seems to have the former sort of wit in
mind, since it is the power of discrimination which sets limits to it. Cf.
Anthropology § 54, 7:2 20.
I I 8 This formulation occurs already a t R 5080 ( 1 7 76-78, 1 8:8 1).
I 19
"The Law of Continuity states that nature leaves no gaps in the order­
ings she follows, though not all individuals belong to the same orderings"

749

Notes to pages 604-62 7
(Leibniz, New Essays on Human Understanding G 6:307). This principle is
closely related to the formula saying that God always does things in the
most perfect way, involving the greatest variety combined with the great­
est order. See Discourse on Metaphysics §§ 5-6, 4:43°-2; Principles ofNature

1 20

and Grace §§ 3 , 1 0; Monadology § 58.
Charles Bonnet (17 26-1 793) was a Swiss naturalist. The work referred to
is Contemplation de la nature (Amsterdam: Chez Marc-Michel Ray, 1 764),
which Kant probably knew in its German version: Betrachtungen iiber die
Natur, tr. Johann Daniel Titus (Leipzig: Junius, 1 766), pp. 29-8 5 .

In biology, "palingenesis" was used to refer to the process by which an or­
ganism metamorphoses from one stage to another in the course of its life
cycle. (The term was used in this sense, for example, by Bonnet, see pre­
vious note.) But it also meant "metempsychosis," or the transmigration of
a soul from one life to another, and it appears to be in this sense that Kant
uses the term here. The relation between the two senses was discussed by
Leibniz, New System ofNature, 4:479-80, Monadology §§ 72-74. See also
Baumgarten, Metaphysica § 704.
1 2 2 For the explanation of this phrase, see A 5 10-1 2 / B 5 3 8-4°.
1 2 3 See "Antinomy of Pure Reason," section eight, A508-16/B 536-44.
1 24 Compare: "As for the future, we must not, with the quietists, stand ridicu­
lously with arms folded, awaiting that which God will do, according to the
sophism which the ancients called AOYOV a£QYov, the lazy reason" (Leib­
niz, Discourse on Metaphysics § 4, G 4:430). "Quietism" is a form of Chris­
tian spirituality, influential in the seventeenth century, which urges the
wickedness and futility of all human effort and advocates complete resig­
nation to the will of God. Its best-known advocates were Miguel de
Molinos (164°-169 7), Jeanne Marie Guyon (1648- 1 7 1 7), and Franc;ois
de Salignac de la Mothe Fenelon (1 650-1 7 1 5), Archbishop of Cambrai.
Quietism was a consistent target of Leibniz's criticism. For the source of
the term ignava ratio and its condemnation by "the ancients, " see the fol­
lowing note.
1 2 5 "This kind of reasoning is justly called lazy or inert, because with the
same reasoning one would suppress every activity in life" (De fato 1 2-13
[28-30]). Cicero i s objecting t o Chrysippus's Stoic doctrine o f fate. This
allusion is employed in Leibniz, Theodjcy § 55. Leibniz's use of the Greek
AOYOV a£QYov, suggests an earlier (Greek) source, but apparently only the
target (Stoicism), and not the epithet itself, was Greek.
126 V(J1;T]Qov JtQOT£QOV refers broadly to the error of putting first that which
should come later ("putting the cart before the horse"), or more narrowly,
in logic, to the methodological error of proving first what should have
been proved later.
1 2 7 See "Antinomy of Pure Reason," section four, A476- 84/ B 504-1 2 .
I 2 8 See above, notes to "Analytic of Principles," note I I 1 .

121

Doctrine ofmethod
2

Kant alludes, of course, to the biblical story of Babel (Genesis 1 1.1-9).
On these divisions of the transcendental doctrine of method, see R 4858

7 50

Notes to pages 627-63 7
(1 776-78, 1 8: I I), R 4865 (1 776-78, 1 8: 14), R 4986 (1 776-78, 1 8 :52), R
4988-9 ( 1 8 : 1 776-78, 1 8: 5 2-3), R 5039 (1 776-78, 1 8:70), R 5044 (1776-78,
1 8:71), and R 5074 (1 776-78, 1 8 : 1 80).
3 There is an ambiguity in the definition of "practical logic" in Kant's para­
digm of a scholastic logic textbook, Georg Friedrich Meier's Auszug aus
der Vernunftlehre (Halle, 1 752), which foreshadows the complex agenda of
the present "Doctrine of Method." Meier initially defines logica practica or
"the practical doctrine of reason" as concerning the "particular ways in which
the rules of learned cognition and learned presentation are applied" (§ 7,
1 7=72-3), which Kant is here arguing is not a part of logic proper but rather
calls for philosophical reflection on the applicability of concepts of the un­
derstanding and reason. This is the initial concern of the "Doctrine of
Method." Later, however, Meier writes that "A cognition is practical (cogni­
tio practica) insofar as it can move us in a noticeable way to do or omit an ac­
tion" (§ 2 16, 1 7 = 5 1 6). This suggests that "practical logic" has to do not with
the application of theoretical concepts but rather with rules for action, or
what Kant comes to call practical rather than theoretical reason; and Kant will
also broach the foundations of his moral theory in the "Doctrine of Method,"
above all in the section entitled the "Canon of Pure Reason," thus suggesting
that it is ultimately his moral philosophy and not merely his transcendental
reflection which is the proper successor to the "practical logic" of the schools.
4 On the general concept of a "discipline," see R 5089 (1 776-78, 1 8:80).
5 The contrast between mathematical and philosophical method was one of
Kant's oldest themes, and a major element in his campaign against previous
forms of rationalism. For a major early statement, see the 1 764 prize essay

Inquiry concerning the Distinctness of the Principles of Natural Theology and
Morals (2:2 73-30 1). In this work, Kant argued that mathematics yields syn­
thetic propositions and philosophy analytic ones, a view which the "Tran­
scendental Aesthetic" of this Critique has revoked; but in the present section
he retains another main claim of the earlier work, that mathematical proofs
proceed by the construction of particular mathematical objects while philo­
sophical arguments are not constructive and determinate, but yield only
more general principles and procedures for cognitive inquiry (see also the
contrast between mathematical and philosophical analogies at A I 79801 B 2 2 2-3). For other statements of the contrast between mathematical
and philosophical methods, see R 1634 ( 1 752-56, 16:5 3-5); R 4445 (1 772,
1 7= 5 5 2-4); R 5 5 8 3 ( 1 778-80s, 1 8:241), R 5593 (1 778-80s, 1 8:243-4), and R
5645 ( 1 785-88? 1 780-84? 1 8 : 2 87-95, at pp. 290-1).
6 The proof Kant is describing is found in Euclid's Elements, book I, proposi­
tion 3 2 .
7 Kant is not here distinguishing between the concept of quantity and specific
magnitudes, as he often does, but rather between the more determinate
magnitudes of geometry (e.g., 1 80°) and the abstract magnitudes of algebra
(e.g., 5X or x"').
8 On Kant's theory of definition, see the Jasche Logic, §§ 99-109 (Lectures on
Logic, pp. 6 3 1 -6), and corresponding passages in the lectures on logic, in­
cluding Blomberg Logic (Lectures on Logic, pp. 2 I I- 1 9), Vienna Logic (Lectures
on Logic, pp. 3 56-66), and Dohna-Wundlacken Logic (Lectures on Logic, pp.
75 1

Notes to pages 63 8-646
489-93). Among Kant's notes, see R 29 I I-68 (various periods, 16:5 72-89)
and R 2993-3008 (1 769-80s, 1 6:606-1 1).
9 Kant's conception of "arbitrarily thought" concepts here is similar to Locke's
conception of ideas of mixed modes, which are always "adequate," because
"not being intended for Copies of Things really existing, but for Archetypes
made by the Mind," a mixed mode is "referred to nothing else but it self"
(Essay concerning Human Understanding, book II, chapter xxxi, § 3).
10 Kant is referring to the technological challenge in the eighteenth century
of making a clock precise enough for computation of longitude, a task so
difficult that the prize of £20,000 offered for its successful accomplishment
by the British parliament in 1 7 1 4 was not fully awarded until 1 77 3 . For a
detailed account, see John Noble Wilford, The Mapmakers (New York:
Knopf, 198 1), pp. 1 30-6.
I I See R 2 920-8 (1 769-75, 1 6 :576-9) and R 2950 ( 1 778-80s, 1 6:585).
1 2 Here Kant is using "characteristic" (characteristisch) in the sense of a com­
putational method in which concepts are assigned numerical values, the

sense underlying Leibniz's project of a "universal characteristic," in which

13
14

15

16

all questions could be solved by analysis by assigning a numerical value to
all concepts (see, e.g., Leibniz's draft "Preface to a Universal Character­
istic" of 1 678-79, in Ariew and Garber, pp. 5-10).
Kant here refers to the "Antinomy of Pure Reason," of course.
Johann Georg Sulzer ( 1 720-1 779), Wolffian philosopher and director of
the philosophical section of the Berlin Academy of Sciences, now remem­
bered primarily for his work in aesthetics, especially Unterredungen iiber die
Schonheit der Natur (Berlin, 1 750) and Allgemeine Theorie der schon en Kiinste
(Leipzig, 1 77 1-74), where he extended Baumgarten's approach into an
even more psychological theory .that the primary object of enjoyment in
aesthetic experience is the state of our own cognitive condition. Sulzer was
the translator of Hume's first Enquiry (1 755), and also the author of the
Berlin Academy prize question for 1 763 in response to which Kant's 1 764
Inquiry was written, as well as one of the original critics of Kant's theory of
the ideality of time in the inaugural dissertation. The present reference is
to Sulzer's Vermischte Schriften of 1 77 3 .
Kant is obviously referring to the arguments of Hume's posthumously
published Dialogues concerning Natural Religion ( 1 779). The Dialogues were
published in German in 1 7 8 1 , in a translation by the Konigsberg writer
Johann Georg Hamann ( 1 7 30-1 788) who, like his follower Friedrich
Heinrich Jacobi ( 1 743-1 8 1 9), enlisted Hume in the cause of his own dog­
matic fideism. Because of his earlier connection with Hamann as well as his
interest in Hume, Kant would certainly have read Hamann's translation
immediately upon publication, if not indeed prior to it.
Joseph Priestley ( 1 7 3 3 - 1 804), English dissenting minister, teacher, scientist,
and philosopher. As a scientist, Priestley's major accomplishment was the
isolation of oxygen, although it was left to Cavendish and Lavoisier to in­
terpret the theoretical significance of Priestley's discovery. As a philosopher,
he was a defender of the associationism of David Hartley ( 1 705-57), and de­
fended materialism, with the consequence that immortality could not be a
natural condition of mankind, and determinism, especially in two works of
7 52

Notes to pages 650-673
1 777, Disquisitions Relating to Matter and Spirit and The Doctrine ofPhilosoph­
ical Necessity Illustrated. The first of Priestley's works to appear in Gennan
was apparently his History of tbe Corruptions of Cbristianity in 1 78 2 , so Kant

17

18
19

20
2I

22

23

24

presumably knew about his philosophical views from reviews when writing
the Critique. However, Kant had already mentioned Priestley in R 502 I
(1776-78, 1 8:63), characterizing him along with Locke as an empiricist.
Here Kant first alludes to Hobbes's diagnosis of the state of nature as given
in Leviathan, book I, chap. XIII (see also De Cive, chap. I, § XII) and to
Hobbes's formulation of the second "Fundamental Law of Nature" in chap.
XIv, and then anticipates his own fonnulation of the "Universal Principle
of Right" in the introduction to the "Doctrine of Right" in the Metaphysics
ofMorals, § C (6: 2 3 0) .
To this section compare the long note R 5645 (1 785-88? I 780-84?
1 8 : 287-95).
Hume's assertion that the principle o f our causal inferences i s "Custom or
Habit" would have been best known to Kant from An Enquiry concerning
Human Understanding, section V ("Skeptical Solution of these Doubts"),
part 1. The Enquiry was first translated into German by J. G. Sulzer in 1 755.
For some comments on the necessary conditions for an hypothesis, see
R 5560 (1 778-8 1 , 1 8: 2 3 3-4) and R 5570 (1 778-8 1 , 1 8 : 2 36).
Here Kant may be alluding to his ironic attack on Swedenborgian spiritu­
alism in Dreams ofa Spirit-Seer (1 766), e.g., 2 : 3 3 2-4; in Theoretical Philoso­
phy, 1755-1770, pp. 3 1 9-2 1 , as well as to his attack on the Leibnizian
conception of substances as monads in the "Amphiboly of the Concepts of
Reflection" above.
Here Kant recapitulates his criticism of the inference from the simplicity
of the representation of the self to the simplicity of the self as object in the
second "Paralogism of Pure Reason"; see A 3 5 5-6 and B 407-8.
See Kant's own proof i n The New Elucidation of the First Principles of Meta­
physical Cognition, prop. VIII, 1 : 396; in Theoretical Philosophy, 1755-1770,
P· 1 7 ·
Kant defines modus ponens in the Heschel Logic as inferring a positione an­
tecedens ad positionem consequentis, or inferring from the positing of the an­
tecedent to the positing of the consequence (Lectures on Logic, p. 405). This
seems to be the same as the usual modern definition of modus ponens as the
rule of inference that ifp and p -> q then q. However, the modern formula­
tion is not understood to have the consequence that Kant imputes to it,
namely that a proposition p can be known to be true only if all of its con­
sequences (q, r, . . ) are known to be true.
Here Kant's definition i s incomplete but h e does not seem t o b e departing
from the customary interpretation of modus tollens. This is usually under­
stood as the rule of inference that if p -> q and not-q then not-p, which is
precisely what Kant takes it to imply. Kant defines modus tollens as inferring
a remotione consequentis ad remotionem antecedentis, i.e., from the removal (or
denial) of the consequent to that of the antecedent, in Heschel Logic (Lec­
tures on Logic, p. 405).
At this late stage in the book, the claim that reason may have a canon in its
practical but not in its theoretical use may seem like an afterthought, but at
.

25

�6

753

Notes to pages 675-684

27

28

29

30

3I

32

33
34

least in the second edition Kant's preface reveals that one of the chief objec­
tives of the entire enterprise has been to prepare the ground for this claim
(see B xxv). Numerous notes also reveal the important position of this claim:
see, for example, R 4241 (1 77°-7I ? 1 7:475-6), R 4459 (1772, 1 7:559-60), R
4461 (1 772, I TS60-1), R 4849 (1776-78, 1 8:5-8, at p. 6), and R 5637
(1 780-8 1 , 1 8: 2 68-78, especially p. 2 73). See also the series of notes from
1 783-84 labeled by Kant "On moral theology" at R 6086-9 1 7 ( 1 8:445-60).
O n the different concepts o f freedom, see Groundwork of the Metaphysics of
Morals, section III (4:446-8), and R 4 2 2 5-7 ( 1 769-70, 1 ]:444-6), R 454850 ( 1 772-75, 1 7:589-90), and R 6076-7 (1 785-88, 1 8:443) . On the claim
that transcendental freedom is necessarily incomprehensible, which is of
quite early origin, see R 4334 (1770-7 I ? 1 769? 1 773-75? 1 7 :508-9) and R
4 3 3 8 (1 770-7 1 ? 1 769? 1 773-75? I TS I0- I I ) .
Of course, the content of the moral law will be discussed at length in the
Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals, section II, and the Critique of
Practical Reason, §§ 1-8. But see also the interesting notes at R 5445-6
(1 776-78, 1 8 : 1 84).
This will be discussed at length in Kant's subsequent works, including the
"Dialectic" of the Critique ofPractical Reason (5 : 107-141), the "Doctrine of
Method" of the "Critique of Teleological Judgment" in the Critique of
Judgment, §§ 83-4, 86-7, (5:429-36, 442-5 3), and Religion within the Boun­
daries ofPure Reason, preface (6:6-8n.). See also Kant's notes from 1 7 83-89
at R 6 1 08-9 (18:456-7), R 61 I 3 ( 1 8 :459), R 6 1 3 2-3 ( 1 8:464-5), and, from
the 1 79os, R 6443 (19:7 1 8-19).
Reich; usually translated as "kingdom," the translation by "realm" (or "em­
pire") better connotes the idea of a body of subjects who are themselves au­
tonomous under the leadership of a higher rules who does not undermine
their autonomy.
Here Kant refers to Leibniz's essay On the Principles of Nature and Grace,
based on Reason, written in 1 7 14 and first published posthumously in the
French journal L'Europe savante in 1 7 1 8 .
Compare this definition of a maxim with that offered in the Groundwork,
4:420- Ill. The present definition makes it clearer than the Groundwork does
that an agent can adopt an objectively valid law as his subjectively valid
maxim, which any coherent interpretation of Kant's ethical theory requires.
See R 4996 ( 1 7 76-78, 1 8:55), R 5495 (1 776-78, 1 8 : 1 98-9), and R 63 1 4
(1 790-9 1 , 18:616-17).
The anti-voluntarist argument expressed here was long a part of Kant's
moral philosophy, and central to the conception of morality that he con­
veyed to his students in his lectures on ethics; see, for instance, Moralphilo­
sophie Collins, 2 ] : 2 74-9; in Immanuel Kant, Lectures on Ethics, edited by
Peter Heath and J. B . Schneewind (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1 997), pp. 65-69. The rejection of voluntarism, that is, the view that
moral laws are such simply because they are willed by God rather than be­
cause of their inherent rationality, was a centerpiece of the Enlightenment
in both Germany (where it was advanced by Christian Wolff) and Britain,
where it was argued by Anthony Ashley Cooper, third earl of Shaftesbury,
prior to 1 699, when John Toland published a pirated edition of Shaftes754

Notes to pages 684-698

35

36

37
38
39
40

41
42

43

44

45

46

bury's An Inquiry Concerning Virtue, or Merit; see book I, part III, section II
(in the edition by David Walford [Manchester: Manchester University
Press, lin I], p. 30).
There are numerous texts bearing on the argument o f this section. First of
all, see the Jasche Logic, introduction section IX (Lectures on Logic, pp.
570- 88); then see R 2450 and 245 1 ( 1 764-68, 1 6 : 3 73-5), R 2452 and 2454
( 1 769-70, 1 6 : 3 75-6), R 2457-62 ( 1 770-75, 1 6: 3 7 7-8 1), R 2477 (1 780s,
1 6 : 3 87), R 2479-80 ( 1 780s, 1 6 : 3 88), R 2486 (1 780s, 1 6:3 89), R 2492
(1 780s, 1 6 : 3 92-3), R 2493 ( 1 790s, 1 6:393) , R 2 793 (1 790S, 1 6: 5 1 3- 1 5), and
R 5645 ( 1 785-88? 1 780-84? 1 8 : 2 87-95).
In a number of notes, Kant makes clear that practical believing cannot be
equated with theoretical belief in a mere probability: see R 6108-10 (178389, 1 8:456-8), R 6280 (1 785-88, 1 8 :546-8), and R 2495 (1 790S, 16:393-4)'
Here Kant presumably alludes t o Pascal's wager; see his Pensies, nos. 2 2 3 ,
4 1 8 (Lafuma numbering).
See R 2630 (1 780s, 1 6:443), R 2 692 (1 780s, 1 6=472), R 2 7 1 4 ( 1 773-76,
1 6:480-1 ), and R 2 793 (1 790s, 1 6:5 1 3- 1 5).
I.e., spontaneous generation; here Kant is again using a biological theory
that still retained credence for his simile.
The ensuing conception of historical cognition, together with the claim
that someone may have only historical cognition of a rational body of
truths if he himself has only learned it from another, derives from Wolff;
see Discursus praeliminaris de philosophia in genere (1 728) , e.g., §§ 3 , 8 , 2 2-4;
translation by Richard ]. Blackwell, Preliminary Discourse on Philosophy in
General (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1 963), pp. 3 , 5 , 1 3-14.
By this Kant means the first chapter of the "Doctrine of Method," i.e., the
"Discipline of Pure Reason."
Here Kant is obviously alluding to Plato's theory of mathematical learning
in the Meno (82 b-86a), although of course he has replaced Plato's theory
of recollection with his own view that the source of mathematical knowl­
edge is a priori intuition.
In Emile, book III, Rousseau argues that the child learns philosophy best
by solving practical tasks and not by being glued to books (in the transla­
tion by Allan Bloom [New York: Basic Books, 1 979] , p. 1 77)' Perhaps Kant
had this thought in mind in the present paragraph.
For the classical formulation of this characterization of metaphysics, see
Aristotle, Metaphysics, I (A), 1 (98 I b2 5-982 a2); Kant himself characterized
the subject-matter of metaphysics in these terms in A New Elucidation of
the First Principles of Metaphysical Cognition of 1 75 5 ( 1 : 3 87); in Theoretical
Philosophy, I755-I770, p. 5 .
Here Kant again seems to have Wolff in mind, who sometimes suggests
that philosophical knowledge is just more general than specific historical
knowledge; see Discursus praeliminaris, § 43; Blad..'Well, pp. 26-7·
Here Kant is referring to the Wolffian distinction between ontology or
general metaphysics as the general science of what is possible, i.e., the cat­
egories of things, and special metaphysics or rational theology, cosmology,
and psychology, as the most general science of what actually exists. See
Discursus praeliminaris, § 2 9; Blackwell, p. 1 7 ·
755

Notes to pages 698-703
Here Kant is referring to the Wolffian distinction between rational cos­
mology and rational theology. See Discursus praeliminaris, §§ 56, 47, 59;
Blackwell, pp. 3 3-5.
48 Here Kant is subsuming rational physics and rational psychology under the
general title of rational physiology, suggesting that there are constructive
doctrines of rational physics and psychology, expounding the a priori con­
ditions of empirical judgments in physics and psychology, that can replace
the merely dialectical transcendent doctrines of rational cosmology and ra­
tional psychology (as well as rational theology) which he has already re­
jected in the "Dialectic." However, although Kant was to go on to produce
his "rational physics" in the Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science of
1 786, there he would deny that any rational psychology (Seelenwissenschaft)
at all is possible, on the ground that inner sense, unlike outer sense, does
not yield to mathematization, and thus there can be no genuine science of
inner sense (see 4:47 1). But that oft-cited argument is undercut by the
present paragraph, especially Kant's footnote, which distinguishes between
the a priori principles of rational physics and the mathematical principles of
general physics, which are in fact underwritten by the principles of rational
physics; for there could still be a priori principles of inner sense, under­
writing the a priori application of concepts of causation and interaction to
psychological phenomena without yielding any mathematically interesting
principles for these phenomena - indeed, that is precisely what the
"Analogies of Experience" and "Refutation of Idealism" have done.
49 In the systems of Wolff and Baumgarten, empirical psychology was in­
cluded as a separate chapter alongside rational psychology; the latter dealt
primarily with the immateriality and immortality of the soul, while the
former tried to describe the experience of thought and passion. But here
Kant seems to have in mind the philosophical project of Locke, in which
the "original, certainty, and extent of human knowledge" were to be deter­
mined by the "historical, plain method" of introspective psychology (see An
Essay concerning Human Understanding, bk. I, ch. i, § 2 ), as well as Locke's
successors, both British, such as Hume, but also Germans influenced by
Lockean and Humean psychology, such as Sulzer and Johann Nicolaus
Tetens ( 1 736?-1 807), whose Philosophische Versuche (Leipzig: 1 777) provided
Kant with the model of empirical cognitive psychology that Kant under­
girded with this transcendental psychology in the "subjective" side of the
transcendental deduction of the categories, especially in the first edition.
50 Leibniz constructed this comparison between himself and Locke on the
one hand and Plato and Aristotle on the other at the opening of the pref­
ace to his New Essays conce17zing Human Understanding (p. 47 in the transla­
tion by Bennett and Remnant), a book that made a deep impression on
Kant at the time of its posthumous publication in 1765.
5 I Kant refers here to An Essay concerning Human Understanding, book IV;
chapter X, § I, where Locke says of the existence of God that "its Evidence
be (if I mistake not) equal to mathematical Certainty. " Locke does not
make the same claim about knowledge of the immortality of the mind or
spirit, although this chapter does include an argument that matter is not
eternal (§ 1 8).
47

756

G L O S S A RY

*

German-English

Abfolge
abhangig
Ablauf
ableiten
Absicht
absondern
abstammen
Abstammung
absteigen
abstrahio·en
abweisen
Affinitat
All
allgemein
Allheit
an sich
analytisch
Anfong
anhangend
Anlage
annehmen
anschauen
anschaulich
Anschauung
Ansehung
Anspruch
anstellen
antreffen
Anwendung
Art
Aufgabe
*

succession (cf. Folge, Sukzession, Nacheinander; Reihenfolge)
dependent
lapse
derive
aim; intention; respect
separate
descend
ancestry
descend
to abstract
dismiss
affinity
(the) all
general; universal
totality (cf. Totalitat)
in itself
analytic
beginning
dependent
predisposition
assume
intuit
intuitive
intuition (intuitus)
regard
claim
institute
encounter; find
application
way, species, kind, manner
problem (cf. Problem)

This is not meant as a complete guide to Kant's vocabulary, but only as a guide to �mr

translation of philosophically significant terms. The yast number of obvious c(jgnaies
.
(e.g., Apperzeption= apperception) are omitted.

757

Glossary

aufgegeben
Auflosung
aujboren
aufsteigen
Ausdebnung
Ausdruck
ausfohrlicb
ausmachen
aufler
Aufleres
iiuflerlicb

given as a problem
solution; resolution; dissolution
cease
ascend

bedeuten
Bedeutung
bedingt
Bedingung
Begebenbeit
begreifen
begrenze1l

signify
significance; meaning
conditioned
condition
occurrence (cf. Ereignis)
comprehend (comprehendere)
bound (cf. einscbriinken)
concept (conceptus)
persist
persistent
persistence
assert
ascribe
affirm
teaching
term

Begriff
beharren
beharrlich
Bebarrlicbkeit
bebaupten
beilegen
bejaben
Belebrung
Benennung
Beobacbtung
bericbtigen
Beschaffenheit
beschiiftigen (sicb)
besonder
bestiindig
bestiitigen
besteben
bestimmen
Bestimmung
Betrachtung
beurteilen
Beurteilung
Bewegllng
Bewegungsgrund
Beweis

extension

expression
exhaustive
constitute; make out; settle
outside; external
external (thing)
external

observation

correct
constitution; property
be concerned
particular; special
constant
confirm
subsist; exist; consist
determine
determination (determinatio), vocation
consideration

assess; judge
estimation; judgment
motion
motive (cf. Triebfeder)
proof
758

Glossary

Beweisgrund
Bewufltsein
Bezeichnung
Beziehung
Bild
bleiben
bleibend
Blendwerk
blofl
Boden

ground of proof
conSCIOusness
designation
relation (cf. Verhdltnis, Relation)
image
remain; endure
abiding; lasting
semblance; mirage (cf. Schein, Illusion)
mere, merely
terrain

Cultur

culture

darstellen
dartun
Dasein
Dauer
Demonstration
denken
Denk(ungs)art
deutlich
Ding
dunkel
durch
durchgiingig

exhibit; present
demonstrate
existence (cf. Existenz)
duration
demonstration
think, conceive
way of thinking
distinct; clear (cf. klar)
thing (cf. Sache)
obscure
through; by
thorough(going)

Eigenschaft
eigentiimlich
Einbildungskraft
Eindruck
Einerleiheit
ein/ach
Einjlufl
einheimisch
Eillheit
eillsehell
einschriinken
Einstimmung
Einteilung
Empfindung
empirisch
endlich
Entgegensetzung
enthalten

property
peculiar
(power of) imagination
impression
identity (cf. Identitiit)
simple
influence (injlux)
indigenous
unity
have insight into; see (into); understand (perspicere)
limit (cf. begrenzen)
agreement
division
sensation (sensatio)
empirical
finite
opposition
contain
7 59

Glossary

Entschlieflung
ent,tehen
Ereignis
Eifahrung
Eifahrungs­
erkennen
Erkenntnis
Erklarung
Erlauterung
Erijrterung
Erscheinung
Erste
erwagen
Erweiterung
erzeugen
Existenz

decision
arise
event (ef. Begebenheit)
experience
experiential
cognize; recognize (cognoscere)
cognition (cognitio) (ef. Kennen, Wissen)
explanation, definition, declaration
clarification, elucidation
exposition (expositio)
appearance
first member (of a series)
consider
amplification; expansion
produce, generate
existence (cf. Dasein)

Fabigkeit
Fertigkeit
figiirlich
Flache
Folge
folge7l
folgeru
Folgerung
Form
Fortgang
Fortschritt
Fortsetzung
Fruchtbarkeit
Fiirwahrhalten

capacity (capacitas)
skill
figurative (speciosum)
surface
sequel; sequence
follow
conclude (ef. schlieflen)
consequence
form
progression; progress (progressus)
progress
continuation
fecundity
taking to be true

Ganze
ganzlich
Gattung
Gebrauch
Gedankending
Gefobl
Gegenstand
Gegenwirkung
gegliedert
Geist
gemein

whole; entirety
entirely
genus
use
thought-entity (ens rationis)
feeling
object (ef. Object)
counter-effect
articulated
mind, spirit (ef. Gemiit)
common

7 60

Glossary

Gemeinschaft
Gemiit
Geschiift
geschehen
Gesetz
Gestalt
Gewicht
Gewohnheit
Glaube
gleichartig
Glied
Gliickseligkeit
Grad
Grenze
GrojJe
grund
Grundkraft
Grundsatz
griindlich
gilltig

community
mind
concern, business
happen
law
shape
weight
habit; custom
belief; faith
homogeneous
member
happiness
degree
bound(ary) (cf. Schranke)
magnitude (cf. Quantitiit, Quantum)
ground; basis
fundamental power
principle (d. Princip, Principium)
well-grounded; thorough
valid

hinabgehen
hinzuJiigen
hinzusetzen

descend
add
add

Idealismus
Idee
Inbegriff
Inhalt

idealism
idea
sum total
content

Kennen
Kenntnis
Kiirp er
korperlich
Kraft
Kriterium

know; be acquainted with (noscere)
acquaintance; information; knowledge
body
corporeal
force, power
criterion

Lage
Liiuterung
lediglich
Lehre
Lehrsatz
Lehrspruch

position
purification
solely, strictly
doctrine
theorem
theorem

761

Glossary

Leit­
Leitfod
Lust

guiding
guiding thread; clue
pleasure

mannigfaltige
Mannigfaltige
Mannigfaltigkeit
Materie
Meinung
Menge
lVlensch
Merkmal
Mittel
miiglich

manifold (ad}.)
manifold (n.), manifold of elements
manifold (n.); manifoldness
matter
opinion
multitude; multiplicity; amount
human being
mark (nota)
means
possible

nach
Nacheinandersein
nachfolgen
niihern
Naturanlage
Naturell
nichtig
notwendig
notwendigerweise
Nutzen
niitzlich

in accordance (with); according to; after
succession (cf. Folge, Sukzession)
succeed
approximate
natural predisposition
natural temper
nugatory
necessary, necessarily
necessarily
utility; usefulness
useful

Obersatz
oberst
Object
art

major premise
supreme
object (cf. Gegenstand)
place

Perzeption
Probierstein

perception (cf. Wahrnehmung)
touchstone

Quelle

source

Raum
Realismus
Reihe
Reihenfolge

space
realism
series
succession (cf. Folge, Nacheinander, Alifolge; Sukzession);
successIve serIes
pure (cf. lauter)
relation (cf. Beziehung, Verhiiltnis)

rein
Relation

7 62

Glossary

Riickgang
Ruhe

regress (regressus)
rest

Sache
Satz
Schiitzung
Schein
schickanieren
schlechthin
schlieflen
Schlufl
Schranke
Schwannerei
schwer
Schwere
Schwerkraft
selbstandig
Selbstbewufltsein
Selbsterkenntnis
Selbsttatigkeit
setzen
Sinn
sinnlich
Sinnlichkeit
Steigerung
Stoff
subaltern
synthetisch

thing (cf. Ding)
proposition; sentence; principle
appraisal
illusion (cf. Erscheinung, Illusion, Blendwerk)
quibble
absolutely
infer (cf. falgern)
inference, conclusion (cf. VernnunftschlujJ)
limitation
enthusiasm
heavy
gravity
gravitational force
self-sufficient; independent
self-consciousness
self-knowledge
self-activity
posit; place; put
sense (n.)
sensible
sensibility
Increase
material, matter

subordinate
synthetic

Teil
teilbar
Teilung
Triebfeder

part
divisible
division
incentive

iiberfliegend
Ubergang
iibergehen
Uberlegung
Uberredung
Uberzeugung
Umfang
Undurchdringlichkeit
unendlich
uneiforschlich

extravagant
transition
pass (into)
reflection (cf. Reflexion)
persuasion
conviction
domain
impenetrability
infinite
inscrutable
7 63

?

Glossary

unerweislich
ungereimt
Unlust
unmittelbar
Untersatz
Unterscheidung
Unterschied
Unterweisung
Urbild
Ursache
urspriinglich
Urteil
urteilen
Urteilskraft
Urwesen

indemonstrable
absurd
displeasure
immediate, immediately
minor premise
distinction
difference
instruction
archetype (prototypon)
cause (causa)
original
judgment
judge
(power of) judgment
original being (ens originarium)

Veriinderung
veranlassen
Verbindung
verflieflen
Verhiiltnis
Vergleichung
Verkniipfung
vermittelst
Vermiigen
verneinen
Vernnunftschlufl
Vernunft
verniinfteln
verniinftelnd
Verschiedenheit
verschwinden
Verstand
verstehen
verwandeln
Verwandtschaft
verweisen
Vielheit
vollkommen
vollstiindig
Voraussetzung
vorherbestimmt
vorhergehen

alteration (cf. Wechsel)
occasion
combination (combinatio) (cf. Verkniipfung, Zusammenhang)
elapse
relation (cf. Beziehung, Relation)
comparison
connection (connexio) (cf. Verbindung, Zusammenhang)
by means of
faculty, capacity (facultas)
deny; negate
syllogism; inference of reason
reason
ratiocinate; rationalize
sophistical
difference (cf. Unterschied, Differenz)
vanish
understanding (intellectus)
understand (intelligere)
transform
affinity (cf. Affinitiit)
refer
plurality
perfect
complete
presupposition
preestablished
precede
.

7 64

Glossary

vorstellen (sich)
Vorstellung

represent; imagine
representation (repraesentatio)

Wahn
Wahrnehmung
Wahrscheinlichkeit
Wandelbar
Wechsel
wechselseitig
wechselsweise
Wechselwirkung
wegfallen
Welt
Weltall
Weltbesgriff
Weltganze
Weltkiirper
Weltreihe
Weltweisheit
Weltwissenschaft
Wesen
Widerlegung
Widerspruch
Widerstand
Widerstreit
Wiederholung
Wirken
Wirklichkeit
Wirkung
Wissen
Wissenschaft

delusion
perception (perceptio) (cf. Perzeption)
probability
changeable
change (cf. Veriinderung)
reciprocal
reciprocally
interaction
disappear
world
world-whole
cosmological concept, cosmopolitan concept
world-whole
heavenly body
world-series
philosophy
cosmology
being; essence
refutation
contradiction
resistance
conflict; opposition
repetition
effect (v.); produce
actuality; reality
effect
knowledge (scientia)
science (scientia)

Zahl
Zeit
Zeitfolge
Zergliederung
Zerteilung
Zucht
zufiillig
zugleich
Zugleichsein
Zurechnung
zureichend

number
time
temporal sequence
analysis
disintegration
correction
contingent
simultaneous; at the same time
simultaneity
imputation
sufficient

765

Glossary

Zusammengesetztes
Zusammenhang
Zusammensetzung
Zusammenstellung
Zustand
Zwang
Zweck
zweckmiiflig

(a) composite
connection, interconnection; nexus (nexus, conjunctio)
(cf. Verbindung, Verkniipfimg)
composition
juxtaposition
state; condition
coercion; compulsion
end; purpose
purposive; suitable

English-German
abiding
absolute(ly)
abstract (v.)
absurd
actual
add
affinity
affirm
agreement
aim
all (n.)
alteration
ampliative
amplification
analysis
analytic
ancestry
appearance
application
appraisal
approximate (v.)
archetype
arise
articulated
ascribe
assert
assess
assume

bleibend
absolut, schlechthin
abstrahieren
ungereimt, absurd
wirklich
hinzufiigen, hinzusetzen
Affinitiit, Verwandtschaft
bejahen
Einstimmung
Absicht
All
Veriinderung
erweitende
Erweiterung
Analyse, Zergliederung
analytisch
Abstammung
Erscheinung
Anwendung
Schiitzung
niihern
Urbild
entstehen
gegliedert
beilegen
behaupten
beurteilen
annehmen

beginning (n.)
being (n.)
belief

Anfang
Sein; Wesen
Glaube
766

Glossary
believe
belong
body
bound(ary)

glauben
gehijren
Korper
Grenze

capacity
cause
cease
change (n.)
changeable
claim
clarification
clear
clue
coercion
cognition
cognize
combination
common
community
comparison
complete
composite (n.)
composition
comprehend
compulsion
concelVe
concept
concern
conclude
conclusion
condition
conditioned
confirm
conflict
connection
consciousness
consequence
consider
consist (of)
constant
constitute
constitution
contain

Fahigkeit (capacitas), Vermijgen
Ursache
aujhijren
Wechsel
wandelbar
Anspruch
Erliiuterung
klar; deutlich
Leitfad
Zwang
Erkenntnis (cognitio)
erkennen (cognoscere)
Verbindung (combinatio)
gemein
Gemeinschaft
Vergleichung
vollstiindig
Zusammengesetztes
Zusammensetzung
begreifen (comprehendere)
Zwang
denken
Begriff (conceptus)
Geschaft
folgern
Schlufl
Bedingung, Zustand
bedingt
bestatigen
Widerstreit
Verkniipfung (connexio), Zusammenhang (nexus, conjunctio)
Bewufltsein
Folgerung
betrachten, erwagen
bestehen (aus)
bestandig
ausmachen
Beschaffenheit, Veifassung
enthalten
767

Glossary

content
contingent
continuation
contradiction
conviction
corporeal
correct (v.)
correction
cosmology
counter-effect
criterion
culture
custom

Inhalt, Gehalt
zufollig
Fortsetzung
Widerspruch
Uberzeugung
korperlich
berichtigen
Berichtigung, Zucht
Kosmologie, Weltwissenschaft
Gegenwirkung
Kriterium

decision
definition
degree
delusion
demonstrate
demonstration
deny
dependent
derive
descend
designation
determination
determine
difference
disappear
disintegration
dismiss
displeasure
distinct
distinction
divisible
division
doctrine
domain
duration

Entschlieflung
Definition, Erkliirung
Grad
Wahn
demonstrieren, dartun, darlegen
Demonstration
�'erneinen
abhangig, anhangend
ableiten
abstammen; absteigen; hinabgehen
Bezeichnung
Bestimmung
bestimmen
Unterschied, Verschiedenheit, Differenz
wegfallen
Zerteilung
abweisen
Unlust
deutlich
Unterscheidung
teilbar
Teilung, Einteilung
Lehre, Doktrin
Umfang
Dauer

effect
elapse
elucidation

W;rkung
verflieflen, ablaufen
Erlauterung

eUlfUr

Gewohnheit

768

Glossary

empirical
encounter
end
endure
enduring
enthusiasm
entirely
essence
estimation
event
exhaustive
exhibit
existence
expansion
experience
experiential
explanation
exposition
expression
extension
external (thing)
extravagant

empirisch
antreffen
Zweck
bleiben, dauern
bleibend
Schwiirmerei
giinzlich
Wesen
Beurteilung
Ereignis
ausfohrlich
darstellen
Dasein, Existenz
Erweiterung
Eifahrung
Eifohrungs­
Erkliirung
Erijrterung, Exposition
Ausdruck
Ausdehnung, Erweiterung
'
iiufierlich; Aufieres
iibeifliegend

faculty
faith
fecundity
feeling
figurative
finite
follow
force
form
fundamental power

Vermogen ( facultas)
Glaube
Fruchtbarkeit
Gefohl
figiri lich (speciosum)
endlich
folgen
Kraft
Form
Grundkraft

general
genus
given
given as a problem
gravitational force
gravity
ground
guide
guiding thread

allgemein
Gattung
gegeben
aufgegeben
Schwerkraft
Schwere
Grund
leiten
Leiifad

769

Glossary
habit
happen
happiness
heavenly body
heavy
homogeneous
human being

Gewohnheit
geschehen
Gliickseligkeit
Weltkiirper
schwer
gleichartig; homogen
Mensch

idea
identity
illusion
image
imagination
imagine
immediate(ly)
impenetrability
impression
imputation
in itself
incentive
increase
indemonstrable
independent
indigenous
infer
inference
infinite
influence
inscrutable
insight
institute
instruction
intention
interaction
interconnection
intuit
intuitable
intuition
intuitive

Idee
Identitiit, Einerleiheit
Schein, Illusion
Bild
Einbildung, Einbildungskraft
einbilden, sich vorstellen
unmittelbar
Undurchdringlichkeit
Eindruck
Zurechnung
an sich (selbst)
Triebfeder
Steigerung
unerweislich
selbstiindig, unabhiingig
einheimisch
schlieflen
Schlufl
unendlich
Einflufl (influx)
unerforschlich
Einsehen (perspicere)
anstellen
Unterweisung
Absicht
Wechselwirkung
Zusammenhang
anchauen
anschaubar, anschaulich
Anschauung (intuitus)
anschaulich

judge (v.)
judgment
juxtaposition

urteilen
Urteil, Urteilskraft
Zusammenstellung
770

Glossary
know
knowledge

wissen (scire); kennen (noscere)
Wissen (scientia); Kenntnis

lapse
lasting
law
limit(ation)

Ablaut
bleibend
Gesetz
einschriinken, Einschriinkung, Schranke

magnitude
major premise
manifold (adj.)
manifold (n.)
mark
material
matter
means
member
mere(ly)
mind
minor premise
mirage
motion
motive
multiplicity
multitude

Grofle
Obersatz
mannigfaltig
Mannigfaltige; Mannigfaltigkeit
Merkmal (nota)
Stoff
Materie
Mittel
Glied
blofi
Gemiit, Geist
Untersatz
Blendwerk
Bewegung
Bewegungsgrund
Menge
Menge

necessarily
necessary
need (n.)
negate
nexus
nugatory
number

notwendig, notwendigerweise
notwendig
Bediirfois
verneinen
Zusammenhang (nexus)
nichtig
Zahl

object
observation
occasIOn
occurrence
opinion
opposition
original
original being
outer
outside

Gegenstand, Object
Beobachtung
veranlassen
Begebenheit
Meinung
Entgegensetzung, Opposition, WuJerstreit
urspriinglich
Urwesen (ens originarium)
iiuflerlich
aufler
771

Glossary
part
particular
peculiar
perception
perfect
perfection
persist
persistence
persuasion
philosophy
place
pleasure
plurality
posit
position
possible
power
precede
predisposition
preestablished
present
presupposition
principle
probability
problem
produce
progress
progression
proof
property
proposition
pure
purification
purpose
purposive

Teil
besonder
eigentiimlich
Wahrnehmung (perceptio)
vollkommen
Vollkommenheit
beharren
Beharrlichkeit
Uberredung
Philosophie, Weltweisheit
Ort
Lust
Vielheit
setzen
Lage, Position, Setzung
miiglich
KraJt, Macht
vorhergehen
Anlage
vorherbestimmt
darstellen
Voraussetzung
Grundsatz, Prinzip, Prinzipium; Satz
Wahrscheinlichkeit
Aufgabe, Problem
erzeugen; wirken
Fortschritt, Fortgang
Fortgang
Beweis
EigenschaJt, Beschaffenheit
Satz
rein; lauter
Uiuterung
Zweck
zweckmaflig

ratiocinate
rationalize
real
reality
reason
reciprocal
refer
refutation

verniinJteln
verniinJteln
real, wirklich
Realitat; Wirklichkeit
VernunJt
wechselseitig, 1vechselsweise
verweisen
Widerlegung
772

Glossary
regress
relation
remain
represent
representation
rest

Riickgang, Regressus
Beziehung, Verhaltnis, Relation
bleiben
vorstellen
Vorstellung (repraesentatio)
Ruhe

sCIence
self-activity
self-consciousness
self-knowledge
self-sufficient
semblance
sensation
sense (n.)
sensibility
sensible
sentence
separate
sequence
senes
settle
shape
significance
signify
simple
simultaneity
simultaneous
skill
solely
solution
sophistical
source
space
species
state
subordinate
subsist
succeed
succession
sufficient
sum
sum total
supreme

Wissenschaft (scientia)
Selbsttatigkeit
Selbstbewufltsein
Selbsterkenntnis
selbstandig
Blendwerk
Empfindung (sensatio)
Sinn
Sinnlichkeit
sinnlich
Satz
absondern
Foige
Reihe
ausmachen
Gestalt
Bedeutung
bedeuten
einfoch
Zugleichsein
zugleich
Fertigkeit
lediglich
AufloSzing
verniinftelnd
Que/Ie
Raum
Art, Species
Zustand
untergeordnet, subaltern
bestehen
nachfolgen
Abfolge, Nacheinandersein, Sukzession
zureichend
Summe
Inbegriff
oberst
773

Glossary
surface
syllogism
synthetic

Fliiche
Vernunftschlufl, Syllogismus
synthetisch

take (to be true)
teaching
temporal sequence
term
terrain
theorem
thing
thorough
thorough(going)
thought-entity
through
time
totality
touchstone
transform
transition

Fiirwahrhalten
Belehrung
Zeitfolge
Benennung
Boden
Lehrsatz, Lehrspruch
Ding, Sache
griindlich
durchgiingig
Gedankending (ens rationis)
durch
Zeit
Totalitiit, Allheit
Probierstein
verwandeln
Ubergang

understand
understanding
unity
universal
use (n.)
use (v.)
useful
utility

verstehen (intelligere)
Verstand (intellectus)
Einheit
allgemein
Gebrauch
brauchen
niitzlich
Nutzen

valid
vanish

giiltig
verschwinden

weight
well-grounded
whole
world
world-series
world-whole

Gewicht
griindlich
Ganze
Welt
Weltreihe
Weltganze, Weltall

774

INDEX

absolute, 400-401
absolute possibility, 401 , 5 5 3-56
absolute whole, 507; see also conditions,
and unconditioned; totality; whole
accidents, 301-2
action, 3 1 3, 535-40; see also freedom
actuality: postulate of, 3 2 1, 3 2 5 , 3 3 3n,
430; relation to possibility and necessity,
3 30-32 ; schema of, 275; see also reality
aesthetic, transcendental, 4, 7-8, 14, 62,
70, 1 55-92 (in first edition, 1 55-7 1 ; in
second edition, 1 72-92), 248, 261, 3 26,
347, 348, 479, 5 1 1 , 5 1 9, 7 1 9-2 3; mean­
ing of, 1 56, 1 73 , 720
affection, 5 1 2 , 533; and self, 2 57-60
affinity: law of, 598-601 , 657; transcendental, 2 3 5-36, 240
agreement and opposition, 367, 369
Albinus, 746
Alexander the Great, 628
algebra, 641, 751
Allison, Henry E., 7 1 7
Alquie, Ferdinand, 744
alteration, 303-5, 3 14-16; continuity of,
292-93, 3 1 5-16; reality of, 1 65-66,
1 82-83; requires perception of motion,
3 3 5-36; and time, 1 79-80
amphiboly of concepts of reflection, 1 3 ,

366-83

analogies of experience, I I-I2, 55-56,
295-32 1 , 729-30; separation from tran­
scendental deduction, 6 1
analogy, 602, 619, 729
analytic and synthetic judgments, see
judgment
analytic and synthetic methods, 3 2-33,

68-69, 45 1 , 7 1 7

analytic, transcendental,

4-5, 8-1 3, 14,
62-63, 201-383, 345, 3 58; distinction
from dialectic, 1 97-200; division into
analytic of concepts and principles,

729

ity; soul; space; time
appearance: contrast to illusion, 1 9°-91 ;
contrast to things in themselves, 36,

3 8-40, I I 5-16, 1 59-62, 163-7 1 ,
1 76-78, 1 80-92, 2 30, 276-77, 305-6,
340, 347-48, 3 5 2 , 356, 364, 3 7 5 , 3 8 1 ,
5 1 1 , S I S; meaning of, I S S , 1 72 ; only
object of a priori cognition, 2 3 5-36,
243-44, 263-64, 345, 3 58; see also

Phenomena
apperception (transcendental, transcen­
dental unity of): as condition of possi­
bility of experience, 2 2 5, 434-6; in
deduction, as ground of all necessity,

7 1 , 2 3 1-38, 24°-44, 246-5 2 , 725, 726;
54-5; eliminated from
Prolegomena, 69; empirical and pure,
2 3 7, 246-7, 25°-1; and inner sense,
1 89-90, 2 50, 2 57-60, 2 76, 2 8 1 , 2 96-97;
and interaction, 3 1 9; and judgment,
2 5 1-52; objective contrasted to subjec­
tive, 2 50-52; in paralogism of pure rea­
son, 419, 42 3-24, 441 , 451-52, 666;
presupposes a manifold, 250; principle
of is analytic, 248-49; and synthetic
judgment, 2 8 1 -82; and time-determi­
nation, 2 96-97, 3 2 0; see also conscious­
early theory of,

ness
apprehension, synthesis of, 2 2 8-29,
26 1-62, 2 89, 2 9 1 ; is always successive,

300, 305, 306-8, 3 1 1-12
a priori (cognition): criteria of, 1 3 7-38;
meaning of, 1 3 6-37, 7 1 6-17; see also

cognition; judgment
Aquinas, Saint Thomas, 743
architectonic: of pure reason, 1 9, 502,
627, 691-701; and structure of Critique,

201-3

Anselm, Saint, 1 7, 26
anthropology, 14, 542, 696,
anticipations of perception,

I05; i n inaugural dissertation, 3 7-3 8; in
1 770s, 57-60, 63-64; mathematical and
dynamical, 1 6-17, 530-32 ; meaning of,
4IO, 467-69; solution to, 479-95 . See
also conditions; God; infinity; simplic­

3-6

Arcesilas,
Aristotle,

700
I I , 290-95,

antinomy o f pure reason,

5, 14, 1 6-17, 56,
459-550, 6 1 3 , 743-45; arrangement of,
775

704
I06, 2 1 2, 2 1 3, 3 7 1 , 395, 703,
7 3 3-34, 739, 745, 749, 755, 756
arithmetic: method of, 63 1-43; as syn­
thetic a priori cognition, 144

Index
assistance, supernatural, see occasionalism
association, 2 2 9-30, 2 3 5-36, 2 39-40, 657,
659
astronomy, 3 5 1 , 3 6 3 , 7 1 5- 1 6
atheism, 1 1 9, 558, 644

Attempt to Introduce the Concept ofNegative
Magnitudes into Philosophy, 2 8 , 34-5
axioms: in mathematics, 2 8 8-89, 640-41 ;
none i n philosophy, 640; subreptic,
44-45, 58
axioms of intuition, I 1 , 2 86-89, 729

Babel, Tower of, 6 2 7, 750
Bacon, Francis, 91, 108
Baumeister, Friedrich Christian, 748
Baumgarten, Alexander, 2 , 4, 5 , 14, 2 5 ,
2 6, I 56n, I 7 3n, 705, 706, 707, 7 1 1 ,

7 14, 720, 7 3 7 , 7 3 8 , 7 3 9 , 742, 743, 744,
745, 746, 747, 7 5 2 , 756
Bayle, Pierre, 709
beauty, 708, 7I I - 1 2
Beck, Jakob Sigismund, 7 2 8
Beck, Lewis White, 705, 707, 7 1 8
Beiser, Frederick c . , 705, 7 1 3
belief, 684-90; contrast to knowledge and
opinion, 646, 684-90; doctrinal, 687;
moral, 688; negative, 690; pragmatic,
687; see aIm faith
Bennett, Jonathan F., 706
Bentley, Richard, 743
Berkeley, George, 67-68, 70, 7 2 , 709, 7 2 3 ,
7 2 8, 7 3 9 ; dogmatic idealism of, 3 2 6
biology, 6 1 2 , 692, 7 2 7, 750, 7 5 5
body, 1 30-31 , 141-42, 5 2 9, 6 6 3 , 698; relation to soul, 16, 432-39
Bonnet, Charles, 604, 750
Boscovic, Rudjer, 744
Brandt, Reinhard, 706
Brucker, Johann Jakob, 397, 7 3 7
canon o f pure reason, S , 1 9, 65, 672-90,
753-54
categories (pure concepts of understand­
ing), 201-66; as conditions of the possi­
bility of experience, 48-5 5, 2 2 6-28,
2 34- 36, 2 3 8, 2 4 1 , 244, 2 64-65 , 345-46,
3 5 8-59; definition and meaning of, 4,
8-9, 2 1 3-14, 2 2 6, 2 5 2 , 2 56, 342, 344,
3 5 7 ; discovery of problem of, 48; and
ideas of reason, 399-400, 402, 406, 4 1 3 ,
445, 459, 46r, 464; as laws for nature,
2 63-44; mathematical contrasted to dy­
namical, 2 1 5, 5 3 1 ; metaphysical deduc­
tion of, 2 1 0-1 2 , 2 6 1 , 7 2 7 ; and
non-being, 3 82-8 3 ; and principles of
pure undersranding, 278-79; of rda­
tion, 724; schematism of, 10-1 I ,
2 7 1-77; table of, 8, 2 I 2 ; transcendental

776

deduction of, 60-63 , 68-70, 1 0 3 ,
2 1 9-66, 734-35, 7 2 7 ; and unity of
space and time, 2 6 1-62; and unity,
truth, and perfection, 2 1 6-18; use re­
stricted to appearances, 2 76-77, 2 98,
3 34, 3 39-42, 345-46, 348-49, 3 5 0-5 2 ,
3 5 5-65, 3 79-8 1 , 659-60
causality, 2 1-2 2 , 3 5 , 3 04-1 6, 463, 484-90,
654-58, 667-68, 7 1 8, 730; a priori con­
cept of needs deduction, 2 2 3 ; category
of, 2 1 2 , 2 14, 2 1 5, 2 3 5, 262-63, 265,
343, 3 5 7; first, 475, 484-90; and free­
dom, 463-64, 484-90 , 5 3 2-46; not
property of things in themselves, I I S ;
particular laws of, 30-3 I; and percep­
tion of motion, 3 3 5-36; and postulate
of necessity, 3 2 9-30; proof of, I I ,
304- 1 6, 730; schema of, 10, 2 7 2 , 2 7 5 ;
simultaneous with effect, 3 1 2- 1 3 , 730;
and synthetic judgment, 1 3 1-3 2 ; uni­
versal law of, 4, 45, 304, 654, 730
certainty, 684-90; in mathematics,
630-3 1 , 641
character, empirical versus intelligible,
5 3 5-3 7, 541, 544-45
chemistry, 59 1-92, 7 1 5, 742-53

chronometer, 638, 7 5 2
Chrysippus, 7 5 0
Cicero, 6 1 5 , 750
Clarke, Samuel, 706, 707, ] 2 2 , 7 3 3
coexistence, see simultaneity
cogito, see 'I think'
cognition: a priori, 2-3, 70, 102, 1 10-1 3 ,
1 2 7-29, 1 3 2 , 2 2 1-2 3 , 2 3 5-36, 243-44,
399, 7 1 6, 7 1 7-18; contrast to belief and
opinion, 684-90; contrast between em­
pirical and a priori, 1 3 6-37, 1 9 3 ; empir­
ical, 695, 700- 1 , 7 1 6; historical, 693;
limits of, 1 3 , 622, 636; in mathematics,
synthetic a priori, 143-45; objective re­
ality of, 2 8 2 ; rational, 92-96, 702-3; re­
quires both intuitions and concepts, 1 3 ,
I S S , 1 7 2 , 193-94, 199, 2 24, 2 5 3-56,
260, 264, 3 34-3 5 , 344, 3 5 2-5 3 , 3 64-65;
requires synthesis, 2 10-1 I ; of self, 62,
2 5 9-60, 3 3 7, 4 1 2- 1 5 , 42 1 , 4 2 3 , 442,
445, 453; time and space as sources of,
1 66-67, 1 70-7 1 , 1 83-84, 1 87-88; tran­
scendental, 1 3 3, 196, 7 I 7
color, 1 6 1 , 1 78, 2 9 2 , 295
combination, 245-49, 2 58, 262, 2 85-86n
community, 3 1 6-19, 3 3 6; category of,
2 1 2 , 2 1 5-16, 343, 3 58; proof o£
3 1 6-19, 730; schema of, 2 7 5 ; between
soul and body, 433-34, 436-3 7, 6 1 1 - I 2 ;
between substances, 463 , 659; see also
interaction
concepts: deduction of a priori, 2 1 9-2 3 ,

Index
2 2 6-28; definition of, 2 30, 399; empiri­
cal vs. pure, 3 2 3 , 399; and existence,

3 2 5-26, 563-69; as functions of judg­
205-6; and intuitions, 37-38,
45-46, 1 55, 1 7 2 , 193, 204-5, 224,
2 5 3-55, 3 34-35, 341, 3 56, 3 7 7-8 1 , 5 5 1 ,
622; in mathematics, 63 1-40; o f reason,
394-404; schematism of, 2 7 1-77; sensi­
ble and intellectual, 3 5 1 , 363; synthesis
of recognition in, 230-34; thoroughgo­
ing determination of, 553-59, 746; see
also categories; deduction
conditions: series of, 400, 461-67, 506-8,
5 14-16; and unconditioned, I 1 2 , 400,
464-65, 506-8, 530-32
consciousness: of self, 49, 54-55, 7 1 ,
3 2 7-29, 41 1-25; unity of, 61-62, 65,
2 3 1-36, 240, 246-49, 2 5 3 ; see also
ments,

apperception
conservation, principle of, 45, 299
constitutive principles, as opposed to reg­

45, 520-25, 547, 552, 5 76-78,
591-92, 602-4, 606-2 3
construction: of concepts, 630-3 1,
639-40; i n mathematics, 158, 630-34
contingency, 463-64, 490-95, 546-59,
5 70-72
continuity: of change, 3 1 5-16; of magni­
tudes, 292-93, 529-30, 600; maxim of,
598-600, 604, 749-50; of sensation,
291-94
ulative,

459-60

Diogenes Laertius, 108, 7 I 5
discipline of pure reason, 5, 1 8-19,

contradiction, principle of: and analytic
judgments, 1 30, 141, 143 -45, 2 79-8 1 ;
not sufficient for real possibility,

62 8-7 1

discursive proof, 64 I
divisibility, of matter in space,

5 2 8-30

3 2 3 -25, 5 5 3
conviction, 684

Conway, Anne (Finch), Viscountess, 744
Copernicus, Nicolas, 70, l IO, I qn., 3 5 1 ,

3 6 3 , 7 1 5-16

copula, function of, 25 I-5 2 , 567
Cordemoy, Geraud, 740
cosmological proof of the existence of
God, 1 7-18, 29, 475, 490-95, 563,

476-83 ,

dogmatism, 2-3, 1 3 ,

19, 9'}-IOO, I I'}-20,
148, 430, 498, 527, 6 16, 653-58, 704
Dreams of a Spirit-Seer, 3 5
dualism, 1 5-16, 425-26
duration, 301

dynamical principles, as opposed to math­
ematical, 2 84-86, 297-99, 487, 5 30-32 ,

547, 745

569-75, 747-48

cosmology, rational,

14, 1 6- 1 7, 64, 406,
44° , 459-67, 606- 10, 6 1 3 , 698-99, 737,
742-45, 755-56
Cratylus, 739
critique: definition of, 1 0 1 , 1 3 2-3 3, 149,
643, 649, 65 3-58, 700-1, 700-4; divi­
sion of, 1 34-35 , 149-5 2 ; as propaedeu­
tic, 700
Critique ofJudgment, 14, 18, 24, 30, 66
Critique of Practical Reason, 14, 2 2 , 27, 66
Crusius, Christian August, 24, 27, 3 3 , 3 5
Darjes, Joachim Georg, 4, 748
deduction, of categories, 8-9, 103,

(in first edition, 2 19-44; in second edi­
tion, 2 1 9-26, 245-66), 2 7 2-73, 7 2 5-27;
empirical versus transcendental,
2 I 9-2 I , 2 2 5-26; history of, 60-63,
68-70; of ideas, 399-408; metaphysical
deduction of categories, 8, 10, 2 10-1 2 ,
261; need for transcendental, 2 2 2-2 3;
objective and subjective, 103; and space
and time, 2 20-2 1
definition: in mathematics and in philosophy, 3 2-3 3, 637-41 ; theory of, 75 1-52
deism, 584, 588, 608
Democritus, 704
demonstration, 641-42
Descartes, Rene, 2, 20-2 1 , 734, 7 3 9; and
cogito, 415, 453, 739, 741 '-42; and onto­
logical proof, 1 7, 26, 569, 747; and
problematic idealism, 72, 3 2 6, 425-26
determination: complete, of concepts,
553-59, 746; and determinable (matter
and form), 367, 369-70; see also time
determinism, 27, 484-89
dialectic, transcendental, 29, 3 84-623;
distinction from analytic, 197-200, 267;
early forms of, 57-60, 62-65; logical
versus transcendental, 3 84-87, 7 3 5-3 7;
meaning of, 384, 393, 605-6, 622-2 3 ;
structure of, 4-5, 1 3-18, 405-8, 440,

2 10-66

Eberhard, Johann August, 7 1 4, 7 1 7,
empiricism, 2, 19, 498-99, 646, 703

718

ens entium, 557, 583
ens imaginarium, 3 8 3
ens originarium, 5 5 7, 5 8 3
ens realissimum, 556-57, 570, 5 7 1 , 572,
583
ens summum, 5 5 7
enthusiasm, 1 19, 226
Epicurus, 2 9 1 , 448, 498, 501, 702 -3 , 729,
744
epigenesis, of pure reason, 265, 7 2 7
Erdmann, Benno, 74-75, 7 1 I , 7 1 4
ether, 7 3 I
..

777

Index
Euclid, 7 1 5 , 75 I
examples, use of, 103-4, 2 68-69
existence: cognition of, 2 97; not given by
concepts, 3 2 5-26, 343, 3 58; necessity
of, 3 2 9-30; and ontological argument,
1 8 , 564-69
experience, 6-7, 7 1 6; analogies of, 2953 2 1 ; and a priori cognition, 1 2 7-28,
1 3 6-3 8; conditions of possibility of,
2 2 1-25, 2 26-2 8, 2 34-36, 241 , 2 64-65,
2 7 2-7 3, 2 82-83, 3 1 1 , 345, 3 58-59; and
empirical intuition, 2 5 5-57; as limit to
cognition, 340-41 , 3 5 5-56, 5 1 1-14;
unity of, 58-60, 2 3 3 , 2 34-36
experiment, 469
explanation, 639, 661
extensive magnitude, 2 86-89
faith, I 1 7 , 500, 684-89; see also belief
False Subtlety of the Four Syllogistic Figures,
28-29

fatalism, I I 9, 750
Feder, Johann Gottlieb Heinrich, 67, 7 1 3 ,
714
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, 706
Fontenelle, Bernard de Bouvier de, 744
force, 659, 666
form, 1 56, 1 7 3 ; contrasted to matter, 367,
369-70
Forster, Eckart, 707
Frederick II (the Great), 7 1 4
freedom, 1 1 5-1 7, 4°5, 4° 7, 484-89, 5°9,
649, 673, 675, 678; of communication,
1 9, 649-5 2 ; possibility of, 5 3 2 -46;
senses of, 484-85 , 5 3 3 , 675-76; see also
will, freedom of

functions, see judgment; understanding
future life, 454-56, 674, 676, 680-8 1 ,
689-90, 702 ; see also immortality

Galilei, Galileo, I08, 7 1 5
Garve, Christian, 67, 7 2 , 7 1 3 , 7 1 4
Gehlen, A . F., 7 1 5
generatio aequivoca, 6 9 2 , 7 5 5
Geulincx, Arnold, 740
genera, maxim of, 595, 597
geometry, 7 1 5, 751; certainty of, 43;
method of, 63 1-43; and pure intuition
of space, 1 58, 1 76; and synthesis of
productive imagination, 2 88; as syn­
thetic a priori cognition, 145, 1 70-7 I ,
1 8 7-88, 2 2 1 , 632-35, 7 1 9; see also
mathematics
God, 1 1 7- 1 8, 5 1 7, 550, 558 , 583 -89,
607-8, 6 1 3-15, 6 20, 644, 645, 649-50,
702; belief in, 1 9, 684-90; concept of,
4°6-8, 5 5 1 -59, 756-47; as highest orig­
inal good, 680, 682; and moral laws,

778

584-85; a s postulate o f pure reason,
1 1 7, 585-89, 681-8 2 , 688; proofs of ex­
istence of, 1 4-1 5, 1 7-18, 26, 29-30, 3 1 ,
3 3 , 64, 559-83, 587-89, 745-47; and
space and time, 1 9 1-2; see also belief;
cosmological proof; faith; ontological
proof; physico-theological proof; pur­
pose
Gram, Moltke, 7 I 3
Gravity, I I 3n, 2 9 1 , 2 93-94, 3 5 1 , 363

Groundwork of the Metaphysics ofMorals,

14, 1 9, 66
Guyer, Paul, 707, 708, 7 1 3

Hagen, Carl Gottfried, 7 I 5
Haller, Viktor Albrecht von, 5 5 7, 7 3 5 ,
748
Hamann, Johann Georg, 7 5 2
happiness, 674, 6 7 7 , 679, 680-82
Hartley, David, 7 5 2
Haywood, Francis, 76
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 706
Heidemann, Ingeborg, 76
Helmont, Francis Mercurius van, 744
Heraclitus, 739
Hercules, Pillars of, 439, 740
Herz, Marcus, 46--9, 5 3 , 66, 7 I O,
7 I I-7 I 2 , 7 2 2 , 724
highest good, 680-82
Hill, John, 74S
history, 678, 683, 693 , 697; of philosophy,
683, 702-4; of pure reason, 6, 1 9,
702-4
Hobbes, Thomas, 70S, 7 5 3
Home, Henry, Lord Kames, 7 1 5
homogeneity, maxim of, 594-96, 598
Burne, David, 2, 12, 1 8, 20-2 I, 2 3-24,
35, 1 3 8 , 146, 2 2 5-26, 646, 647, 654- 5 7 ,
704, 705, 708, 709, 7 14, 7 I S, 7 1 9 ,
748-49, 7 5 2 , 7 5 3 , 756
hypothesis, 65 8-65
hysteron proteron rationis (UOTEQOV
rrQo"tEQOV rationis), 6 I 7-IS, 750

ideal: of highest good, 680-S2 ; of pure
reason, 5, 14, 1 7-18, 63-65, 4IO,
5 5 1-89
idealism, kinds of, 67-68, 1 1 9, U Ill , 3 26,
425-26, 43 °, 451, 5 1 1 ; refutations of,
1 2 , 1 5-16, 26-27 I 2 I-22n, 3 2 6-29,
425-3 1, 7 I O, 7 1 6, 7 2 7, 730, 743; see also
idealism, transcendental
idealism, transcendental, 7-8, 1 2 , 36, 40,
42-43 , 68, 1 5 9-7 1, 1 76--9 2 ; meaning
of, 5 I 9; use to resolve antinomies,
16- 1 7 , 2 7 , 5 I I-I4
ideality, of space and time, 42-43, 46-47,
1 5 9-7 1 , 1 76-92 , 5 u , 5 1 9, 7 I O

Index
ideas, of reason, 395-408, 605-6, 622-2 3,
669; cosmological, 463-67; deduction
of, 399-408; meaning of, 395-99, 5 5 1 ;
system of, 405-8, 463-67, 606; use of,

18, 52 0-24, 590-62 3 , 691-701

identity: and analytic judgment, 1 30; and
difference, 367-69; of indiscernibles,
368, 3 72-73; of person, 422-25, 446,
45 1 ; of self, 2 3 5-3 7, 246-48
illusion, 736; opposed to appearance,
190-91 , 3 84-85; dialectical, 1 98-200,

267, 3 84-87, 439-44, 5 19, 590, 6 70
399 , 402, 499, 5 2 9; original, 552,
557, 607; and schema, 2 73-74
imagination: and causation, 304-5,
3 1 I-u; definition of, 2 56; function of,
in synthesis, 2 1 I , 2 2 5, 2 3 6-39, 256-57,
2 8 1 , 2 88-89; distinguished from experi­
ence, 3 1 2 , 3 2 6, 3 2 8-29; and hypothe­
ses, 659; productive and reproductive,
2 3 8-41 , 657, 725; role in schematism,
2 7 3-74; and synthesis of reproduction,
2 2 8-3 0 , 2 36, 2 39, 401
immateriality of soul, 4 1 7-2 2 , 449-56,
644
Immortality, 1 5-16, 405-7, 414, 4 1 7-2 2,
449-5 1, 454-56, 644-45, 649-50, 673,
689; see also future life
impenetrability, 3 2 8
imperatives, 540-42, 680
imputability, 486, 540-45
indifferentism, 2-3, 19, 100
inference, of reason, 1 5-18, 389-93
infinity: in the antinomies, 470-75,
5 1 7-3 0, 6 1 3 , 742, 744; concept of, 472,
5 2 1 , 6 1 3 , 742; of space and time,
471-5; of supreme being, 589, 745
influence (influx), physical, 26, 44,
436-37, 7 39-40
inner and outer, 367, 369, 3 7 3-74, 378
image,

inner sense: and apperception, 257-60,

2 76, 296-97; and outer sense, 1 5 7 , 1 74,
6 1 2 ; and synthesis of apprehension,
228; time as form of, 1 65-66, 1 79-80,
281
Inquiry concerning the Distinctness ofthe
Principles of Natural Theology and
Morality, 2 8, 3 1-34
insight, 500, 5 5 3
intellect, logical versus real use of, 3 9-40;
see also understanding
intellectual philosophers, 702-3
intelligible world, 43-44, 475, 5 32-46,
680-84
intensive magnitude, 290-95, 729
interaction, 1 I-12, 44, 55, 3 16-19; see also
community
intuition: contrast to concepts,

1 55, 1 72,
7 79

193, 204-5, 2 1 1 , 22 1-22, 224, 2 5 3-56,
3 44, 3 7 8-81 ; empirical, 5 1 , 2 54-56,
290-95; intellectual, 2 5 3 , 2 56, 3 5 1 ,
3 6 1 , 363; i n mathematics, 5 2 , 144, 158,
1 66-7 1 , 1 76, 1 83-84, 187-88, H I ,
63 3-34; meaning of, 36, I S S , 1 72 , 399,
709, 720; necessary for cognition,
1 93-94, 1 99-200, 2 5 3-56, 341, 3 56,
622, 63 3-34; needs to be synthesized,
2 2 8-30, 254-5, 258, 261-2; objects
conform to, I 1O- 1 I ; precedes thinking,
246; pure, 5 1 , 1 56, 1 73 , 193, 2 36, 3 8 2 ,
63 3-34; a s relations, 188-89; space and
time as pure forms of, 41-44, 157-61,
162-64, 1 65-66, 1 7 1 , 1 74-75 , 1 7 7-78,
1 78-79, 1 80-8 1 , 1 82-83, 261-2, 634,
720; and synthetic judgment, 5 1-52; see
also axioms of intuition; concepts; cog­

nition; representation; sensibility
'I think', 246, 249, 260, 41 2-1 3 , 415,

419,
42 2, 440-41 , 445-48, 457, 564; see also
apperception

Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich, 752
Jakob, Ludwig Heinrich, 723
Jasche, Gottlob Benjamin, 706
judgment: aesthetic, 1 56, 1 7 3 , 706; affirmative and infinite, 207-8; amplitica­
tory and clarificatory, 1 30, 141; analytic
and synthetic, 6, 25, 26, 29, 3 3-34,

5 1-53 , 1 30-32 , 141-43, 146, 2 79-8 3 ,
3 5 2 , 364-65, 564, 63 2-37, 656-57; and
apperception, 2 5 1-52 ; definition of,
245, 2 5 1-52 ; of experience and of per­
ception, 69, 142; faculty of, 29, 268-70,
390, 6 5 1 , 7 1 0, 7 2 8; grounds and causes
of, 685-90; ground of truth and error,
3 85; highest principle of analytic,
279-8 I ; highest principle of synthetic,
2 8 1-83 ; logical functions of, 8-9, 29,

205-ro, 226,

344;

modality of, 209- IO;

principles of, 4-56, 267-3 3 7 , 660, 7 2 8;
of relation, 208-9; singular and univer­
sal, 207; and synthesis, 2 1 1-12; and un­
derstanding, 204-6, 2 76-78
knowledge, contrasted to belief and opin­
ion, 500, 646, 584-90; see also cognition
Kiesewetter, Johann Gottfried Carl
Christian, 7 3 I
ECnutzen, �artin, 26, 739
Kuehn, �anfred, 705, 7 10
Lambert, Johann Heinrich,

46-47, 505,
7 1 1 , 72 1-2 2 , 7 3 2 , 744-45
Lavoisier, Antoine, 7 1 5, 752
laws: civil, 388-89; o f freedom (moral
laws), 485, 5 3 2-35, 540-42, 674-84; of

Index
laws:

(cant.)

nature, 242-43, 263-64, 2 8 3-84,
485-89, 5 3 2-35
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 20-2 I ,
2 3-29, 3 3 6, 473, 569, 57°, 6°4, 606,
6 1 8 , 703, 706, 7 2 2 , 7 2 3 , 7 2 8 , 7 3 2 , 7 3 3 ,
7 3 4 , 7 3 8 , 739, 7 4 I , 742, 7 4 3 , 744, 746,
747, 748, 749-50, 754; critique of his
monadology, 1 2 , 1 3 , 26-27, 3 69-70,
3 7 1-75, 3 7 7-79, 480; on identity of in­
discernibles, 368, 3 72-73, 3 7 7; princi­
ples of nature and grace, 680, 754; on
space and time, 7, 2 8, 3 5-36, 42, 167,

1 83-84, 374-75, 722
Leibnizian-Wolffian philosophy, 2 , 5, 1 3 ,
14, 2 3-2 5, 3 1-3 2, 16 � 1 86, 3 7 3
Locke, John, 2 , 6, 20, IOO, 2 2 I , 2 2 5-26,
3 7 2 , 703, 705, 706, 707, 7 1 4, 7 2 2 , 7 2 5 ,
729, 734, 738, 7 3 9 , 7 5 2 , 7 5 3 , 7 5 6
logic: division into analytic and dialectic,
1 97-200; general as opposed to special,
3-4, 1 94-95, 7 2 3 ; general as opposed
to transcendental, 4, 8-1 3 , 1 9 5-99, 2 lO,
267, 269, 2 8 I ; pure as opposed to ap­
plied, 1 94-95, 627-28; and reason,
389-93; as a science, lO6-7
logon aergon (AOYOV aEQYov), 6 1 5-16, 660,
75°
Longuenesse, Beatrice, 706
Lucian of Samosata, 72 3-24
magnitude: categories of, 2 1 2 , 2 1 5, 285,
342, 344, 3 5 7; construction of, 6 3 2 ; dis­
crete and continuous, 292-93, 5 2 9-30,
600; extensive, 2 86-89, 7 2 9; intensive,
290-95, 729; and··outer sense, 3 3 6;
schema of, 2 74-75; see also quantity
Mairan, ].]. Dortous de, 493-95, 744
Malebranche, Nicolas, 2 I , 740
materialism, I I 9, 43 I , 433, 4 5 1
mathematical principles, as opposed to
dynamical, 2 84-86, 297-99 , 487,
5 30-3 2 , 547, 745
mathematics: and divisibility of space,
479; knowledge of requires empirical as
well as pure intuition, 2 54-55; method
of, contrasted to philosophical method,
5, 19, 3 1-34, 630-643, 709, 7 1 7, 7 1 8,
7 1 9 ; pure and applied, 2 85, 505, 728; as
synthetic a priori cognition, 42-43, 5 2 ,
I07-8, 1 2 8-29, 1 3 8, 140, 143-45, 147,
1 66-67, 1 8 3-84, 2 26, 34I, 3 56, 505,
63 1-35, 640-43, 697-98; transcenden­
tal principles of, 2 84-86, 2 89-90,
2 90-95; see also algebra; geometry;
number
matter: contrasted to form, 367, 369-70;
divisibility of, 463-64; in nature, 3 75-6 ;

780

pure elements of, 591-92; and soul,
420-2 2 , 43 1
maxims, 6 8 I ; of reason, 594-6°4, 606, 645
mechanics, 3 7 3
Meikeljohn, John M.D., 76
Mendelssohn, Moses, 2 8, 3 1-3 2 , 46-47,
7°8, 7 I O, 7 I I , 7 1 4- 1 5 , 72 1-2 2 , 7 2 3 ,
7 3 8, 747; his argument for immortality,
449-52, 74°-41
metaphysical deduction of categories, see
deduction

Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science,

9, 62, 66-7, 69
metaphysics, 1 3 , 99-I02, lO9-14, 1 3 9,
146, 7 1 6; architectonic of, 696-99;
method of, 3 2-34, 44-45, 53°-43; pos­
sibility of, 2-3, 146-48
metaphysics of morals, 696, 7 1 7
metaphysics o f nature, lOS, 696, 7 I 7
method: contrast between analytic and
synthetic, 68-69; contrast between
mathematical and philosophical, s, 19,
3 1-34, 630-643, 709, 7 1 7, 7 1 8, 7 1 9 ;
doctrine of, 4 , 5, 1 8-19, 62 7-704; of
metaphysics, 3 3-34, 44-45, 696-99
modality: categories of, 9, 1 2 , 2 1 2 ,
2 14-1 5 , 3 2 2 ; o f judgments, 209-lO;
schemata of, 2 7 5-76, 3 2 I-3 3; see also
actuality; necessity; possibility; postu­
lates of empirical thinking
modus ponens, 669, 7 5 3
modus tollens, 669, 753
Molinos, Miguel de, 750
monads (monadology), 1 2 , 1 3 , 24, 26-27,
369-70, 3 73-75, 3 78, 479-8 I , 744
monotheism, 563
morality, 14, 3 3 , 469, 498-99, 585, 648,

700; and belief, 684-90; and freedom,
1 I 6-17; not based on happiness,
674-79; not included in transcendental
philosophy, 1 5 I; not based on will of
God, 682-84, 754; pure not empirical,
505, 5 5 2 , 585
moral world, 678-81
More, lIenry, 744
motion, 1 7 9-80, 167, 1 84, 2 58, 3 3 5-36,
3 78, 47 1-7 3 , 494, 60I , 666
Muller, Friedrich Max, 76

natural science, 505
naturalism, 703
nature, 485-89, 6 l O, 6 1 3 , 636; meaning
of, 465-67, 725, 727; purpose in,
578-83, 6 1 3-2 2, 645-46, 660-6 I ; as
sum of law-governed appearances,
2 1 -2 2 , 2 36, 241-42, 263-64, 3 20,
464-65 ; unity of, 454, 577-78, 6 l O-25 ;
see also laws

Index
necessary being, 490-95 , 509, 546-49,
559-78, 6 1 0
necessity: o f a priori cognition, 1 2 7-28,
1 3 7-3 8; in antinomy, 463-64, 466,
490-95; of apperception, 2 3 2-34; cate ­
gory of, 2 1 2 , 2 1 5, 343, 3 58; and causal­
ity, 265, 305, 307, 654-58, 667-68, 7 1 8 ;
and concept o f object, 2 3 1-] 2 ; i n cos­
mological argument, 546-49, 6 1 0; and
freedom, 5 3 3 ; of judgments, 209-10;
postulate of, 3 2 1 , 3 2 9-3 1 ; relation to
possibility, 3 3 0-3 2 ; schema of, 2 7 5 ; see
also modality

New Elucidation of the First Principles of

Metaphysical Cognition (Principiorum pri­
morum cognitionis metaphysicae nova delu­
cidatio), 1 7 , 2 3 , 2 5-2 8

negation: and schema of reality, 2 74-7 5,
2 9 1 , 382; and thoroughgoing determi­
nation of concept, 5 5 5
Newton, Isaac, 3 2 , 3 5 1-5 2 , 363-64, 706,
707, 7 2 2 , 743; on space and time, 7,
35-36, 42, 166-v67, 1 8 3-84
Nicolai, Christoph Friedrich, 7 1 4
nothing, table of the concept of, 383
notion, 399
noumena: distinguished from phenomena,
10, 1 2- 1 3 , 36, 7 2 , 3 3 8-65 (in first edi­
tion, 3 3 8-53 ; in second edition,
3 54-65), 447, 466, 5 1 0, 5 34-36,
73 2-3 3; positive and negative senses of,
1 3 , 349, 360-6 1 , 380, 709; as problem­
atic concept, 3 50-5 r , 3 80-8r
number: concept of, 2 I 5; construction of,
6 3 2 , 635, 638; infinitude of, 472,
5 2 9-30; and schematism, 2 7 3-74

object: and apperception, 2 3 1-34; and
cognition, 2 24-2 5 , 341, 356; empirical,
5 1 3 ; meaning of, 2 3 1 , 2 3 2- 3 3 , 249,
305, 3 1 0, 7 1 6; perception of requires
causality, 304-3 10; transcendental,
2 3 3-34, 345-46, 348, 3 59, 43 1 , 5 1 3 ,
725
objective validity, 342, 3 44-45, 3 8 1
Observations o n the Beautiful and Sublime, 3 5
occasionalism, 30, 436, 740
Ockham, William, 743, 749
Ockham's razor, 45, 595, 749

On the Differentiation of Regions in Space,
35-36

On the Form and Principles ofthe Sensible
and Intelligible World (De mundi sensibilis
atque intelligibilisforma et principiis) (in­
augural dissertation), 2 3 , 2 8 , 35-46, 59

Only Possible Ground of Prooffor a
Demonstration of the Existence of God, 1 7 ,
2 8 , J 3 , 64

781

ontological proof o f the existence o f God:
critique of, 1 7-18, 26, 29-30, 563-69,
749; relation to other proofs of exis­
tence of God, 1 7-18, 5 70-7 1 , 580
ontology, 14, 2 5-26, 698, 7 37, 7 5 5 ; re­
placed by analytic, 345, 3 5 8
opinion: contrast t o cognition and belief,
684-90; in philosophy, 659, 662, 664
opposition: analytical and dialectical,
5 1 7- 1 8 , 5 30; logical and real, 367, 369,
373
Opus p ostumum, 24
organism, 5 2 9-30
outer sense, and personality, 425-30; see
also space
Ovid, 99, 636
palingenesis, 6 1 2 , 750
paralogisms of pure reason, 5, 14, 1 5-16,
6 3 , 409-58; meaning of, 409, 447-48,
457-58, 666, 7 3 7; revision of, 7 2
Parmenides of Elea, 745
Pascal, Blaise, 755
Paton, Herbert James, 7 I 3
3�.s:, 1crz,
perception, �
3 2 7, 398, 7 1 6; and actuality. 325-22,;",see
also anticipation
erception
perfection, 2 16- 1 8
persistence: o f th e soul, 449-5 3; o f sub­
stance, 296, 2 99-304, 3 1 3-14, 3 2 7-2 8 ,

�

sOf!)

342-43, 3 5 7, 657, 660
Persius, Antonius Flaccus, 104, 704
personality, 422-25, 446, 455, 738-3 9
phenomena, distinguished from noumena,
10, 1 2- 1 3 , 36, 7 2 , 3 3 8-65 (in first edi­
tion, 3 3 8-5 3 ; in second edition,
3 54-65), 7 3 2-3 3 ; see also appearance
Philo of Alexandria, 746
Philoponus, John, 743
philosophy, 694-701, 7 1 6, 7 1 7; applied,
700; concepts of, 694; history of,
702-4; method of, 19, 3 2 -34, 630-43;
transcendental, 1 49-5 2 , 2 69-70, 3 8 2 ,

504-7
phlogiston, 7 I 5

Physical Monadology (Metaphysicae cum
geometria junctae usus in philosophica nat­
uralis), 2 8

physico-theological proof o f the existence
of God, 1 7-18, 29, 563, 578-83,
748-49
physiology, rational, 697-701 , 756
physics, as synthetic a priori cognition,
107, 109, 145, 147, 2 2 6
Plato, 1 2 9, 1 40, 395-98, 498, 501 , 5 1 7,
5 5 1-5 2 , 702-3, 7 3 7, 739, 744, 745, 746,
755
Platonism, o f the Middle Academy, 746

Index

Plotinus, 746
Poncius, Ioannes, 749
possibility: and ideal of reason, 5 5 3-59;
ontology as science of, 7 5 5 ; postulate
of, 3 2 1-25, 3 30-3 1 ; real as opposed to
logical, 30, 34-3 5, 3 2 3-2 5, 343-44,
3 58, 3 6 1 , 5 71-72, 73 1; relation to ne­
cessity, 3 30-3 2 3 ; schema of, 2 7 5 ; see also
modality; necessity
postulates: of empirical thinking, 298,
3 2 I-3 3 ; meaning of, 3 3 2 ; of pure prac­
tical reason, 1 1 6-17, 58 5-89, 681-8 2 ,
688

practical use of reason, I I4-17, 458,
498-50 1 , 662, 672-90, 749

predication and existence, 563-69
pre-established harmony, 30, 3 74, 436, 739
preformation system of pure reason, 265,
727

reason, 101-2, 104-5, 1 °9, 3 8 7-93, 444,
543, 691-70 1 ; apodictic use of, 592;
concepts of, 394-405; and dialectic, 5,
14-15, 3 8 7-4°5, 496-503; history of,
702-4; lazy (ignava ratio, AOYOV
CtEQYOV), 6 1 5-16, 660, 750; maxims of,
594-604; perverse (VU'tEQOV JtQO'tEQOV
rationis), 6 1 7-18, 750; necessarily sys­
tematic, I I 3-14; polemical use of, 64345, 663; practical as opposed to specula­
tive, 5, 14, 70, ro7, I I 2- 1 5 , I I 7, 458,
498-5 0 1 , 662 , 672-90, 749; relation to
understanding, 40-1 , 508-ro, 736
recognition, synthesis of, 2 2 8, 2 30-34, 2 3 6
reflection, transcendental, 366-68, 3 7 1
refutation o f idealism, 70-72, 1 2 1 -nn,
3 26-29; see also idealism, refutations of
regulative principles, opposed to constitu­
tive, 14, 1 8 , 45, 297-98, 5 2 0-24, 547,
552, 567-78, 591, 602-4, 606-23 ,

Priestley, Joseph, 646, 7 1 5 , 752-53
principles: constitutive versus regulative,

45, 297-98, 520-25, 547, 5 5 2 , 576-78,
5 9 1 , 602-4, 606-23; dynamical versus
mathematical, I 1 , 2 84-86, 297-99, 487,
530-3 2 , 547, 745; of empirical drink­
ing, ro- 1 3 , 278-3 3 7; theoretical versus
practical, 672-90; see also laws; maxims
probability, 384, 589, 638, 661-62, 736,
755
Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics, 9 ,
1 2 , 2 3 , 62, 66-7 1
proof: kinds of, 19, 641-43 , 668-7 1 ; in
mathematics and philosophy, 641-43,
665-7 1 ; see also God, proofs of the exis­

tence of
psychology: empirical, 4 1 5, 606, 61 1-1 3,
699-700; rational, 14, 1 5-16, 3 1 , 64-65,
4 1 1-25, 43 2-43 , 45 1-58, 606, 61 1-1 3,
6 1 8, 634-45 , 698-99, 73 7-42 , 755-56
purpose, 673-84; in nature, 578-83,
6 1 3-2 2, 645-46, 660-61

quality, categories of, 9, I I , 2 1 2 , 2 85, 295,
631

quantity: categories of, 9, I I , 2 I 2 , 2 1 5 ,
2 85, 6 3 1 ; discrete and continuous,
5 2 9-30, 600; schema of, 2 74
quietism, 750
Real Progress ofMetaphysics from the Time
of Leibniz and Wolff, 62
realism, transcendental and empirical,
42 5-430

reality: category of, 2 1 2 , 3 44, 3 8 2 , 5 5 5 ,
5 5 8, 568, 564-69; empirical, 42 5-30;
noumenal and phenomenal, 369; objec­
tive, 2 82, 3 3 5 ; schema of, 2 74-75,
290-95, 342-43, 3 5 7; see also actuality
782

659-60

Reid, Thomas, 705
relations: categories of, 9, I I , 1 5 , 5 5 , 2 1 2 ,
2 1 5-16; of judgments, 208-9; logical
and real, 7 3 0-3 ! ; space and time as,
1 88-89, 378-79; see also causality; com­
munity; space; time
religion, rorn, 498-99, 582, 647, 700
representation, 398-99; see also appear­
ance, concepts; ideas; intuition
reproduction, synthesis of, 2 2 8, 2 29-30,
236

right, concept of, 397, 639
Rorty, Richard, 707
Ross, W David, 734
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 24, 755
Rufus, Richard, 743
rules: 636, 7 1 6; in causality, 307-I I ; in
time-determination, 6 1 ; understanding
as faculty of, 242-43; see also concepts;
imperatives; laws; maxims; schemata
schemata: of concepts of the understand­
ing, 2 7 1-77, 63 1 ; definition of, 2 7 3 ; of
ideas, 691-92; see also Schematism
schematism of categories, 1 0-1 1 , 6 1 ,
2 7 1-77, 7 2 8 ; definition of, 2 7 3
Schmidt, Raymund, 74-5
Schultz, Johann, 7 1 3
Schiitz, Christian Gottfried, 7 1 5
Scotus, John Duns, 749
sciences, 62 7, 691-701
Segner, Johann Andreas, 144, 7 I 8
self: cognition of, 2 5 7-60, 3 2 7-29, 3 3 7,
4 1 2- 1 5 , 42 1 , 423, 444, 445, 463; con­
sciousness of, 61-62, 4I I-25, 445-''1:8;
see also apperception; consciousness;
inner self; soul

Index
sensation: definition of, 1 55, 1 7 2 , 398;
and intensive magnitude, 290-95; and
schema of reality, 2 74-75
sensibility: contrasted to understanding,
36-4 1 , 1 3 5, 1 5 5 , 1 ] 2 , 1 93-94, 2 5 7, 3 5 2 ,
364, 3 8 1 , 385; a s pure, 1 56, 1 7 3 ; and
schematism, 272-74; and transcenden­
tal reflection, 366-67
Shaftesbury, Anthony Ashley Cooper,
third earl of, 754-55
simplicity, of substance, 374, 3 78, 4 1 7-2 2 ,
442-43, 666-67
simultaneity, 296, 300, 3 1 2 , 3 1 6- 1 9
skepticism, 2 , 19, 99-100, 1 1 9, 148, 2 2 6,
430, 435, 652-58, 704; as method,
468-69, 508-14; refutation of, 652-58;
see also idealism, refutations of

Smith, Norman Kemp, 74-76
Solon, 704
soul: and body, 16, 420- 2 3 , 432-39, 663,
63 9-40; brute, 745; fundamental pow­
ers of, 593-94; immortality of, 405-7,
414, 4 1 7-2 2, 449-5 1, 454-56; and ra­
tional psychology, 1 5- 1 6, 65, 4 1 1-2 5 ,
445-58, 606, 6 1 1-1 3 , 660; substantial­
ity of, 4 1 5-17, 445-48; simplicity of,
4 1 7-22, 441-43, 446, 449-50, 660
space, 7-8, 35-36, 41-44, 1 5 7-62,
165-7 1 , 1 74-8, 1 82-92; in the antino­
mies, 470-84, 5 2 8-32; and geometry,
43, 1 58, 1 76, 288; infinite extension
and divisibility of, 16- 1 7 , 56, 1 59, 1 75,
47°-84, 5 2 8-3 2 , 720-2 1 ; Leibniz's view
of, 166-67, 1 83-84, 3 74-7 5, 3 78 -79,
7 2 2 , 7 2 3 , 743; as pure form of intu­
ition, 38, 42, 50, 1 5 7-58, 1 74-75,
42 5-30, 7 10, 720-2 I , 743; as pure intu­
ition, 42-43, 1 5 8-59, 1 7 5 ; objective re­
ality of, 2 82-83; and representation of
time, 2 5 9-60, 3 2 8, 3 3 5-36; and simul­
taneity, 3 1 7-19; and synthesis of under­
standing, 2 61-62; transcendental
ideality of, 56, 1 59-62, 1 7 6-78, 7 1 0;
and unity of apperception, 2 3 2, 2 34,
248-49n, 262; unprovability of empty,
293
specification, maxim of, 596-98
spontaneity: of apperception, 146; of
imagination, 2 57 ; of understanding,
193, 205, 242 , 245, 2 5 6
Stahl, Georg Ernst, 108, 7 1 5
Stoics, 5 5 2 , 750
Strawson, Peter F., 72 I
Stroud, Barry, 705
subject, thinking, 1 5-16, 41 1 - 1 3 , 4 1 5-17,
443, 4 5 1
substance, 2 99-304, 3 1 3-14, 463, 660,
729-30; action as criterion of, 3 I 3; cat-

783

egory of, t r , 2 1 2 , 2 1 5 , 2 56, 3 4 3 , 344,
3 5 7; and intelligible world, 43-44; as
monad, 369, 3 73-74, 3 7 7-78; needs in­
tuition of space, 3 3 5-36; possibility of
new kinds of, 3 24; schema of, 2 75; and
self, 4 1 3 , 41 5-17, 443; simplicity of,
374, 3 78, 463, 476-83 , 5 2 8-3°, 660; as
substratum of time, 29�3oo, 3 1 3; in
time-determination, 55-56, 2 99-304
substratum, of time, 2 9�3oo, 3 I 3, 72 9-30
succession, 296, 300, 304-3 16, 494, 5 I 2;
see also causality
sufficient reason, principle of, 2 5-26, 3 I I ,
665-66
Sulzer, Johann Georg, 46-47, 645,
72 I-22, 752 , 756
syllogisms: figures of, ]2 7; and ideas of
reason, 14-15, 63, 388-93, 403-4,

409-10, 4 1 1 , 4 1 5-16, 4 1 7 , 422, 425,
442-43 , 45 9, 5 14, 556-57, 562, 736,
746
Swedenborg, Immanuel, 7 3 1 , 7 5 3
synopsis, synthesis of, 2 2 5, 2 2 8-29
synthesis, 3 2 , 54-5; and combination,
245-46; exercised a priori, 2 2 9, 2 3 7-38,
2 40; of extensive and intensive magni­
tude, 2 86�95; figurative, 2 56, 2 5 8;
meaning of, 2 IO-I I ; necessary for cog­
nition, 2 1 0-I I , 2 2 5, 2 2 7-28; presup­
posed by analysis, 2 I O-I I , 246-47;
progressive and regressive, 459-6 2 ,
5 1 5 , 5 2 1-24, 526-27; pure and empiri­
cal, 2 1 0-I I; threefold (of apprehension,
reproduction, recognition), 2 2 8-34,
2 3 8, 241, 7 2 5 ; transcendental, 2 56, 6 3 3 ;
see also apIlrehension; combination;
recognition; reproduction
synthetic a priori knowledge, possibility
of, see cognition
synthetic judgment, see judgment
system, systematicity: in morality, 676-84;
in nature, 592-604; in philosophy,
591-92, 691-701, 7 1 6; of pure concepts
of understanding, 2 0 1 , 204; see also
unity, of reason

tables: of categories, 2 1 2 ; of the concept
of nothing, 3 8 3 ; of cosmological ideas,
464; of lOgical functions of judgment,
206; of paralogisms of pure reason, 443,
45 I; of principles of pure understand­
ing, 2 8 5
taste, 1 56, 1 7 3 , 720
teleology, 30, 578-83, 6 1 3-22, 645 -46,
660-6 1 , 672-84, 694-95
Terrasson, Jean, 104, 7 I 5
Tetens, Johann Nicolaus, 741 , 756
Thales of Miletus, 108, 7 1 5

Index
theism, 584, 644
theology: moral, 14, 1 9, 30, 5 84-85,
680-90; natural , 1 9 1 -92, 559-63, 584;
rational, 14, 1 7-18, 3 1 , 3 3 , 64-65, 406,
440, 559-89, 607-8, 6 1 3- 1 5 , 643-45,
698-99, 7 3 7 , 745-49, 755-56; transcen­
dental, 5 5 8, 563, 575-78, 5 8 3 ; see also
God
things in themselves: opposed to appear­
ances, 1 6-17, 36, 3 8-40, 1 1 2 - 1 3 ,
I I 5-16, 1 59-62, 163-7 1 , 1 76-78,
1 80-92, 2 76-77, 305-6, 340, 347-48,
3 5 � 3 75, 3 8 1 , 425-30, 5 1 6, 5 1 8, 5 2 3 ,
5 2 7 , 5 2 9, 548, 556, 664
thinking: as opposed to knowing, 449,
660; as opposed to sensing, 41 1 - 1 3 ,
44°, 448
thoroughgoing determination, principle
of, 5 5 3-56
time, 7-8, 41-44, 162-67, 1 7 8-84; and al­
teration, 1 79-80, 3 1 5-16; in antino­
mies, 1 6- 1 7, 3 7 , 462-63, 47°-76,
49°-95, 5 2 5-28, 5 36-38; continuity of,
3 1 5- 1 6; and contradiction, 1 80,
2 80-8 1 ; determination of order of, 48,
49-5 5, 63, 2 7 5-76, 2 86, 300-4, 306-8,
3 1 0-1 1 , 3 2 7 ; empty, 293, 303, 306; as
form of inner sense, 7 I, 2 7 2 ; as form of
intuition, 38, 4 1 , 1 6 2 , 1 78-79, 422-2 3,
7 1 0, 72 1-2 2 ; Leibniz's view of, 3 74-75;
modes of, 296, 300, 3 1 9; not immedi­
ately perceived, 2 86, 300, 306, 3 1 0,
3 1 6; objections to Kant's theory of,
46-47, 1 65-66, 1 82-83; objective real­
ity of, 2 8 2 ; as pure intuition, 41-42,
162-63, 1 79, 248-49n; represented by
spatial figure, 2 59-60; in schematism,
2 7 2-76; substratum of, 299-300, 3 1 3 ,
7 2 9-30; in transcendental deduction,
2 2 8, 2 34, 727; transcendental ideality
of, 42, 56, 163-68, 179-84; unity of,
3°3; and unity of apperception, 2 3 2 ,
2 6 1 -62
Toland, John, 754
Tonelli, Giorgio, 706
topics, transcendental, 3 7 1 , 7 3 3-34
Torricelli, Evangelista, 108, 7 1 5
totality, in antinomies, 400, 461-62,
476-83 , 509, 5 2 8-30, 5 3 8
transcendent: meaning of, 3 8 5-86; princi­
ples, 3 85-86, 392, 402, 549; see also
transcendental
transcendental: deduction of categories,
8-9, 10, 2 1 9-66, 7 2 5-27; definitions,
5 3 5-36; exposition, 1 76, 1 7 9-80; free­
dom, 484-90, 535-3 7 ; hyp othesis,
660-6 1 ; idealism, 7-8, 1 2 , 30, 40,
42-43 , 68, 1 59-7 1 , 1 76-92, 42 5-3 1 ,

784

5 1 1-14, 5 1 9, 534-35; illusion, 3 84-87;
meaning of, 1 3 3, 1 96, 340, 3 56,
3 85-86, 3 9 2 ; object, 2 3 3-34, 345-46,
348-49, 3 59, 43 1 , 5 1 3 , 55°, 7 2 5 ; phi­
losophy, 6-7, 504-7; proof, nature of,
19, 3 10-1 , 641-43 , 665-7 1 ; realism,
425-3 1 ; reflection, 366-68, 3 7 1 ; see also
deduction; idealism; ideality; object
truth: analytic as logic of, 267; meaning
and criteria of, 1 97-98, 2 1 6-18, 2 80,
384, 685; taking to be, 684-90; tran­
scendental, 2 76
typography, 76
unconditioned, the, 15, 1 1 2, 4°0, 464-65,
506-8, 5 30-2, 538
understanding: analysis of, 202-3, 2 2 7-28;
concepts of, 20 1-66; as faculty of judg­
ment, 205-6, 2 I 1-1 2; as faculty of
rules, 242-43, 268, 2 83-84; as faculty
of synthesis, 2 3 8, 242-43, 245, 248-49,
2 5 7-58; logical and real use of, 3 9-40;
and reason, 40-41 , 508-10, 590-3, 595,
598, 602-3, 736; and sensibility, 36-4 1 ,
1 3 5 , 1 5 5, 1 7 2 , 1 93-94, 3 5°, 3 5 2 , 362,
364, 381, 3 8 5; and transcendental re­
flection, 366-67; see also categories;
judgment
unity: analytical and synthetical, 247; of
apperception, 2 3 1-34, 2 3 6-3 7, 240,
246-48, 559; architectonic, 692 ; cate­
gory of, 2 1 2 , 2 1 5, 2 1 6-18, 248; of expe­
rience, 2 3 4-36, 600-1, 607, 610; of
intuition, 2 2 8-29; of nature, 454,
5 7 7-78, 6 1 0-2 5; and object, 2 3 1-34;
purposive, 614, 6 1 7- 1 8; of reason, 576,
593, 602-3 , 6°7, 610-1 1 , 6 1 7, 692 ;

technical, 692; see also apperception;

consciousness

Universal Natural History and Theory of the
Heavens, 2 8
universality: o f a priori judgments,
1 2 7-28, 1 3 7-38; and singularity of
judgments, 207

Vaihinger, Hans, 706, 7 1 2- 1 3 , 7 1 8
Virgil, 6 7 1
virtue, 6 5 2
Weischedel, Wilhelm, 76
whole, and parts, 476-83, 509, 5 2 8-30
Wilford, John Noble, 752
will, 5 5 2-34, 54°-41, 673-76, 745-46;
freedom of, 1 5 , 2 1-2 2 , 2 7, I I 6, 405,

4°7, 484-87, 53 2-46, 673, 67 5, 678;

745-56
wit, 596, 629, 749

Index
concept of, 460-66, 508-10, 609-10,
6 1 3 ; intelligible versus sensible, 347,
3 5 1 , 363, 475, 5 3 2-46; limits of,
462-6 3, 465-66, 47°-75, 5 °8-9,
5 2 5-28; series, 5 1 5-16, 5 2 5-30; see also
noumena; things in themselves

Wolff, Christian, Freiherr von, 2, 5, 17,
2 3-25, 693, 7°5, 7 10, 7 14, 7 2 2 , 7 3 7,
739, 740, 742, 744, 746, 747-48, 7 5 2 ,
754, 755, 7 5 6 ; see also Leibnizian­
Wolffian philosophy
Wolff, Robert Paul, 7 I 3
Wollner, Johann Christoph, 7 I 4
Wood, Rega, 749
world: beginning of, 47°-75, 5 2 5-28;

Zedlitz, Karl Abraham, Freiherr von, 7 1 4
Zeno o f Elea, 5 1 7, 709, 745

785

