Immanuel Kant
CRITIQUE
OF
PRACTICAL REASON

Translated by

Werner S. Pluhar
Introduction by

Stephen Engstrom
Hackett Publishing Company, Inc.
INDIANAPOLIS/CAMBRIDGE

Immanuel Kant: 1724-1804
The Critique of Practical Reason was originally published in 1788.
Copyright © 2002 by Hackett Publishing Company, Inc.

All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
08 07 06 05 04 03 02

12 3 4 5 6 7

For further information, please address:
Hackett Publishing Company, Inc.
P.O. Box 44937
Indianapolis, IN 46244-0937
www.hackettpublishing.com
Cover design by Listenberger Design & Associates

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Kant, Immanuel, 1724-1804.
[Kritik der praktischen Vernunft. English]
Critique of practical reason / Immanuel Kant; translated by Werner S.
Pluhar; introduction by Stephen Engstrom.
p.
cm.
Includes bibliographical references (p. ) and index.
ISBN 0-87220-618-1 (cloth) — ISBN 0-87220-617-3 (paper)
1. Practical reason. I. Pluhar, Werner S., 1940- . II. Title.
B2773.E5P59 2002
170—dc21
2002024148

The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American
National Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper for Printed
Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1984.

To Elissa,
Nina and Jarrett

CONTENTS

Dedication

v

Translator's Preface

xi

Introduction by Stephen Engstrom
1. The Place of the Critique of Practical Reason
within Kant's Critical Philosophy

xv

2. The Relation of the Critique of Practical Reason to
Kant's Ethics

xvi
xx

3. The Practical Purpose of the Critique of Practical Reason

xxvii

4. Showing the Practicality of Pure Reason
A. The Idea of a Principle of Practical Reason (§ 1 )
B. Theorems about Practical Principles (§§2-4)
C. Practical Laws and Freedom (§§5-6)
D. The Basic Law of Pure Practical Reason (§7)
E. Autonomy and Freedom (§8)

xxxii
xxxii
xxxvi
xxxix
xl
xliii

5. Can the Highest Principle of Practical Reason
Be Justified?

xliv

6. The Effects of Pure Practical Reason
A. Defining the Concept of an Object of Practical Reason
B. The Subjective Effects of Pure Practical Reason

xlvi
xlvi
xlviii

7. The Highest Good and the Antinomy of Practical Reason

xlix

8. Conclusion

liii

vii

CRITIQUE OF
PRACTICAL REASON

Preface

3

Introduction

23

On the Idea of a Critique of Practical Reason

23

PART I.

DOCTRINE OF THE ELEMENTS

27

OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

BOOK I.

ANALYTIC OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

29

On the Principles of Pure Practical Reason
Explication

29
29

Comment

29

§ 2.

Theorem I

32

§ 3.

Theorem II

33

Corollary

34

§ 4.

Comment I
Comment II
Theorem III

34
38
40

§5.
§ 6.

Comment
Problem I
Problem II

40
42
42

Chapter I.
§ 1.

Vlll

CONTENTS

§ 7.

§8.

I.
II.

Chapter II.

Chapter III.

BOOK II.

Chapter I.
Chapter II.
I.
II.
III.

IX

Comment
Basic Law of Pure Practical Reason

43
45

Comment

45

Corollary

46

Comment

46

Theorem IV

48

Comment I
Comment II

49
51

Practical Material Determining Bases

58

On the Deduction of the Principles of Pure
Practical Reason

60

On the Authority of Pure Reason in Its Practical
Use to an Expansion That Is Not Possible for
It in Its Speculative Use

69

On the Concept of an Object of Pure Practical
Reason

11

Table of the Categories of Freedom in Regard
to the Concepts of Good and Evil

88

On the Typic of the Pure Practical Power of
Judgment

89

On the Incentives of Pure Practical Reason

94

Critical Examination of the Analytic of Pure
Practical Reason

114

DIALECTIC OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

On a Dialectic of Pure Practical Reason as Such
On a Dialectic of Pure Reason in Determining
the Concept of the Highest Good
The Antinomy of Practical Reason
Critical Annulment of the Antinomy of Practical
Reason
On the Primacy of Pure Practical Reason in
Its Linkage with Speculative Reason

137

137
141
144
145
152

X

CONTENTS
IV.
V.
VI.
VII.

VIII.
IX.

PART II.

The Immortality of the Soul, as a Postulate of
Pure Practical Reason
The Existence of God, as a Postulate of
Pure Practical Reason
On the Postulates of Pure Practical Reason
as Such
How It Is Possible to Think an Expansion of
Pure Reason for a Practical Aim without Thereby
Also Expanding Its Cognition as Speculative
On Assent from a Need of Pure Reason
On the Wisely Commensurate Proportion of the
Human Being's Cognitive Powers to His
Practical Vocation

155
157
167

170
179

184

DOCTRINE OF THE METHOD OF PURE PRACTICAL
REASON

Conclusion

187

203

Selected Bibliography

206

Glossary

233

Index

243

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

Kant's second Critique is, for me as translator, the third; my first was the
Critique of Judgment1 (Kant's third), my second the Critique of Pure Reason.2 This sequence is no accident. Kant's third Critique was generally
agreed to be the one most in need of a new translation.3 The first was, by
comparison, in much better condition; of the available translations, that by
Norman Kemp Smith,4 although deficient in various respects, had served
scholars well for decades—even though, during the same time period, there
was a steadily and significantly increasing need by Kant scholars for greater
accuracy. The Critique of Practical Reason, on the other hand, has fared
best of all. Among the translations available until a few years ago, the most
favored was that by Lewis White Beck;5 his translation, apart from having
profited from Beck's profound familiarity with Kant's moral theory, was
1

With an introduction by Werner S. Pluhar and a preface by Mary J. Gregor Indianapolis,
Ind.: Hackett, 1987.
2

With an introduction by Patricia Kitcher. Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett, 1996. There is also an
abridged version of this translation, with an introduction by Eric Watkins. Indianapolis, Ind.:
Hackett, 1999.
3

In the mid-seventies, at Gnnnell College in Iowa, I was teaching a Kant course that included
the third Critique. Finding myself frustrated by the seeming impenetrability of much of the
material as I found it in the existing translations, I decided to delve into the German original—
and found, to my amazement, that the original was, on the whole, vastly clearer than the translations. By a fortuitous coincidence, the illustrious Lewis White Beck was visiting my department just then, and I expressed to him my frustration with the translations. His reaction was
quick and simple. "W^hy don't you translate the Critique of Judgment?" he replied. I was
stunned; the idea had never occurred to me. But it took hold, and I soon embarked on my first
major project of translating Kant.
4

London: Macmillan; New York: St. Martin's, 1929. 2nd impression with corrections. London: Macmillan; New York: St. Martin's, 1933, 1989.
5

Critique of Practical Reason, and Other Writings in Moral Philosophy. Translated and
edited, with an introduction, by Lewis White Beck. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,

xi

xii

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

praised for being extraordinarily easy to read. However, Beck had attained
this high degree of readability in part by sacrificing terminological consistency—even for key terms in Kant's philosophy—and thus, in effect, accuracy. This defect wasfinallyaddressed» with tremendous skill, in the recent
translation of the second Critique by another great expert in Kant's moral
theory: Mary J. Gregor.6 On close scrutiny of Gregorys excellent work,
however, I became convinced that even it still suffered from significant
problems that needed to be remedied.7 This new translation seeks to eliminate,
as much as possible, these remaining problems. In addition, its appearance
will make the three Critiques available, for thefirsttime, in uniform English
terminology.
This translation, like my previous ones, has profited immensely from
contributions made by two eminent Kant scholars: Professor James W.
Ellington, whose skill and sensitivity as a Kant translator I greatly admire,
and Professor Stephen Engstrom. Ellington's contributions are indicated
below. Engstrom's contribution is his exceedingly fine Introduction to this
volume.
This translation of Kant's Critique of Practical Reason is based on the
standard edition of Kant's works, Kants gesammelte Schriften, Königlich
Preußische Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin: G. Reimer; Berlin and
New York: Walter de Gruyter Sc Co. and Predecessors, 1902-), vol. 5,
edited, with introduction, variant readings, and factual elucidations, by Paul
Natorp (1908).
Like my two previous translations, this one also is copiously annotated.
Kant's own footnotes are distinguished from the translator's footnotes by
their larger print, by bold footnote and reference numbers, and by the ab[1949]. The Critique by itself 3rd ed., with notes. New York: Macmillan; Toronto; Maxwell
Macmillan Canada; New York: Maxwell Macmillan International, 1993; Upper Saddle River,
NJ.: Prentice Hall, 1993. For the other earlier translations of Kant's second Critique—those
by Thomas Abbott and Heinrich Cassirer (the latter published only recently)—see the Selected Bibliography.
6

Critique of Practical Reason. Translated and edited by Mary Gregor; with an introduction by
Andrews Reath. Cambridge Texts in the History of Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.

7

The defects, briefly, are the following. Gregor's appropriately heightened concern for accuracy has unfortunately resulted in a significant loss of readability: her grammar is often unclear
because of excessively convoluted sentence structure. Moreover, she frequently uses English
pronouns that, unlike their German originals, leave their referents ambiguous; and even she
commits occasional important but unnecessary terminological inconsistencies. Finally, in
some places Gregor simply misreads or misunderstands the German text.

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

xiii

sence of brackets. Translator's footnotes use smaller print, have no bold
numbers, and are bracketed. When a Kantian footnote has a footnote in
turn, this latter note is referenced by a lower-case letter, and its number is
the same as that of the original note but is followed by the lower-case letter.
Of the translator's footnotes, many contain references to other relevant
passages in the work and to other Kantian works; I owe most of these notes
to Ellington's kind efforts and keen expertise. Others provide references to
works by other authors, explanatory comments, variant readings, or translations (all of which are my own). Still other such notes concern terminology.
Of these, some explain or defend my renderings of certain German terms,
but most give the original German terms whenever an original term has been
translated rather freely or is otherwise of special importance or interest;
whenever terminological relationships between adjacent terms in the original
have either been lost or (seemingly) been created in translation; or whenever either the same German term is translated by different English terms or
different German terms are translated by the same English term in the same
context. The German terms are usually given in such footnotes not as they
appear in the original, but as they can be found—by interested readers—in
a modern German dictionary: viz., in their modern spelling, and the verbs in
the infinitive, the nouns in the nominative, etc.
References provided in this volume are given as follows. Page references in the table of contents are to the pagination of the present volume. In
footnotes, references to the text of the work are given by the page numbers
of the Akademie edition, which appear in the margins of this translation.
Similarly, references to footnotes give the Akademie edition's page containing the footnote's reference number, and then the footnote's number (or
number and lower-case letter) preceded either by 'n.' ('ns.' in the plural) or
by 4br. n.' ('br. ns.' in the plural)—respectively, for notes containing Kantian materials, or bracketed notes provided by the translator. References to
other works by Kant are also to the Akademie edition and are given as 'Ak.\
followed by volume and page numbers and, as applicable, by 'n.' for a note,
except that references to the Critique of Pure Reason follow the standard
format for that work, by indicating 'A' and 'B' (for the first and second original editions) and then the page numbers in those editions.
At the end of this volume will be found a Selected Bibliography, a Glossary of the most important German terms in the work along with my translations of them, and an Index.
Acknowledgments: In the course of translating the second Critique I frequently checked the translation by Mary Gregor, and occasionally also that

xiv

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

by Lewis White Beck. I am tremendously grateful to Professor James W.
Ellington for the contributions already mentioned, but especially for his
careful reading of the entire manuscript. Indeed, Ellington's contribution to
my translation of all three Critiques as a whole has been immeasurable. I
address sincerest thanks, once again, to the various members of Hackett
Publishing Company for their superbly professional and exceedingly
friendly collaboration at every stage of this project. My warmest and deepest gratitude is reserved for my wife, Dr. Elissa J. Hoffman, whose expertise
as a psychiatrist and writer has allowed me to share with her many philosophical and linguistic queries and qualms, and whose empathy and kindness have been immensely supportive to my project.
WERNER SCHRUTKA PLUHAR

The Pennsylvania State University
Fayette Campus, Uniontown

INTRODUCTION

The Critique of Practical Reason (1788) is the second of the famous three
Critiques that together form the core of Immanuel Kant's philosophical writings. In these works, Kant assesses the cognitive powers of the human mind
with the aim of expounding, justifying, and delimiting the use that can be
made of them a priori, or without the aid of experience. Each Critique investigates these capacities as they are employed in a different domain of activity. The Critique of Pure Reason (1781) examines the theoretical use of
reason in the natural sciences; the Critique of Practical Reason is concerned
with the use of reason in action, and in particular with the rational principles
of morality that govern human conduct; and the Critique of Judgment (1790)
considers the power of judgment as it is employed in our assessments of the
products of nature and of human art as beautiful or purposive.
The second Critique is largely a self-contained work, which may profitably be studied by readers who lack a detailed acquaintance with the other
Critiques. But as Kant is a systematic philosopher par excellence, a full appreciation of this work requires an understanding of the place it occupies
within his philosophical system. Of particular significance is the fact that
the second Critique carries to completion the momentous project Kant initiated in the first Critique of rethinking speculative metaphysics as it had
been practiced throughout the entire history of Western philosophy. Although the second Critique is of interest to many readers today mainly because of the light it throws on particular themes and issues within Kant's
ethical theory, Kant is grappling in this work with the much larger question
of how ethics and metaphysics themselves are related.
In addressing this larger issue, Kant is responding in part to a general
problem that had become pressing in his day and that has remained with us
to the present. Ever since the bloody religious conflicts of the Reformation
and the emergence of science and secular society in the modern period,
philosophers have looked for ways of providing a secure basis for morality
that is independent of the specific religious creeds and traditions that have

xv

XVi

INTRODUCTION

divided society and culture throughout the modern era. Others before Kant
had also sought solutions. Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz and his followers,
for example, endeavored to provide ethics with a rational metaphysical
foundation, and David Hume attempted to trace moral principles to an empirically discoverable source in human nature. Similar concerns have
moved others after Kant as well Many philosophers have been drawn to
more recently developed moral theories, such as the nineteenth-century
utilitarianism of Jeremy Bentham, John Stuart Mill, and Henry Sidgwick,
or the emotivist theories that were popular in the mid-twentieth century, because such theories seem well suited to a secular, scientific outlook.
In the second Critique Kant pursues this larger issue to its deepest level.
In addition to asking whether the principle of morality, the most basic standard of right and wrong, has its basis in experience or a priori in reason,
Kant takes on the question whether ethics depends on any antecedently accepted metaphysical view at all—be it a doctrine congenial to a traditional
religious faith or a modern, secular outlook tied to a thoroughly empirical
and scientific view of the world. In answer to these questions, Kant argues
that the principle of morality is based in pure practical reason rather than
experience, that it stands entirely on its own, independently of speculative
metaphysical doctrines (even one so minimal as to assert nothing more than
the freedom of the will), and further that this principle itself provides the
basis for a rationally acceptable metaphysics.
As Kant's argument for these claims is intimately linked to the critical
assessment of traditional speculative metaphysics carried out in the first
Critique, the second Critique is written with the presumption that its readers will have at least some familiarity with that work. Indeed, there are
many points in the second Critique at which Kant steps back from his discussion of practical reason to point out how it relates to issues treated in the
first Critique or to draw parallels and contraste between the arguments and
the arrangements of topics contained in these two great books. It will be appropriate, therefore, to situate the second Critique in relation to the larger
aims of Kanfs critical philosophy before turning to the specific problems
and issues it addresses.

1. THE PLACE OF THE CRITIQUE OF PRACTICAL REASON
WITHIN KANT'S CRITICAL PHILOSOPHY
Reason, according to Kant, is the highest of our cognitive capacities; its
function is to introduce unity and order into our knowledge (or "cogni-

INTRODUCTION

XV11

tion").1 In doing so, it is guided by the idea of a system, an idea of which it
is itself the source. In the Critique of Pure Reason, Kant considers this cognitive capacity as it figures in theoretical knowledge—that is, the sort of
cognition that we first acquire through ordinary experience and then seek to
deepen and expand through the investigations we carry out in the natural
sciences. The objects of such cognition exist independently of it and therefore can come to be known by us only through their somehow affecting us,
by means of the senses. Although Kant does not attempt to explain how this
affection takes place, he does argue that our capacity for sense perception is
so constituted that the representations (or "presentations") of those objects
provided by our senses are always subject to the conditions of space and
time. In the pursuit of theoretical cognition, reason's idea of a system
amounts to the general idea of nature, or a realm of objects, or substances,
that exist independently of one another yet also causally interact according
to a system of fixed laws and so depend on one another for their accidents,
or nonessential features. The law-governed motion of the moon, for example, depends in part on the position and motion of the earth, and the earth's
motion similarly depends on the position and motion of the moon, though
the earth and the moon themselves do not depend on one another for the
very existence of the permanent substantial material, whatever it may be, of
which they are composed. As is apparent from this brief characterization,
the general idea of nature itself comprises several interrelated component
concepts. Kant calls these concepts categories, or pure concepts of understanding. Three of them are of particular importance for our purposes: substance, cause, and community (or causal interaction among substances).
Kant maintains, however, that, because our sense perception of the objects of theoretical cognition is subject to the conditions of time, temporal
interpretations, or meanings, must be assigned to the categories in order for
them to be used in theoretical cognition. The pure concept of cause, for example, which might figure in a philosopher's metaphysical doctrine of
God's timeless creation of the world, needs to be given a temporal meaning
1

In the present translation of the second Critique, 'cognition' and 'cognize' are used to render
Kant's Erkenntnis and erkennen. This practice is generally followed in this Introduction,
though on numerous occasions I use 'knowledge' and 'know' instead, with a view to capturing
Kant's thought more easily in ordinary English, or when I am relying on the fact that (according to the primary sense in which Kant uses this term) Erkenntnis is true, or in agreement with
its object. Except where otherwise indicated, both 'cognition' and 'knowledge' are used only
for Erkenntnis in this Introduction. It should be noted, however, that in the translation 'knowledge' is generally reserved for Wissen, which implies objectively grounded certainty.

XVÜi

INTRODUCTION

through the representation of a rule-governed temporal succession of
events. Only then can this concept be used in theoretical cognition of objects of experience, where the production of effects is always by temporal
processes. By interpreting the categories in accordance with the temporal
conditions of experience, Kant is able to argue that these concepts, despite
having their origin in reason, nevertheless apply necessarily to the objects
of experience. He does this by presenting proofs for various principles,
such as the principle of causality, which asserts that every event is determined by causes acting in the preceding time. These "principles of pure
understanding" explicate more determinately the general conception of a
natural order provided by the categories. Kant argues that we are justified in
applying this general conception a priori to the objects of experience on the
grounds that the application of these principles is a constitutive element of
experience itself, on which all pursuit of scientific theoretical cognition of
nature depends.
But Kant also maintains that, throughout the entire history of philosophy, from the days of the ancient Greek philosophers to the time of his own
contemporaries, speculative metaphysicians have attempted to use the three
principal concepts that figure in this general idea of nature to acquire
knowledge of things of which we can have no experience whatsoever. In their
pursuit of such knowledge, metaphysicians have stripped these concepts
of the temporally restricted meanings that are requisite for their legitimate
use in systematizing the theoretical cognition we gain through experience.
Through the removal of these restrictions, (1) the concept of a substance existing permanently in time is transformed into the idea of a substance existing
outside of time (immortality); (2) the concept of a cause, which when used
in experience always applies to things whose productions of effects are
themselves effects produced by further causes operating in the preceding
time, is transformed into the idea of an uncaused cause (freedom); and, finally, (3) the concept of a community among the substances of nature that
makes possible their simultaneous interaction is transformed into the idea
of the ground of all reality and of nature itself (God). Misled by an illusion
to which human reason is naturally subject, traditional speculative metaphysicians dogmatically sought to establish theoretical knowledge of
objects represented through these ideas (the immortality of the soul, the
freedom of the will, the existence of God), whereas other, more skeptical
philosophers were continually challenging these claims to knowledge. It
was a primary aim of the first Critique to put an end to these disputes once
and for all by establishing that theoretical knowledge of the objects repre-

INTRODUCTION

XIX

sented by such unrestricted ideas is in principle impossible. Kant argued
that, by removing the temporal restrictions that rendered reason's a priori
concepts suitable for use in systematizing theoretical cognition, speculative
metaphysicians had framed ideas of objects that were in principle impossible to encounter in experience and that, for this reason, could not be objects
of our theoretical knowledge; but he also argued that, for the same reason,
skeptical denials of the propositions asserted by these metaphysicians were
equally dogmatic and unfounded.
The agnostic conclusion of the first Critique does not, however, represent Kant's final judgment on the fate of metaphysics. In the Critique of
Practical Reason, Kant shifts his attention from theoretical to practical
knowledge to determine what reason is capable of knowing a priori in its
practical use. Kant sometimes expresses the difference between these two
sorts of cognition by saying that theoretical cognition is cognition of what
is, and practical cognition is cognition of what ought to be. But he also
sometimes describes the difference in the following more illuminating way:
Theoretical cognition is cognition of objects that exist independently of it
and that therefore must, in order to be known, or cognized, by us at all, be
given to us in some way through sense-perception. Practical cognition, on
the other hand, is cognition of objects that can be brought into existence by
that cognition itself, or cognition that is at the same time a determination of
the will to produce its object. Thus, although our theoretical knowledge that
the moon orbits the earth does not bring it about that the moon orbits the
earth, a person's knowledge that one ought to help others in need where one
can is practical insofar as this very knowledge can move that individual to
choose to help others in need and thus bring its object, the action of helping
others, into existence. Since reason determines the will through such practical cognition, Kant also describes reason in its practical use as concerned
with "the determining bases of the will" (15).2
The second Critique takes up the question whether pure reason can determine the will—that is, whether reason by itself, without reliance on empirical conditions lying in the senses and feeling, is the source of practical
knowledge, or whether the practical knowledge reason can provide is always empirically conditioned. This question is addressed in Book I of Part
2

References to the Critique of Practical Reason use the page numbers of the Akademie edition. Except for references to the Critique of Pure Reason, which use the pagination of the first
(A) or second (B) edition, references to passages from Kant's other writings are by the volume
and page numbers of the Akademie edition.

XX

INTRODUCTION

I of the second Critique, the Analytic of Pure Practical Reason. There Kant
first undertakes to identify what the principle must be by which pure reason
determines the will, if it can indeed do so. Once he has isolated this principle, he points out that it is nothing other than the very principle we recognize to be operative in our practical life as the moral law and draws the
conclusion that pure reason is indeed practical, the source of practical
knowledge. This conclusion, however, turns out to have important implications concerning the ideas of pure reason. Once we recognize that pure
reason is practical, Kant argues, we are rationally compelled and thereby
entitled to assume that we are free—that is, that pure reason's idea of freedom
applies to our will insofar as the latter can be determined by pure reason.
And in Book II, the Dialectic of Pure Practical Reason, Kant argues further
that the practicality of pure reason has implications that involve the other
two ideas of pure reason as well. Pure practical reason places us under an
obligation to make the complete object of practical knowledge, the highest
good, our end, and this obligation provides a practical-rational basis for belief, or faith, regarding the immortality of the soul and the existence of God.
Thus, the investigation into practical reason undertaken in the second
Critique has the striking result that the very ideas of pure reason that Kant
argued in the first Critique could not figure in any theoretical cognition turn
out to play a legitimate role in certain beliefs that are sustained and justified
by their relation to the practical use of pure reason, a relation that Kant expresses by calling them "postulates of pure practical reason." In the end,
then, the critical examination of the faculty (or "power") of reason that is
carried out in the second Critique does fill in, after a fashion, the agnostic
gap left at the conclusion of the first Critique, in that the former does credit
pure reason with the capacity to have a type of a priori cognition of the objects of pure reason. This cognition, however, is neither theoretical cognition (for its objects cannot be given through sense-perception) nor practical
cognition (for it does not bring its objects into existence); it is rather practical-rational belief.

2. THE RELATION OF THE CRITIQUE OF
PRACTICAL REASON TO KANT'S ETHICS
For many readers, the second Critique is of interest not so much because of
its relation to the first Critique and to the larger aims of Kant's critical philosophy as on account of its relevance to his ethical writings, and in partie-

INTRODUCTION

XXi

ular to the two principal texts in which he presents his system of moral philosophy, or what we might call his "normative ethics": the Grounding for
the Metaphysics of Morals (1785), in which he seeks to identify and establish the supreme principle of morality, and the Metaphysics of Morals
(1797), in which he elaborates the system of duties derivable from that principle.3 How exactly the second Critique is related to Kant's ethical system
is a matter of some disagreement among scholars, but the importance of this
work for our understanding of his ethics is beyond dispute. For the purposes
of this Introduction, it will be convenient to distinguish two ways in which
the second Critique is relevant to Kant's ethical thought. One of these ways,
to which we shall turn in the next section, is through the distinctive manner
in which the second Critique contributes to the practical aim of Kant's
moral philosophy. Isolating this work's contribution to that aim will provide
a useful standpoint from which to survey its specific claims and arguments.
The other way, our concern in this section, is through the light its discussions of particular topics throw on a variety of specific ideas, claims, and
themes that are integral to Kant's ethical theory.
Kant's principal writings in practical philosophy did not begin to appear
until he was in his sixties, after some thirty years of research and publication devoted almost exclusively to natural science and metaphysics. This is
not to say, however, that it was only late in his career that Kant turned his attention to practical philosophy. Both "the moral law within" and "the starry
sky above" (to borrow the famous words of the second Critique's conclusion) were enduring objects of Kant's philosophical interest as well as his
admiration and reverence. When the Grounding, his first major work in
moral philosophy, appeared in 1785, Kant had already been lecturing regularly on ethics for nearly thirty years at the University in Königsberg. Numerous clear indications of his interest in this subject can be found in his
writings from that period.
In his practical philosophy as in his theoretical philosophy, Kant endeavored to arrive at a satisfactory understanding of how both intellectual and
sensible capacities are at work in our cognition. In each of these parts of his
system, he tried to preserve the elements of truth that he found in the Leibnizian rationalist tradition prevalent in his native Prussia while also ac3

It is worth noting that the expression "metaphysics of morals " which figures in the titles of
both works, does not signify any type of speculative metaphysics—the illegitimate theoretical
metaphysics Kant criticized in the first Critique. It refers rather to the a priori part of morality,
which Kant takes to consist in the practical knowledge of the system of duties that pertain to
human beings considered merely as such.

XXII

INTRODUCTION

knowledging the insights of the empiricist tradition in Great Britain. But he
also opposed the reductive tendencies that he saw in each of these schools
of thought; the rationalists attempted to view sensations and feelings as
confused workings of the intellect, whereas the empiricists sought to resolve the acts of the intellect into the refined workings of imagination and
feeling. In contrast to both approaches, Kant maintained that our cognition
comprises two distinct elements—form and matter—which differ in kind
and therefore must arise from different sources within the mind: The form
of cognition, which is spontaneous and universal, is due to the intellect,
whereas its matter, which is passive and particular, is provided by the
senses. Kant's form/matter analysis as it applies to practical cognition is
nowhere more clearly and forcefully articulated than it is in the second Critique. As we shall see later, Kant locates the form of practical knowledge in
the idea of a practical law (or what he calls "the mere form of a universal
legislation"), and he identifies the matter with the objects to be produced
through that knowledge, such as the objects of sensible desire, the things
we find pleasing, or agreeable. This form/matter analysis provides the key
enabling Kant to formulate the supreme principle of morality.
As he sought to negotiate a path between the extremes of rationalism and
empiricism, Kant also raised a variety of more specific criticisms against
these two approaches. On the side of the rationalists, the two figures with
whom he was most immediately engaged were Christian Wolff and his disciple Alexander Baumgarten. Following Leibniz, and to some extent the ancient Stoics, these thinkers based their ethical doctrines on a metaphysical
system in which reality is identified with perfection. While only God, the
being of highest reality, possesses perfection absolutely, all beings naturally
seek perfection as their end, striving to imitate the divine, and share in it to
the extent that circumstances and the natural limits on their powers allow.
Against this metaphysical backdrop, the rationalists expounded an ethics of
perfectionism. From their ideal of perfection they derived such principles as
"Seek perfection," "Do good," and "Love the best"; and since the pursuit of
perfection was, according to their metaphysics, something to which nature
itself in any case directs us, they also endorsed the Stoics' principle "Live
according to nature " Although Kant's earliest thinking about ethics grew
out of this tradition, he soon began to raise objections to it, two of which are
particularly worth noting. First, the general criticism that Kant directed in
the first Critique against all traditional speculative metaphysics—that its
claims pertaining to God and reality in general outstrip the reach of our capacity for theoretical cognition—meant that he could not accept the ratio-

INTRODUCTION

XXÜi

nalists' metaphysical doctrines nor indeed any attempt to provide a metaphysical foundation for ethics. Second, he criticized the rationalists' attempts
to derive moral principles from the concept of perfection as our natural end.
Such attempts, he held, are vitiated not because this concept must lead us
astray, but because it is empty and indeterminate and therefore throws no
light on the question of what morality's principle is. The principle "Do good,"
for example, is an empty tautology, for it is implicit in the very idea of a practical principle of reason that the action it prescribes is good.
On the other side were the British moral sense philosophers—the Earl of
Shaftesbury, Francis Hutcheson, David Hume, and Adam Smith. From
early on, Kant was much impressed by the writings of these thinkers, who
sought to account for our approval of virtuous action by appealing to a
moral sense woven into the fabric of human nature. Hutcheson saw this
sense as originally expressed in our responses to benevolent action, and
Hume, by developing an elaborate theory of the workings of the imagination and our natural feeling of sympathy, ingeniously extended the idea to
account for our approval of a wide range of virtuous action, including acts
of justice. Aided by his study of these philosophers, Kant gained an appreciation of the indispensable role that moral feeling must play in any account
of how a moral judgment can move us to act—an appreciation that informed all of his subsequent thinking on ethical topics. He did not, however, accept their attempt to use feeling or sentiment as the standard by
which actions are judged to be right or wrong. He argued, to the contrary,
that if the standard were traceable to a moral sentiment, we would have to
allow that it might be reasonably rejected by a rational being to whose natural constitution this sentiment did not belong. Yet the characteristic universal and necessary validity of our moral judgments reveals that the principle
on which they depend applies not just to members of the human race, but to
all rational beings, and hence that the standard must be known by reason.
As a result, he also did not accept the moral sense philosophers' accounts of
moral motivation. These accounts, he held, mistook the motive of virtuous
action—a feeling of respect based in a rational recognition of the moral
law—for an immediate inclination (or sensible desire) to perform the action. In keeping with his form/matter analysis of practical cognition, Kant
held that there is a difference in kind between the motive expressed in
morally worthy action and all other motives. The moral motive must ultimately have its source in reason, whereas other motives, because they arise
from empirical sources, are all kindred to one another and belong to a person's general interest in personal happiness.

XXIV

INTRODUCTION

In the end, then, Kant could no more follow the moral sense philosophers than he could the Stoical rationalists. Moral principles can be derived
neither from the transcendent heights of metaphysical speculation nor from
the empirically discovered sentiments of human nature. As he later observed in the Grounding, moral philosophy's position "is supposed to be
firm even though there is nothing in heaven nor on earth from which it depends or on which it is based" (IV, 425).
While his thinking was significantly advanced by his critical engagement with these two schools, it was not by drawing on these sources alone
that Kant moved beyond them and worked out his most important positive
ethical doctrines. It was rather his reading of the brilliant Swiss social and
political philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau and an apparently momentous
encounter with Plato in the 1760s that turned Kant onto the path that led to
his formulation of the principle of morality and the mature moral philosophy expounded in the great works he published in the 1780s and 1790s.
Although comparatively little is known about the development of Kant's
ethical views during this early period, it seems likely that it was in connection with his study of these two philosophers that he developed some of his
most important ideas, now familiar to us from the Grounding. His conception of the good will as the only thing that is good without qualification, for
example, seems to have been inspired by an argument that Plato gave to
show that practical wisdom is the only thing good by itself alone. And his
attempt to formulate the principle of morality—conceived as the principle
governing a good will—by developing the idea that such a will must be
autonomous, or self-legislating, and therein free, can be seen as an elaboration, at a deeper level, of ideas that figure in Rousseau's account in the Social Contract of the general will as the basis of civic freedom.
Although the fundamental ideas of his ethical theory were all in place by
the time he wrote the Grounding, Kant had not yet quite hit upon the idea of
a critique of practical reason, at least not in the form in which it eventually
appeared. In the Grounding's Preface, he did briefly contrast the project he
was undertaking in that work with a critique of pure practical reason, describing the latter as something that would both (1) provide the true "foundation" for a metaphysics of morals and also (2) show the unity of practical
and theoretical reason (IV, 391); and he did, in the final chapter of the
Grounding, claim to make a transition to the critique of pure practical reason. But when the Critique of Practical Reason was finally published three
years later, Kant began the work by pointedly explaining why it was not titled Critique of Pure Practical Reason, observing that if there is such a

INTRODUCTION

XXV

thing as pure practical reason, no critique of it is needed, since pure reason
itself furnishes the standard by which any critique of its employment is carried out (3, 15-16). What is needed instead, Kant claimed, is a critical examination of the entire practical use of reason, so that, once it has been
shown that there is pure practical reason, empirically conditioned reason
can be prevented from presuming that it is the sole determining basis of the
will. This broader investigation, dealing with practical reason in its entirety,
is what the second Critique undertakes to provide.
How significant a change in view is reflected in the omission of the word
"pure" in Kant's title is a question on which scholarly opinion divides. It
seems clear that Kant does attempt in the second Critique to deal, up to a
point at least, with the question of the unity of practical and theoretical reason.4 Whether he aims to provide the true "foundation" for a metaphysics of
morals—the foundation that he said in the Grounding would be furnished
by a critique of pure practical reason—is less clear. But it seems at the very
least correct to say that Kant changes his thinking on the question whether
it is possible and necessary to provide a "deduction," or justification, of the
moral law. In the final chapter of the Grounding, the chapter in which a
transition is made to a critique of pure practical reason, he actually presents
what he there calls a "deduction" of the "supreme principle of morality"
(IV, 453-54, 463), in which he relies on the claim that freedom can ("in a
practical respect") be attributed to rational beings independently of their
consciousness of the moral law and merely in virtue of their having a will.
In the second Critique, on the other hand, he maintains that we can be conscious of ourselves as free only through our consciousness of the moral law
and explicitly denies that a deduction of the moral principle can be provided, offering in its place his doctrine of the "fact of reason" and a "credential" for the moral law deriving from considerations bearing on the relation
between practical and theoretical reason (46-48).
Although the Critique of Practical Reason provides no deduction of the
supreme principle of morality, it illuminates Kant's ethical theory in a number of important respects. By carrying out a full examination of the practical use of reason, it furnishes Kant's clearest and most comprehensive
argument to show that the principle identified in the Grounding as the
supreme principle of morality is based solely in pure reason. In addition,
4

See in particular the sections On the Deduction of the Principles of Pure Practical Reason
(42ff.), Critical Examination of the Analytic of Pure Practical Reason (89ff.), and On the Primacy of Pure Practical Reason in Its Linkage with Speculative Reason (119ff.).

XXVI

INTRODUCTION

the second Critique contributes to our understanding of Kant's ethical
views through its examination of a variety of related topics that are also of
considerable interest in their own right. These include the idea of a practical
principle and the distinction between maxims and practical laws, the relation between morality and freedom, the "justification" of morality, the
meaning of 'good/ and the nature of moral motivation (see §§4-6).
Through its treatment of these topics, the second Critique brings into
sharp relief the features of Kant's ethical theory that have chiefly contributed to his reputation as the preeminent exponent of modern ethical
thought and the cosmopolitan ethics of the Enlightenment in particular, an
ethics centered around the ideals of rationality, freedom, and equality. Here,
as in the Grounding, we find Kant maintaining that genuine moral principles are based in reason rather than in human nature, social custom, or religious creed, and that they therefore hold not merely for the members of a
particular race, tribe, or sect, but universally, enjoining all persons to act out
of a regard for themselves and others as free and equal rational beings. We
also find a characteristically modern emphasis on the idea of law and the
representation of moral conduct as a matter of acting on principle rather
than from inclination or with a view to the good. Indeed, the opposition between duty and inclination so emphatically asserted in the Grounding is
echoed and amplified in the second Critique through its prominent depiction of a fundamental opposition between the principle of morality and that
of personal happiness, and through Kant's claim that the concept of the
good is not to be defined independently of the moral law, but rather in accordance with it.
Because of the great stress Kant lays on these and other similar claims,
his ethics is sometimes thought to stand in stark opposition to the ethical
thought of the ancient Greeks, who saw ethical conduct as lying in the pursuit of a good and happy life, and who conceived of ethical virtue as an
essential element in such a life, rather than as something opposed to happiness. The second Critique is of particular interest in this regard because in it
Kant completes his critical assessment of practical reason with a detailed
examination of the central problem of ancient ethics: What does the summum bonum, or highest good, consist in, and what does its pursuit involve?
Kant's discussion of this topic reveals that, however dedicated he may be to
Enlightenment ideals, his ethical views are in important respects closely related to those of the ancients. Despite certain criticisms he raises against
them, Kant agrees with the ancients that, in the highest good, virtue and
happiness, far from being opposed, are rather necessarily united. It is a

INTRODUCTION

XXVÜ

noteworthy fact that the only competing ethical theories receiving any detailed discussion at all in the second Critique are those of the Stoics and the
Epicureans. Kant's extensive critical commentary on these schools of antiquity throws light back on his own position, showing that he regards his doctrine of the highest good as preserving the elements of truth in the opposing
Stoic and Epicurean accounts.
Finally, as noted earlier, the second Critique contains an extensive treatment of the three "postulates of pure practical reason"—the freedom of the
will, the immortality of the soul, and the existence of God. By expounding
these postulates as presuppositions of the moral law and of the pursuit of
the highest good, Kant completes his philosophical project of reconceiving
the basis of metaphysics by replacing the traditional speculative arguments
he criticized in the first Critique with supports that are derived from practical sources and furnish a moral basis for religious faith. In doing so, he provides his clearest statement of his distinctive account of the relationship
between morality and religious faith, according to which morality leads to
religion, though it cannot be founded on it.

3. THE PRACTICAL PURPOSE OF THE
CRITIQUE OF PRACTICAL REASON
Through its contribution to Kant's aim of reconstituting traditional metaphysics by overthrowing its speculative arguments and replacing them with
an ethical basis, the Critique of Practical Reason serves a further purpose,
which is purely practical and moral in character. Kant holds that because
the dogmatic metaphysical claims that the will is free, that God exists, and
that the soul is immortal are theoretically insupportable, they lead in the end
to skepticism about these propositions. He thus regards the dogmatism inherent in traditional metaphysics as "the true source of all the unbelief that
conflicts with morality" and sets out to reconceive traditional metaphysics
with a view to protecting morality from this threat.5 But as we shall see, the
second Critique serves to protect morality from other skeptical threats as
well. Specifying more precisely this antiskeptical purpose and tracing its
connection to the overall practical aim of Kant's moral philosophy will
5

Critique of Pure Reason B xxx. The quotation is from the sentence containing Kant's famous
remark that he found it necessary to overturn the dogmatic claims to theoretical knowledge
(Wissen) in order to make room for practically based rational belief, or faith (Glauben).

XXVÜi

INTRODUCTION

put us in a good position to survey the claims and arguments presented in
this work,
Kant emphasizes repeatedly that ordinary human beings already have an
understanding of the moral law and of what it requires of them. This means
that the moral-practical purpose of moral philosophy cannot be to discover
anything we do not already at least implicitly know. It cannot be the business of the moral philosopher to presume to instruct the rest of the world as
to what the moral law asserts. The proper moral contribution of moral philosophy must lie rather in helping to secure "acceptance and durability" for
the moral law as an efficacious motive in conduct.6
There are, of course, a variety of ways in which the efficacy of the moral
law is fostered. Parents contribute by providing their children with a good
upbringing, the state contributes through its laws and the sanctions it attaches to them, and society contributes through the opinions, favorable or
otherwise, that persons form of one another through their social interactions. But the distinctive way in which philosophy can further this end is by
making our ordinary understanding of morality clearer and more secure.
This is accomplished in part by clarifying the content of morality, by identifying its principle and expounding the system of duties derivable from it.
This task is carried out in Kant's system of ethics proper, in the Grounding
and in the Metaphysics of Morals. In addition to promoting the moral motive in this direct way, philosophy can also contribute indirectly by countering obstacles and threats to our naturally sound understanding of the moral
law that arise from thought and reflection and that are themselves at least
incipiently philosophical or theoretical in nature. It is here, in the domain of
philosophical criticism, that the Critique of Practical Reason makes its distinctive practical contribution, removing and forestalling the confusions
and misunderstandings from which certain doubts that can impede the
moral law's acceptance might otherwise arise.
As Kant argues in the Grounding, the chief doubts concerning morality
arise in large part from the fact that it has its origin in pure reason. Although
obscurely present in ordinary moral thought, the idea that reason by itself
can move us to act is so singular, so different from what we know about all
6

See Grounding IV, 404-5. This broad practical aim is reflected in Kant's division of the second Critique into two parts—a Doctrine of Elements and a Doctrine of Method. After completing the critique proper, which is carried out in the first of these parts, Kant proceeds in the
second part to describe, in general outline and in the light of the conclusions reached in the
first part, the method to be followed in cultivating morality, whereby the laws of pure practical
reason gain "acceptance in the human mind and influence on its maxims" (151).

INTRODUCTION

Xxix

other types of motivation familiar to us, that it can easily strike us as utterly
strange and suspect. Thus, Epicurus and many other philosophers after him
have concluded that the sole practical function of reason is to minister to the
inclinations, and Hume famously proclaimed that "Reason is, and ought
only to be the slave of the passions."7 Those who would grant that morality
must have its source in pure reason if it is possible at all may therefore be
prompted to suppose, nihilistically, that it is simply a figment of our minds,
without any genuine reality or capacity to move us to act. Others may rather
doubt that morality has such an origin at all, and seek to understand it in
some other way, by tracing it to self-interest, for example, as Epicurus did,
or, like Hume, by deriving it from a feeling such as sympathy.
Such doubts can also arise or receive further support from two additional
sources, one motivational and the other theoretical. On the one hand, these
doubts can result from the fact that the needs and inclinations of an individual human being can come into conflict with what the moral law requires.
Kant notes that because the demands of self-interest tend to seem reasonable to us even when the action that would be required to satisfy them is
contrary to duty, they can awaken a certain propensity within us to quibble
with the moral law and to raise doubts about its validity, or at least its strictness and purity. Under such circumstances, we may concoct specious
grounds for qualifying this law and allowing exceptions to it to accommodate our wishes and inclinations. This source of doubt, however, at least
when taken by itself, is more a matter of deficiency of motive and character
than a matter of philosophical or theoretical confusion or misconception. It
is therefore more properly countered directly, by clarifying the content of
morality and by the other means of fostering the moral motive mentioned
earlier, than by undertaking a critique of practical reason.
It is the other source of doubts about the rational basis of morality, the
theoretical source, that is of primary significance for Kant's purposes in the
second Critique. We have already noted that Kant undertakes his project of
criticizing traditional speculative metaphysics with a view to protecting
morality from the unbelief to which theoretically insupportable metaphysical claims regarding the freedom of the will, the existence of God, and so
on can lead. But Kant recognizes that skeptical doubts can also arise more
or less directly from experience and reflection on the character of empirical
cognition. If reason by itself is practical, then it must be possible for us to
choose and act directly from principles of reason without being determined
7

A Treatise of Human Nature II.iii.3.

XXX

INTRODUCTION

by anything outside of ourselves. But the empirical theoretical sciences
seem to imply that our choices and even our moral judgments and convictions
do not lie in the free exercise of our reason, but instead are determined, in
accordance with empirical laws, by factors external to our understanding
and our will. Biologists point to our genetic makeup and explain how it has
arisen through natural selection; psychologists appeal to the drives, instincts, and other psychic mechanisms that are operative in mental
processes; and social scientists, impressed by the diversity of custom and
opinion prevalent in different societies and historical periods, treat morality
as a social artifact, seeking to explain how particular moral codes arise and
are sustained within their economic, social, and cultural settings.
This apparent conflict between the type of explanation of human choice
that the theoretical sciences demand and the freedom of choice that morality
presupposes does not arise by accident. As we noted earlier, Kant himself offers a general argument in the first Critique for the principle of causality,
which is meant to demonstrate that every occurrence, every happening in
time, is determined by antecedent causal conditions. Accordingly, he maintains that every particular act of choice, simply in virtue of being an occurrence, is necessarily the effect of some antecedent determining basis, which
provides the impulse required to determine the will The theoretical doubts
about the rational basis of morality are thus decidedly philosophical in character, being at bottom inseparable from the problem of freedom and the related question whether practical and theoretical reason are compatible.
In order to indicate properly the scope of Kant's project in the second
Critique, however, it is not enough to identify the theoretical source of
doubt; it is also necessary to describe briefly the alternative conception of
practical reason that accompanies these doubts and the role that reason, according to this conception, would play in moral thinking. The denial that
there is pure practical reason is equivalent to the presumption that the practical employment of reason is always empirically conditioned. It is equivalent, that is, to the supposition that in prescribing a practical rule, or perhaps
a virtuous trait of character, reason always depends on a theoretical judgment that the action or trait specified will contribute to the attainment of
some object we have come to desire through experience—that is, through
our discovery that its existence is something we find pleasing or agreeable.
On this conception, then, the practical employment of reason presupposes
materials provided by the concepts of such empirically discovered agreeable objects; and it is confined to the business of fashioning from them a
determinate conception of an achievable end and specifying the means of

INTRODUCTION

XXXi

attaining it. Accordingly, when philosophers develop theories of morality in
the shadow of the theoretical doubt that reason by itself can be practical,
they always follow the same path in their attempt to describe the role that
practical reason plays in morality. They inevitably begin by looking among
the things whose existence we know from experience to be pleasing or satisfying in the hope of finding in one or a few of them—or perhaps in their
sum total (under the name of happiness)—an object that is such that, in the
rules and the traits of character reason directs us to adopt in order to attain
it, we can recover the familiar duties and virtues of morality. Thus, a theory
developed in this way starts with an experience, some pleasing or agreeable
feeling, which provides the basis for identifying an object to be pursued
(usually happiness); this object, in turn, is the basis for deriving practical
principles or conclusions regarding character and virtue.
The Critique of Practical Reason is a direct response to the theoretical
doubts just described and to the associated presumption that the practical
employment of reason, even in morality, is always empirically conditioned.
To address these doubts, the Critique has "to show," as Kant announces at
the beginning of the Preface, "that there is pure practical reason." Whereas
empirical practical reason is just practical reason in respect of its capacity
to produce rules or principles for the will on the basis of experience (of
some agreeable object, or material), pure practical reason would be just
practical reason in respect of its capacity to produce a principle for the will
that can be known a priori, or independently of experience. Accordingly, to
show that there is pure practical reason it is first necessary to expound completely a priori the idea of a principle of pure practical reason, deriving
from this idea a formulation of what the principle would assert, and making
clear that, being purely formal in character, it is different in kind from all
material principles, which can be subsumed under the principle of personal
happiness. It will then be necessary to show that the principle thus expounded and formulated is in fact operative in our practical life, which Kant
does (in part) by identifying this principle as the basis of morality. It will
also be necessary to address a concern regarding our right, or entitlement,
to attribute to ourselves the freedom of the will that morality presupposes in
virtue of having its origin in pure reason, given that all occurrences in nature are subject to theoretical reason's a priori principle of universal determinism. And to counter the presumption that the practical employment of
reason, even in morality, is always empirically conditioned, it will be necessary to spell out (in an order that reverses the sequence followed in moral
theories based on that presumption) an account of how pure reason can first

XXXÜ

INTRODUCTION

immediately determine the will and thereby, through the application of its
formal principle through which this determination takes place, subsequently provide for itself an object to be pursued and finally produce an effect on our feeling through which it can move us to act.
These tasks are addressed, in the order just presented, in the three chapters that make up the Analytic of Pure Practical Reason (Book I of the Doctrine of the Elements). The first chapter, On the Principles of Pure Practical
Reason, endeavors to show that pure reason is practical by expounding the
idea of a practical law, identifying this idea itself as the fundamental law of
morality, and securing the presupposition of freedom that is revealed
through our awareness of this law. After completing this argument, Kant appends two further sections to this chapter (42-57), in which he takes up
questions of justification—that is, questions concerning the possibility of
giving a "deduction" in his special sense of that term—that arise concerning this principle and the associated concept of freedom. The second chapter, On the Concept of an Object of Pure Practical Reason, then provides an
account of the object of pure practical reason (the good), and the third chapter, On the Incentives of Pure Practical Reason, describes how the moral
law functions as a motive or spring of action through producing effects on
feeling. Having now surveyed the main tasks to be addressed in the Analytic, we are ready to look more closely at the argument.

4. SHOWING THE PRACTICALITY OF PURE REASON

A, The Idea of a Principle of Practical Reason (§1)
Reason, according to Kant, is the faculty of knowledge from principles, or
our capacity to know the particular from the universal. In other words, it is
the capacity to reach knowledge about particular things from universal
knowledge that we already have. Thus, if we know that all hurricanes in the
Northern Hemisphere rotate in a counterclockwise direction, we do not
need to rely on observation to know that the next hurricane to hit Florida
will rotate in that direction; we know this through reason, by applying the
universal knowledge we have to the case in question. But the principles relied on in such knowledge of the particular from the universal are, in many
cases if not all, not themselves known through reason. Our knowledge of
the principle just mentioned, for example, depends on, among other things,
our knowledge of the direction of the earth's rotation, which we have ac-

INTRODUCTION

XXXÜi

quired from experience. The question thus arises whether there is any principle, or universal knowledge, that we already have in an absolute sense—
that is, whether pure reason, or reason by itself, is a source of principles of
knowledge, or whether the principles on which we rely in the use of our
reason must always be borrowed from elsewhere—from experience itself or
its sensible conditions. Principles that have their source in reason itself
would have to be absolutely universal, pertaining not merely to all objects
of a specific kind (for example, all hurricanes), but to all possible objects of
rational knowledge, or to the fundamental material of which they are all
composed. All more specific rational knowledge would therefore necessarily be in conformity with these principles, just as all more specific
knowledge about hurricanes in the Northern Hemisphere is necessarily in
conformity with the knowledge that they rotate in a counterclockwise direction. In the first Critique, Kant argues that, as far as theoretical knowledge is concerned, pure reason is not itself a source of principles.
In the second Critique, however, Kant raises a parallel question about
reason in its practical employment and argues for a very different conclusion. Since practical knowledge is knowledge about how to act that can
itself move the subject possessing it to act accordingly, the principles of
practical knowledge are principles of action: They are universal cognitions
from which efficacious knowledge about how one should act in particular
circumstances can be derived. Thus, if the prudent shopkeeper Kant describes in his famous example in the Grounding knows that where there is
much trade, one should not overcharge, but keep a fixed general price for
everyone, then he can know through reason that he should not overcharge
when, in such conditions, an inexperienced customer enters his shop. By
applying this universal principle of action to the case at hand, the shopkeeper can know by reason what he should do, and insofar as the principle
is practical, or capable of determining his will, this knowledge can move
him to act accordingly. But though the shopkeeper's principle is universal
in that it is conceived as equally applicable to any other merchant who aims
to be successful in business (and, in a hypothetical way, even to all other
human persons), it is nevertheless based on experience (whether the shopkeeper's own or that of others), from which the shopkeeper has learned that
this policy works to one's advantage. Kant raises the question whether all
such principles, on which our knowledge of what we are to do or of how we
are to act is based, are similarly dependent on experience or whether pure
reason is itself a source of practical principles. In the latter case, there
would be universal practical knowledge that we already have in an absolute

XXXiv

INTRODUCTION

sense. Such knowledge would have absolute universality, and all more specific practical knowledge would necessarily be in conformity with it. If reason by itself is a source of such universal knowledge, universal knowledge
that can move us to act, then pure reason is practical.
The question whether pure reason is practical, then, is a question about
practical principles. Accordingly, Kant makes such principles his subject of
investigation in the first chapter of the Analytic of Pure Practical Reason. In
the introductory definition (Explication), practical principles are said to be
propositions that contain a universal determination of the will. This characterization is clearly fixed by the points about practical principles just noted:
In order to be the source of knowledge of the particular from the universal,
they must themselves be universal, and being practical, they must determine the will.
This initial definition is too general, however, to isolate the specific sort
of practical principle that will be operative in practical thought if pure reason is practical. Thus, Kant proceeds immediately to introduce the idea of a
practical principle that is objective, or a practical law (rather than merely
subjective, or a maxim). Such a principle, Kant states, is one in which the
"condition" to which the determination of the will is subject is cognized as
valid for the will of every rational being. No immediate clarification is provided of what such a "condition" of the will's determination might be, but
an understanding of what Kant has in mind can be gained by returning to
the idea of a principle of practical knowledge.
To the extent that a practical principle is a source of knowledge of the
particular from the universal, there is another sense, in addition to the one
indicated earlier, in which it can be said to be universal. All cognition, Kant
holds, be it theoretical or practical, has what he calls subjective universal
validity: If a particular judgment counts as knowledge, then it must be valid
for every knowing subject, so that all such subjects could agree in the matter and share the same judgment. Thus, a principle of reason, being itself a
cognition, is universally valid in two respects: In addition to being valid of
all the objects that fall under its subject concept (objective universal validity), it is valid for every subject capable of rational cognition (subjective
universal validity). This is true of both theoretical and practical principles
of cognition. However, unlike theoretical cognition, which is of objects that
are distinct from the cognizing subject and given to it from elsewhere by
means of the senses, practical cognition is essentially knowledge subjects
have that they themselves should act in a certain way, and as such it is always
cognition of the very subjects who have such cognition. Therefore, in the

INTRODUCTION

XXXV

case of a principle of practical cognition, the two sorts of universal validity
coincide in the sense that the principle is valid jfor the very subjects of which
it is valid: The principle applies to the will of every rational being, and every
such being can recognize this universal applicability. This is as much as to
say that principles of practical cognition are necessarily such that every subject can agree to every subject's acting on them, as would actually happen if
all subjects were jointly to legislate this principle for themselves. Kant thus
gives expression to this necessary feature of all principles of practical
knowledge by speaking of "the mere form of a universal legislation" (27).
Such universal legislation must therefore be possible if, for example, the
shopkeeper can rightly be said to have practical knowledge that, where there
is much trade, one should keep a fixed general price for everyone.
Because consideration of the bare idea of a principle of practical cognition reveals that this "mere form of a universal legislation" necessarily
belongs to any such principle, this form is just the form of a principle of
practical cognition. Thus, diverse principles of practical cognition will all
alike share the common form of a universal legislation merely in virtue of
being principles of practical cognition. All differences among them must
accordingly lie in differences in their matter—that is, differences among the
objects they represent, objects that are to be realized through the actions
that spring from these principles as general determinations of the will.
This distinction between the form and the matter of a principle of practical knowledge can be drawn a priori, and, as soon as we draw it, we are in a
position to see that (/"pure reason can determine the will—if, that is, reason
by itself can be the source of practical principles—then the "form of a
universal legislation" will necessarily be the "condition" to which its determination of the will is subject (that is, the condition that makes the determination possible), so that any principle that has its source in reason will
necessarily have this form. Pure reason's determination of the will would
have to be subject to this condition because principles that arise from a faculty of practical cognition from the universal must necessarily have the
form of universal practical cognition. Because this "condition" is the a priori form of universal practical cognition, it is itself recognizable by every
rational being as a condition of cognition that is valid for the will of every
rational being, inasmuch as all rational beings, as such, share this same faculty of cognition from the universal. The principles Kant characterizes as
objective principles and as practical laws are precisely those in which the
determination of the will is subject to this universally valid condition.
As Kant points out in his Comment in §1, in some rational beings

XXXVI

INTRODUCTION

(human rational beings, for example), the will is "pathologically affected/'
By this Kant means not that such a will is in any way diseased, but that it is
by its very nature related to sensible desires (for shelter, food, sex, and so
on) in such a way that the latter can play a causal role in the will's determination. In a rational being whose will is of such a nature, it is possible for
the will to contain practical principles that have as their conditions the pleasure a subject takes in the existence of the objects of sensible desires rather
than the condition described earlier (the mere form of a universal legislation) and that are therefore not practical laws, or principles of practical cognition. Such principles would be merely maxims?

B. Theorems about Practical Principles (§§2-4)
After presenting the initial definition in § 1, Kant proceeds to deduce several
theorems by drawing on the concepts introduced in the definition.9 The task
of §2 is to establish Theorem I, which concerns a certain type of practical
principle, what Kant calls a "material practical principle." This theorem
states, roughly, that if the determining basis of a practical principle lies in
its matter—-that is, in the object to be realized through acting on the principle—then the possibility of the will's determination is subject to a condition
that is not valid for all rational beings, and the principle therefore cannot be
a practical law. The argument for this proposition is striking in its simplicity and generality. Any such object, Kant maintains, can be a basis of the
will's determination only under the condition that the object stands in a relation to the subject that consists in a feeling of pleasure in the existence of
the object. This relation can be known only by experience, never a priori,
8

It is worth noting here that, although it may appear that in the definition at the beginning of
§1 Kant defines maxims in such a way as to preclude the possibility that one and the same
practical principle could be both a maxim and a practical law, this is not a possibility he wishes
to close off (see Theorem III in §4). If we follow Kant's characterizations of maxims in the
Grounding (IV, 420n), according to which a maxim is a "subjective" principle in that it is one
on which the subject acts (an objective principle being one on which the subject ought to act),
we can then understand him to be saying in the opening definition in §1 that if a practical principle has a condition that is regarded by the subject as valid only for that subject's own will,
then it is a maxim and nothing more—that is, not also a practical law.
9

This is not to say that the definitions of practical principle, maxim, and practical law are the
only ones on which Kant relies in his arguments for the theorems. He acknowledges in the
Preface that he also makes use of certain other concepts not specific to practical philosophy,
mentioning in particular that he can reasonably presuppose, as obtainable from psychology,
definitions of the concepts of the power of desire and of the feeling of pleasure (9n),

INTRODUCTION XXXVÜ

and therefore cannot furnish a condition that is recognized to be valid for
the will of every rational being. It is a relation of causal affection, in which
the representation of an object's existence—for example, the visual impression of a sunset, or the sensations of taste and smell that accompany the
eating of an apple—produces a feeling of pleasure in the mind; this connection, however, like any other specific causal connection, can be known only
by experience. From the mere representation, independently of the actual
feeling of pleasure it produces, it is thus impossible to know even in one's
own case—to say nothing of that of others—that it has such an effect. Likewise, it is impossible to infer from the actual effect produced in oneself that
the same effect would be produced in all other rational beings.
The examples just mentioned might suggest that this argument applies
well enough to material principles that depend on what are sometimes
called "the pleasures of the senses," but that it does not touch material principles whose objects lie in the exercise of our active and rational powers—
objects that we could place under such headings as "the pleasures of the
mind" (invention, discovery, learning, and the like) and "the pleasures of
society" (friendship, conversation, competition, and so on). But it is clear
from Kant's later discussion in §3 that even principles whose determining
bases are objects of this latter sort are meant to be covered by his conclusion. As an example, we might consider a case in which the object is the action of helping others in need. The sympathetic man Kant describes in the
Grounding delights in helping others out of an immediate inclination to
help. This man, however, can hardly know a priori that every rational being
will in every case find a similar delight in such action, and even in his own
case occasions can arise in which, his mind being overclouded by his own
grief, the delight he customarily takes in helping others dissolves (Grounding IV, 398). Moreover, for reasons that will emerge shortly when we consider Kant's discussion of the material principle of personal happiness, even if
we could know that every rational being did delight in the action of helping
others, this would not be enough to show that a principle of helping others
that had this basis would be a practical law. The condition of the possibility
of a practical principle whose determining basis lies in the object to be produced thus cannot be known to be valid for all rational beings, and therefore
a principle with such a determining basis cannot be a practical law.
In §3 Kant argues for Theorem II, which asserts that all material practical principles belong under the general principle of self-love or personal
happiness, a principle whose object is identified as the consciousness of the
agreeableness of life uninterruptedly accompanying one's whole existence.

XXXVÜi INTRODUCTION

This principle too is a material principle, but one whose object is indeterminate, being specified simply in terms of the agreeable effect it produces in
the subject. Kant claims that happiness is an end that every rational being
has necessarily, by nature. This claim prompts the question whether, contrary to what was claimed in §2, this principle provides an example of a material practical principle that can be a practical law. Kant, however, denies
that this is so. It is true that, if personal happiness is indeed an end every finite rational being has by nature, then there is a sense in which the principle
of personal happiness can be said to have a condition that is recognized to
be "valid for the will of every rational being"; but this is not the sense Kant
has in view in his definition of a practical law. As he points out, personal
happiness does not really supply a single determining basis, or condition,
that is valid for all rational beings: In your case, the determining basis is
your happiness; in my case, the determining basis is my happiness. So,
strictly speaking, there is no common determining basis here that is valid
for the will of every rational being, nor, therefore, are persons who act on
the principle of personal happiness, strictly speaking, acting on the same
practical principle. Where there is a single determining basis and a single
principle that different persons share, there is no possibility of conflict
among their wills (except incidentally, as when they disagree about the best
means to a given end because they have different theoretical opinions about
which course of action would be most effective). But nothing is more common than for the wills of persons who are pursuing the "same" end of personal happiness to come into conflict.
Having argued that practical principles whose condition lies in their matter cannot be practical laws, Kant has laid the ground for Theorem III (§4),
which states that in order for a subjective practical principle, or maxim, to
be a practical law, its determining basis, or the condition of its possibility,
must lie in the principle's having the form of a universal legislation. The
considerations on which Kant relies in making this linkage of practical laws
to the form of a universal legislation have already been sketched in our
foregoing discussion of the idea of a practical law. We observed that the
universal validity of the "condition," or determining basis, of such a law is
due to this condition's being the a priori cognizable form of a principle of
practical cognition—a form that amounts to the form of a universal legislation. But in view of the highly abstract terms in which this important theorem is stated, it will be helpful to consider an example Kant provides a few
pages later—in Comment I to Theorem IV (§8)—to illustrate how the form
of a universal legislation can function as the determining basis of a practical

INTRODUCTION

XXxix

principle. Noting that all finite rational beings necessarily have their own
happiness as an end, Kant observes that such a being can pursue this object
in accordance with a principle that is a practical law only by subjecting the
end to the restricting condition that is provided by the form of a universal
legislation—the condition that it be possible for every rational being to
agree to every rational being's pursuing the end in question. Since all such
beings necessarily have their own happiness as an end, the happiness of one
rational being is not something other rational beings can agree to make their
end unless their own happiness is also included. Therefore, subjecting the
end of one's own happiness to this condition is a matter of including others'
happiness along with one's own in the object, which yields an end that all
can share. Insofar as the practical principle in accordance with which one
pursues one's own happiness is adopted only subject to this condition, it is
a practical law.10

C. Practical Laws and Freedom (§§5-6)
Having reached the conclusion that the determining basis of a practical law
can lie nowhere but in the form of a universal legislation, Kant is in a position to argue, in his solutions to Problems I and II (§§5-6), that a will that
can be determined only by this form (that is, a will whose practical principles can be practical laws) is a free will, and, conversely, that a free will is a
will whose practical principles can be determined only by the form of a universal legislation. Indeed, the distinction Kant has already drawn between
the form and the matter of practical principles enables him to present very
succinct arguments for these claims.
In the first argument, Kant relies on a premise for which he argued in the
first Critique: If a thing is determined in accordance with laws of nature and
hence subject to natural necessity, its determining basis must lie among the
appearances—that is, among things representable by means of the senses,
10

Specifically, it is the law that underlies the duty of beneficence (cf. Metaphysics of Morals
VI, 393). While there is not space here to discuss this principle in detail, it is worth mentioning
that although it may at first sight appear to be similar to John Stuart Mill's principle of utility,
according to which the object on which the standard of right conduct is based is the greatest
happiness of the greatest number, it differs from the latter not only in respect of its determining basis but also in what it prescribes, which is not that one act in a way that maximizes happiness in general, but (roughly) that one limit the pursuit of one's own happiness by a readiness
to give such assistance to others as one can when circumstances arise in which they are in need
of help.

xl

INTRODUCTION

as existing in time. Drawing on the argument developed in the preceding
sections (§§1-4), he adds to this the claim that a practical principle can
have an appearance as its determining basis only insofar as the latter lies in
the principle's matter rather than its form, since the form of a universal legislation is not representable by means of the senses at all. From these
premises it follows that a will that is determinable only by the form of a universal legislation is not determinable in accordance with laws of nature and
is therefore free,
Kant's argument in the reverse direction relies on the thought that, if a
will is free, or not determinable in accordance with laws of nature, then the
determining bases of the acts of self-determination in which its principles
consist must lie, not in appearances, but rather in what the subject can think
entirely a priori, through reason. As Kant argued in §2, however, the determining basis of a material practical principle lies in a feeling of pleasure resulting from the empirical awareness of the existence of some object. Such
a determining basis therefore belongs among the appearances. On the other
hand, the form of a universal legislation, as the a priori form of a principle
of practical cognition, can be thought a priori by reason alone and is not the
representation of any appearance at all. Thus, the determining basis of the
principles of a free will must lie in this form.
As Kant well knows, to show that these reciprocal entailments hold is
not to show that the two propositions are themselves true. By introducing
the concept of freedom into his analysis, however, the arguments prepare
the way for further important conclusions that Kant will soon be in a position to draw.

D. The Basic Law of Pure Practical Reason (§7)
Besides enabling him to introduce the concept of freedom, Kant's arrival at
the conclusion stated in Theorem III puts him in a position to state the
"basic law of pure practical reason." We have already noted that if pure reason is itself practical, then it must have its own a priori principle, to which
all practical knowledge necessarily conforms. But since only practical laws
have the form of practical knowledge (the form of a universal legislation),
and since, as Theorem III states, the determining basis of all such practical
laws lies in this very form, the a priori principle of pure practical reason
with which these laws necessarily conform can be nothing other than this
form of universal legislation itself. In Kant's statement of it, however, this a
priori principle is couched in terms that capture not only this form, but also

INTRODUCTION

xli

the specific way it manifests itself in the consciousness of a finite rational
being. Because the will of such a being is pathologically affected, the principles actually adopted may lack the form of practical knowledge and so be
maxims that are not also practical laws. For this reason, the basic law of
pure practical reason is represented by such a being as an unconditional
command, or imperative, of pure practical reason, which Kant states as follows: "So act that the maxim of your will could always hold at the same
time as a principle of a universal legislation" (30).
There are several points to be noted here concerning Kant's presentation
of this basic law of pure practical reason and the comment he offers regarding it. First, in contrast to the three theorems that preceded it, the basic law
is not a proposition for which any proof is offered. One reason for this difference is that, as a basic law, it is not derivable from any more fundamental proposition and is, therefore, not any sort of theorem at all. But another
reason can be found in the second point to be noted here—that, again in
contrast to what precedes it, this basic law is & practical proposition. As the
first principle of all practical cognition, this basic law lays down what ought
to be, or how one ought to act, and it is therefore not entailed by the propositions preceding it. As theorems about practical principles reached by
reflection on the concepts of such principles introduced in the opening definition (in §1), those propositions merely concern what necessarily is the
case (provided that there are indeed practical principles). Kant's argument,
up to this point, can establish no more than that if pure reason is practical,
then its principle must be the one he identifies as the basic law of pure practical reason. This conclusion, however, is not the same as the imperative itself; it identifies what the basic law is and thus enables Kant to display it,
but it does not assert it. On the one hand, then, this basic law is valid for all
rational beings in the sense that all such beings should be able, by following
the argument, to agree that if pure reason is practical, then its principle must
be the one Kant states. Yet, on the other hand, the possibility has not thereby
been excluded that pure reason is nevertheless not practical in some of these
beings, or perhaps indeed not in any of them.
It is clear, moreover, that Kant does not intend to achieve his aim of
showing that there is pure practical reason by reasoning from a priori concepts and definitions. As he remarks at the beginning of the Preface, if pure
reason is practical, "it proves its reality and that of its concepts through the
deed" (3). This somewhat cryptic statement anticipates the point Kant elaborates in the Comment that follows his statement of the basic law in §7,
where he indicates that this law is produced or generated a priori as the fun-

Xlii

INTRODUCTION

damental act, or deed, of pure practical reason itself. To capture this idea of
something reason does, Kant describes the basic law and the consciousness
of it as a "fact of reason" (Faktum der Vernunft), employing a transliteration
of the Latin term factum, which signifies a deed or action.11 Thus, perhaps
somewhat surprisingly, given our usual understanding of 'fact' today, Kant
uses the expression "fact of reason" precisely to indicate that the basic law
is neither given to us from without, as it would be if it were an empirical
fact given to us through the senses, nor reached as a conclusion from any
"antecedent data of reason," such as the antecedent consciousness of our
freedom—something Kant denies we have, as it would require an intellectual intuition, a mode of cognition that, if possible at all, would be available
only to an infinite rational being.
Unlike the familiar deeds that human beings perform in practical life,
which are occurrences that take place in time, a deed of pure reason is not
an action undertaken in response to any specific empirical conditions and
cannot be assigned to any particular position in time; it is rather the activity
of reason itself, manifest in practical life as a fundamental law, something
unchangingly operative at all times and in all conditions, even if its effects
may vary owing to differences in the conditions and circumstances in which
it is operative. And in having this unchanging standing in practical thinking,
the deed of pure reason has an independence from all particular acts of
practical thinking that enables Kant also to characterize it as given, though
of course not in the way that an empirical fact is given, but rather as a fact
of reason. That is to say, it is not given to us, from some external source, but
rather given in us, by our own reason.
If the basic law of pure practical reason is a fact in the sense just indicated, then showing that pure reason is practical must be a matter of drawing attention to this law, of directing thought to it in a way that clearly reveals
its basis in reason and thereby puts us in a position to achieve a reflective
(philosophical) recognition of it as given in us by reason. Kant does this in
two ways. The first is through the argument of §§ 1-6, which, though it does
not have the assertion of this fundamental law as its logical conclusion,
does identify what the law is and show that it originates solely in reason.
The argument thus directs our attention to the idea of such a law and puts us
11

See Metaphysics of Morals VI, 227. Because the basic law of pure practical reason is a practical law, the law and the consciousness of it are ultimately the same, for practical laws differ
from laws of theoretical cognition precisely in that they depend for their very reality on the at
least implicit awareness of them by the beings who are subject to them.

INTRODUCTION

xliü

in a position to be conscious of the practicality of pure reason in ourselves
through our own awareness of the actuality of this law in our own practical
thinking. Kant is thus in a position to state, as he does in the Corollary (31 ),
that pure reason is indeed practical. To come to this awareness of pure reason's practicality in ourselves simply by working through the argument of
§§1-6 is no easy feat, of course, owing at least in part to the necessarily
highly abstract character of the philosophical considerations contained
within it. The achievement of this recognition is aided, however, by the second way in which Kant draws our attention to the basic law, through his observation in the Corollary that this law is nothing other than what we have
known all along under another name, as the moral law.12 Recognizing the
basic law as identical with the moral law enables us to appreciate its actuality in our practical thinking, and recognizing, in accordance with the argument of §§1-6, that this law originates solely in reason, enables us to see
that the actuality of this law in our practical thinking is the actuality of pure
reason itself.

E. Autonomy and Freedom (§8)
Kant is now finally in a position from which he can derive a positive conclusion regarding freedom. This conclusion, which he presents as Theorem
IV, states that the autonomy, or freedom, of the will is the source of the
moral law. Having established, in his solutions to Problems I and II
(§§5-6), that a relation of mutual entailment holds between the concept of
a will determinable only by the basic law of pure practical reason (now
identified with the moral law) and the concept of a free will, Kant can now,
by appealing to the actuality of that law, which is given in the fact of reason,
infer the actuality of freedom as well and positively characterize this freedom in terms of that law as the will's autonomy, or self-legislation.
The fact that this proposition is placed under the heading "Theorem IV"
should not prevent us from appreciating that its status is fundamentally dif12

Kant does not present here any detailed argument in support of this identification of the
basic law of pure practical reason with the moral law, presumably for the reason that he assumes a familiarity on the part of his readers with the first two chapters of the Grounding,
where, in seeking to identify the principle that lies at the basis of morality, he eventually
reached a formulation of it in terms of the idea of universal legislation (IV, 431-33). As Kant
says in the Preface, the Critique of Practical Reason does presuppose the "preliminary acquaintance with the principle of duty" and an indication and justification of "a determinate formula of duty," which are provided in the Grounding (8).

XÜV

INTRODUCTION

ferent from that of the three theorems that precede it. This difference in status stems directly from the fact that Theorem IV is the only theorem whose
derivation depends on the basic law of pure practical reason. Kant points
out in his Comment on the basic law that, although not itself a postulate,
this law can be compared to the postulates used in geometry insofar as it is
a practical proposition. And just as geometers use their postulates to derive
further theorems, so Kant uses this law as a basis for establishing Theorem
IV. Thus, despite the fact that Theorem TV is like the three preceding theorems in that it is a theoretical proposition—a proposition about what is,
rather than what ought to be—it is unlike the other three in that its proof depends on a practical proposition. To mark this difference in standing, Kant
employs the phrase "postulate of pure practical reason," which, as he later
tells us, signifies "a theoretical proposition, though one not provable as
such [i.e., not provable by a purely theoretical argument, which relies on no
practical propositions], insofar as it attaches inseparably to a practical law
that holds a priori [and] unconditionally" (122).13 Thus, we have reached
here in Theorem IV the first of the three postulates of pure practical reason
expounded in the second Critique, in which the ideas of pure reason,
though declared in the first Critique to be unsuited for use in theoretical
cognition, receive a practically justified application.

5. CAN THE HIGHEST PRINCIPLE OF
PRACTICAL REASON BE JUSTIFIED?
The exposition of the fundamental principle of practical reason is followed
by a section titled Of the Deduction of the Principles of Pure Practical Reason. Despite what this title might lead us to expect, Kant argues here that a
deduction of the fundamental principle—that is, a justification of its objective and universal validity and of insight into its possibility—is neither possible nor needed. In the first Critique, Kant provided such justification of
the a priori principles of theoretical cognition (for example, the principle
that everything that happens has a cause) by relating them to the possibility
of experience: To provide insight into how we are able to have such a priori
theoretical cognition of the objects of experience, Kant sought to show that
it is only by presupposing these principles that it is possible to have experi13

As Kant points out in the Preface, in this use 'postulate' has a sense quite different from the
one it has in mathematics (see 1 In).

INTRODUCTION

xlv

ence of those objects at all. The fundamental principle of pure practical reason, however, does not stand in any such relation to the possibility of experience. Nor, Kant points out, is it possible to supply in place of a deduction
any proof from experience, given that the principle is formal rather than
material.
Kant does present, in lieu of a deduction, a "credential" for the moral
law, or what amounts to a philosophical confirmation of our awareness,
through the fact of reason, of this law's actuality. A satisfactory elucidation
of this credential would require an examination of doctrines in the first Critique that lie beyond the scope of this Introduction. In brief, Kant suggests
that the credential is furnished by the fact that the moral law is itself the
source of a deduction of the idea of freedom (as we noted, the proof of Theorem IV, in which the idea of freedom is applied to the will, depends on the
moral law). The moral law thus provides an application for an idea that
would otherwise have a merely problematic standing in the eyes of reason.
According to Kant's argument in the Third Antinomy of the first Critique,
theoretical reason cannot apply the idea of a freely acting cause to any object yet must regard this type of causality as somehow compatible with its
principle of natural necessity, which states that everything that happens in
nature is determined by the operation of causes in the time that precedes it.
The compatibility of these two sorts of causality—that of freedom and that
of natural necessity—depends, Kant argues, on a distinction between things
as they appear to us and are knowable by means of the senses, through
which they are represented according to the condition of time, and things as
they are in themselves, as conceived by reason, without reference to that
condition. With this distinction in place, it becomes possible to see that theoretical reason's principle that all occurrences in nature are determined by
natural necessity applies only to things as appearances, and that the possibility is therefore left open that the actions of things in themselves may
nevertheless be free, even though the latter cannot be known by theoretical
reason. In the case of human beings, this possibility can be described more
definitely by saying that, although the actions whereby the exercise of a
human being's will appears and is knowable by means of the senses are all
occurrences in time subject to natural necessity, the will itself, conceived
solely by reason as the causality of the human subject as it is in itself, may
nevertheless be free. The acts in which the will's exercise consists are not
themselves occurrences in time appearing to us by means of the senses, but
rather the very practical principles, or maxims, in which the will's selfdetermination consists and in accordance with which the temporally deter-

Xlvi

INTRODUCTION

mined actions that appear to the senses occur. By providing a determinate
conception of the law by which a free cause determines itself and a practically justified use for the concept of freedom, the moral law fills a gap that
theoretical cognition by itself is unable to close. This harmonious way in
which practical reason complements theoretical reason provides a confirmation of the fact of reason, or a credential for the moral law.

6. THE EFFECTS OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON
Having completed his argument that there is pure practical reason and having secured the concept of freedom for use in a practical connection, Kant
is in a position tofinishhis task in the Analytic of countering the presumption that the practical employment of reason, even in morality, is always
empirically conditioned. As noted earlier, this is to be accomplished by
spelling out an account of how pure reason, by applying its formal practical
principle, can provide for itself an object to be pursued andfinallyproduce
an effect on our feeling through which it can move us to act. Thus, Chapter
II deals with the objective effect of the moral law—that is, the effect that is
to be produced through action in accordance with pure practical reason *s
concept of that effect—and Chapter III concerns the subjective effect of this
law—that is, its effect on feeling in the mind of the subject.

A« Defining the Concept of an Object of Practical Reason
We have noted that the basic law of pure practical reason requires that practical principles, or the will's general acts of self-determination, be in accordance with the mere form of a universal legislation, and that this form is just
the form of a principle of practical knowledge, It follows that all practical
principles that are in accordance with this basic law are principles of such
knowledge. Thus, insofar as the will is determined by the basic law, the object, or the matter represented in its principle, is an object of practical
knowledge. Accordingly, the task of Chapter II—to specify the object of a
will determined by this law—amounts to the task of specifying the object of
the will insofar as it is an object of practical knowledge. Pointing to certain
features of our understanding of the concept of the good that mark it out as
a concept that we employ in cognitive claims about objects, namely, that in
calling something good we take it to be a necessary object of desire and
suppose that rational beings should universally agree with our judgment

INTRODUCTION

xlvii

(59), Kant identifies the good as the object of practical knowledge. And relying on his argument in Chapter I that there is pure practical reason, which
asserts its moral law a priori, independently of all experience, as the condition of all practical knowledge, Kant can now say of the good, identified as
the object of such knowledge, that the determination, or specification, of
what it consists in must be carried out in accordance with the moral law.
Kant acknowledges that many will find this claim paradoxical. The
widespread assumption that the practical employment of reason is always
empirically conditioned has led moral philosophers to suppose that the rational determination of the will must start with the identification of an object for the will (often under the heading of the agreeable, or happiness) and
then proceed, with the aid of theoretical reason, to the specification of practical principles that have this object as their matter. On the strength of his
demonstration that there is pure practical reason, Kant maintains to the
contrary that the object of the will, thought under the concept of the good,
must be determined only after and by means of the moral law (62-63).
Readers familiar with the first Critique will recognize that this "paradox of
method" parallels the approach Kant follows in that work with regard to
theoretical cognition, wherein he abandons the assumption prevalent
among traditional metaphysicians that "all our cognition must conform to
the objects" and proclaims, to the contrary, that "the objects must conform
to our cognition" (Critique of Pure Reason B xvi).
One important implication of this way of proceeding—given the cognitive character of the concept of the good and given Kant's argument in
Chapter I that a practical principle whose determining basis lies in its matter cannot be practical knowledge—is that it makes it possible to call things
good without thereby meaning merely that they are good for something
(that is, as a means for attaining some object). If it is assumed that the practical employment of reason is always empirically conditioned, then the cognitive character of the concept of the good restricts the application of it to
means, or to what is useful. On this assumption, the prudent shopkeeper
could say that it is good to keep a fixed general price, but not that the aim of
personal advantage or prosperity for the sake of which he follows that practice is likewise good, for the latter is not pursued for the sake of anything
further. If, on the other hand, pure reason is practical, then the concept of
the good can also be applied to ends to the extent that these are objects of
practical laws and thus objects of practical knowledge. This enables Kant to
go so far as to say that the concept of the good itself, where this is understood not as the mere relativized concept good-for-something but as a con-

Xlvüi

INTRODUCTION

cept that is applicable to ends, is made possible by the moral law (64). And
it will also enable him» in the Dialectic, to provide an account of the complete ultimate md as the highest good, to the pursuit of which all persons
are enjoined by the moral law.

B. The Subjective Effects of Pure Practical Reason
In the third and concluding chapter of the Analytic, Kant provides an account of how the moral law can be an "incentive,"14 or subjective determining basis of the will, an account in which, starting with the fact of reason, he
indicates a priori what effects the moral law must produce in the mind of a
rational being in whom the will is affected by sensible impulses, Kant has
already argued, in Chapter I, that objectively, or in the a priori and ideal representation of reason, the moral law is the determining basis of a free will
But in the case of a rational being such as the human being, in whom the
will is by its nature pathologically affected, the exercise of the will is liable
to be influenced by subjective factors—that is, by feelings and the inclinations associated with them—and hence such a will is not necessarily, by its
very nature, in conformity with the moral law. Therefore, if the moral law is
to determine the will of such beings, it must do so not only objectively, in
the judgment of reason, but also subjectively, through producing effects on
feeling that both prevent sensible impulses from influencing the will's exercise and also, positively, provide a basis for our taking an interest in morally
good action.
In this chapter, as in the preceding one, Kant develops his account in
opposition to the presumption that the practical employment of reason is
always empirically conditioned. With regard to the will's subjective determining bases, this presumption amounts to the thought that the only such
determining bases are the feelings of pleasure or displeasure, agreeableness
or disagreeableness, that attend the representation of the existence of some
object. This presumption cannot accommodate the fact of reason, for the
representation that figures in the will's determination by pure reason—the
14

It has become the almost universal practice of English language translators of Kant's ethics
to render the German term Triebfeder as incentive.' It is important, however, not to be misled
by this practice into thinking that Kant has in mind some circumstance or prospect that incites
or tends to incite a person to action—the sort of thing we mean when we speak, for example,
of the bonuses or rebates a company may offer as providing prospective customers with an incentive to do business with it. Kant is rather thinking of a "spring" or source of action lying in
the subject.

INTRODUCTION

xlix

bare idea of practical law, or the mere form of a universal legislation—is
not, and cannot be, the representation of the existence of anything at all. As
the fact, or deed, of reason, this idea is itself actual, but it is not a representation of anything actual; it says nothing about how the will is determined
but is rather a law that sets forth a priori how the will is to be determined.
Accordingly, the account Kant is to provide of how this law can produce
a positive effect in feeling must accommodate the fact that, as a purely intellectual representation, it cannot itself be anything we find agreeable.
Kant accomplishes this by identifying an indirect effect that the moral law
has on feeling in a rational being in which, as in the human case, there is a
sensible nature that, in addition to being the source of inclinations, also
contains a certain propensity, under the name of self-love, to regard oneself
as an objective determining basis of the will in general—a propensity that
can be called self-conceit to the extent that one comes to regard oneself as
an unconditional practical principle. This indirect effect arises through the
moral law's striking down the presumptuous claims of self-conceit, which
produces a painful feeling of humiliation. This feeling of humiliation, however, is, at the same time, a feeling of respect for the moral law, a feeling
that can come to have a positive aspect to the extent that we recognize that
it is in the judgment of our own reason that our self-conceit has been struck
down. Through this recognition, the feeling of respect takes on a certain
elevating and ennobling character, insofar as its object is recognized to be a
law that has its source in our own rational nature. As a result, the feeling of
respect can have a positive influence on the exercise of the will, providing
us with an interest in acting according to this law and thereby a basis on
which morally worthy maxims of action can be founded. To this feeling of
respect for the moral law and for persons as subjects of the moral law Kant
gives the name moral feeling. As the subjective effect the moral law produces on the human mind, this feeling is nothing other than the moral law's
own operation as a subjective determining basis of the will.

7. THE HIGHEST GOOD AND THE
ANTINOMY OF PRACTICAL REASON
As mentioned earlier, Kant argues in Chapter II that the moral law makes
possible a concept of the good that is applicable to ends. This concept is
taken up again in the Dialectic of Pure Practical Reason, which begins with
an exposition of the idea of the totality of the good, under the name of the

1

INTRODUCTION

highest good, an idea that pure practical reason frames simply in virtue of
its cognitive function of introducing unity and order into our practical cognition. Corresponding to the distinction drawn in the Analytic between the
form and the matter of practical knowledge, two specifically different elements—virtue and happiness—are identified as constituents of the highest
good. That virtue should be counted as something good comes as no surprise, of course, for virtue is just the will's perfection in determining itself
in accordance with the moral law, or in making the form of a universal legislation the determining basis of one's maxims. But many readers are surprised tofindKant now claiming that, in the judgment of pure practical reason,
the happiness of a virtuous person is also something good. Interpreters have
often questioned whether this claim is consistent with Kant's earlier denial
(§§3-4) that the principle of personal happiness can be a practical law, or
with the many passages in which happiness is linked with the agreeable,
which Kant sharply contrasts with the good. Yet the grounds for this claim
can be found in the conclusions that have already been reached in the
Analytic. As we have seen, a finite rational being's necessary end of happiness can be pursued in accordance with a maxim that has the form of a universal legislation if others' happiness is also included along with it, and we
have also noted that this form is just the form of a principle of practical
knowledge. Since the maxim in accordance with which a virtuous person
pursues this necessary end has this form as its determining basis, it is a principle of practical knowledge. And since practical knowledge has the good
as its object, the object of this virtuous maxim is good. Given, then, that the
highest good includes all ends that are good, it must be conceived as a condition in which all persons are not only virtuous, but also happy.
To achieve an adequate conception of the highest good, however, it is not
enough simply to identify virtue and happiness as its ingredients. In conceiving of the totality of the good, pure practical reason represents it as systematically unified. Hence it conceives of the highest good not as a mere
aggregate of virtue and happiness, but as a whole in which these two elements are necessarily connected. Kant observes that both the Stoics and the
Epicureans appreciated that, in the highest good, virtue and happiness are to
be found united, but he argues that these two schools of antiquity erred in
their understanding of how the elements are related. Each of these schools
attempted, as best it could, to define the elements in such a way that the
presence of one entailed the presence of the other. The Epicureans endeavored to reduce virtue to a maxim of prudence grounded in the secure cognizance that it leads to happiness, and the Stoics sought to reduce happiness

INTRODUCTION

li

to the satisfaction that cornes from being conscious of one's virtue. Kant argues that in attempting such reductive definitions both schools overlooked
the fundamental difference brought to light in the Analytic between the
principle of morality and the principle of happiness. Since the former is a
principle by which the will can immediately determine itself a priori,
whereas happiness includes agreeable states of mind that depend on external conditions (health, material goods, and so forth), the attainment of happiness depends on further conditions beyond those on which the attainment
of virtue depends. Neither virtue nor happiness, then, can be reduced or assimilated to the other through such definitions. Instead, Kant says, virtue
and happiness must be regarded as connected within the highest good simply as cause and effect, so that in the achievement of the highest good,
persons would be, through their virtuous conduct, the authors of their own
happiness.
Once this proper understanding of the relation between these elements
has been reached, however, a difficulty immediately arises, which lies at the
heart of what Kant calls the Antinomy of Practical Reason. As in the case of
the concept of freedom, the difficulty here concerns whether the ideas on
which pure reason relies in its practical use are compatible with the principles of theoretical reason. Whereas the achievement of the highest good
would require virtue and happiness to be so related that happiness follows
as a necessary effect of virtue, the conception of nature on which theoretical reason relies seems to rule out the possibility of any such connection.
How, after all, could virtue protect us from disease and other natural
calamities? And even where we do succeed in making one thing serve as
means for achieving another, we do so by ingenuity and skill, forms of
intelligence quite different from the practical knowledge that lies at the
basis of virtue. Because this antinomy seems to entail that the highest good
is impossible, it threatens the validity of the moral law itself, insofar as the
highest good is something the moral law unconditionally commands us to
pursue.
We noted earlier that Kant's distinction between appearances and things
in themselves makes it possible to understand how the concept of freedom
is compatible with the principle of natural necessity. This compatibility, together with the connection between the moral law and freedom, enables
Kant to find a credential for the moral law in lieu of a deduction. In the Dialectic, Kant again appeals to his distinction between appearances and things
in themselves, this time to remove the antinomy concerning the concept of
the highest good. By appealing to this distinction, Kant is able to introduce

lii

INTRODUCTION

the other two ideas of pure reason as representations figuring in two further
postulates of pure practical reason—namely, the immortality of the soul
and the existence of God—which together express necessary and sufficient
conditions under which the highest good is achievable. Despite the fact that
the ideas of God and immortality are not concepts that can enter into our
theoretical cognition of objects, Kant argues that, on account of the unconditionality of the moral law's command, pure practical reason has a primacy
over theoretical reason that justifies us in using them for practical purposes.
Linking the two postulates just mentioned with the highest good's two
elements, virtue and happiness, Kant first argues that the immortality of the
soul must be postulated in order to conceive of the full attainment of virtue
as possible. Since the human will is by its nature pathologically affected,
complete adequacy to the moral law does not belong to it simply by nature,
but rather must be attained, through the will's exercise; and, for the same
reason, this attainment of complete adequacy to the moral law is not possible in a finite period of time. So in order to conceive of the attainment of
such adequacy as possible, we must assume the possibility of an unending
progress toward it. Conceiving of an unending progress enables us to conceive of the human will as in itself completely adequate to the moral law,
for we can regard unending progress as the way in which, in a finite being,
the complete adequacy that belongs to the exercise of its pathologically affected will in itself appears in time.
With regard to the other element of the highest good, Kant argues that
the existence of God must be postulated in order to conceive of happiness
as an effect that follows necessarily from virtue. We can think of virtue and
happiness as necessarily connected in this way only by supposing that nature itself, which contains the external conditions on which virtuous action
depends for its attainment of the happiness included in its end, depends in
turn on a supreme moral being—that is, a being of infinite wisdom and
power whose ultimate purpose in creating the world lies in the highest
good. Although it is not explicitly asserted as part of his argument, we
might reasonably surmise that, just as Kant sees the adequacy of a finite
being's will in itself to the moral law as something that appears in time as
unending progress toward perfect virtue, so he sees the happiness that follows as virtue's necessary effect in the highest good as something that gradually and proportionately increases in time as the human being—in the
species as well as in the individual—makes progress in virtue.
These two postulates differ from the postulate of freedom in that they are
necessarily required to conceive of the possibility of the object of the moral

INTRODUCTION

lui

law, whereas the idea of freedom is immediately connected with the representation of the moral law itself. Yet all three postulates are alike insofar as
they are theoretical propositions that, because they concern objects that
cannot be given in experience, cannot be supported by theoretical reason,
and so cannot contribute to our theoretical cognition of the world, yet are
rationally justified for practical purposes merely through the relation they
bear to the unconditional requirements of pure practical reason. In this regard, they have a unique standing within Kant's philosophy.

8. CONCLUSION
Having completed our outline of Kant's argument in the second Critique,
we may now cast our glance back over the whole in a concluding observation. We noted earlier that, for Kant, the practical aim of moral philosophy
is to remove and to forestall the confusions and misunderstandings from
which certain doubts that can impede the moral law's acceptance might otherwise arise, especially the theoretically engendered doubts concerning the
concept of freedom and the related presumption that the practical employment of reason is always, even in morality, empirically conditioned. Having
traced Kant's attempt to remove these sources of doubt through his arguments in the Analytic and the Dialectic, we are now in a position to see that
the philosophical understanding of morality expressed in these arguments
also helps, in a direct and positive way, to secure "acceptance and durability" for the moral law in two quite distinct yet complementary ways. The
first emerges in the Analytic, the second in the Dialectic.
In the Analytic, Kant carries out an analysis of the faculty of reason in its
practical employment, in which the a priori and empirical sources of its
principles and of the motives for acting on them are distinguished. Kant
himself calls attention to this procedure of separating the pure from the empirical and explicitly likens it to a chemist's analysis. Indeed, it is difficult
to overstate the great emphasis he places on the importance of clearly distinguishing the formal principle of pure practical reason from the principle
of personal happiness, under which he places all empirical sources of motivation. And the reason for this emphasis is not difficult to see. In addition to
enabling Kant to identify the source of morality in the autonomy of the will,
this separation of the moral law from all other practical principles enables
him to argue in Chapter III that in virtue of its origin in pure practical reason, the moral law can both inspire respect for itself and for ourselves as

liv

INTRODUCTION

subjects who share this reason and also thereby be the source of a heightened consciousness of our freedom and autonomy, thus effecting an elevated and ennobled frame of mind that does much, Kant thinks, to
strengthen the moral motive.
Yet this analysis, if taken by itself, can easily give the impression that the
two elements it separates—morality and happiness—have no relation to
one another. It may leave us with the image of a fragmented practical life, in
which these two principles work within us in an altogether unrelated way. If
not dispelled, such an image can itself easily become the source of doubts
about morality that can weaken the moral motive, or (what is perhaps more
likely) it can become the source of doubts about Kant's own analysis—
doubts that have been raised by many critics of his moral philosophy.
Given this concern, the Dialectic takes on an additional importance, for it
is here that Kant offers the means of removing it. Once the a priori and the
empirical elements have been clearly separated through the analysis carried
out in the Analytic and understood in their difference from one another, Kant
is able in the Dialectic to show how these elements are necessarily combined
in the highest good and to remove obstacles that may impede understanding
of this object as something that is possible. In working out his doctrine of the
highest good, Kant identifies the relation the moral law bears to the totality
of the good, and the relation in which, within that good, virtue stands to
happiness. By explaining these connections, he provides the outlines of a
systematically unified conception of practical life, to which both virtue and
happiness are integral, and in this way too helps to secure "acceptance and
durability" for the moral law. Thus, through appreciating both parts of
Kant's work—both the analysis with which it begins and the synthesis with
which it is completed—it is possible, if Kant's argument is successful, both
to find the moral law, taken just by itself, as based in the autonomy of the
will, to be an ennobling and inspiring source of motivation, and also to find
a source of further support for this motivation by comprehending how it is
possible for the virtuous action that issues from it to contribute to the totality
of the good and, therewith, to human happiness as well.15
STEPHEN ENGSTROM
UNIVERSITY OF PITTSBURGH

15

1 wish to thank Professors Werner Pluhar and Jerome Schneewind for a number of very helpful suggestions.

smut
be?

pracfifdjen Sernunff
«ott

3mmartitei 5Unt

£R t 9 a ,
*«V S o ^ a n n $ r i e b r t $
1788.

«Çartttiocft

Critique
of

Practical Reason
by

Immanuel Kant

Riga
Johann Friedrich Hartknoch
1788

CRITIQUE
OF
PRACTICAL REASON

BY
IMMANUEL KANT

PREFACE

Why this Critique1 is titled a critique not of pure practical reason but simply2 of practical reason as such,3 although its parallelism with the critique
of speculative reason4 seems to require the former—on this the treatise provides sufficient information. This Critique is to establish merely5 that there
is pure practical reason, and with this aim it critiques6 reason's entire practical power1 If it succeeds in this [aim], then it does not need to critique (as
does happen with speculative reason)8 the pure power itselfin order to see
1

[Kritik. Here Kant uses the term to refer to the work rather than, as he does most often, to the
activity of critique.]
2

[schlechthin, used informally here; usually Kant employs this term (synonymously with
schlechterdings) more formally, to mean 'absolutely.']
3

[überhaupt. I render this term—except where doing so would be misleading—by 'as such'
rather than by 'generally' (or 'in general') because the latter can too often be misread as an adverb modifying some nearby verb. In the few cases where 'as such' is used to translate als
solch-, this use is readily identifiable by the expression's placement or by its being set off by
commas.]
4

[I.e., the critique of speculative pure reason—the subject of the Critique of Pure Reason. According to Kant's own definition of the term, 'speculative' means the same as 'theoretical'
(compare the etymology of the two terms) except for being confined to objects beyond any
possible experience: see the Critique of Pure Reason, A 634-35 = B 662-63, and cf. below,
Ak. V, 47. However, Kant often uses the term more broadly, as pertaining not only to such objects but also to objects of possible experience.]
5

[soll bloß dartun, which could also mean 'is merely to establish.' The rendering adopted here
looks ahead to 'in order to see [i.e., establish]' in the next sentence.]
6

[I.e., examines the scope and limits of: kritisiert.]

7

[Or 'practical ability': praktisches Vermögen. I avoid translating Vermögen as 'faculty,' because this term may wrongly suggest—in line with the traditional "faculty psychology"—that
a Vermögen is some kind of psychological entity "in" the mind, rather than a mere power or
ability.]
8

[Although in the original the parenthesis, as is typical for Kant's writing, occurs at the end of

3

4

PREFACE

whether reason is not overreaching itself, by merely claiming such a power.
For if as pure reason it is actually9 practical, then it proves its reality10 and
that of its concepts through the deed,11 and all subtle reasoning12 against the
possibility of its being practical is futile.
With this pure practical power of reason, transcendental freedom is now
also established—taken, moreover, in that absolute signification in which
speculative reason needed this freedom, when using the concept of causality, in order to rescue itself from the antinomy into which it unavoidably
falls when it wants to think the unconditioned in the series13 of causal linkage.14 Speculative reason was able to put this concept15 forth only problematically, as not impossible to think, without securing the concept's objective
reality,16 but only in order to keep an alleged impossibility of what speculative reason must surely accept17 at least as thinkable from challenging speculative reason's essence and from plunging this power into an abyss of
skepticism.18
Kant's sentence (just after 'not overreaching itself'), the present context—including, in particular, the next sentence—clearly suggests that Kant intends it to apply to 'does not need to critique.']
9

[Wirklich. Unlike in contemporary German, this term never means 'real' in Kant (as he uses
this latter term), and translating it so tends to distort what Kant is trying to say, especially in
contexts—such as the present one—where reality in Kant's sense is likewise mentioned.]
10

[I.e., its applicability to things (Latin res, from which 'reality' is derived).]

11

[Or 'through action': durch die Tat. In the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 22, Kant defines
'deed' as follows: A deed is what we call an action insofar as it falls under [more precisely, 'is
subject to': unter. . . steht] laws of obligation, thus also insofar as the subject is regarded in it
in terms of the freedom of his power of choice.' (Translation mine.)]
12

[alles Vernünfteln.]

13

[The term is singular here: Reihe.]

14

[-Verbindung. Whenever possible (exceptions are noted), I use 'linkage' and sometimes
'link' (or, where needed, 'combination') for Verbindung, and 'connection' for Verknüpfung;
similarly for the verbs. This is especially appropriate where the two terms occur in the same
context, as, e.g., at Ak. V, 51.]
15

[The concept of transcendental freedom taken in the absolute signification.]

16

[I.e., without securing (rendering secure) the reality that the concept does indeed have. More
literally, Kant says 'without securing [sichern] for the concept its objective reality.']
17
18

[gelten lassen.]

[See, in the Critique of Pure Reason, the Third Antinomy of Pure Reason, A 444-51 =
B 472-79, and cf. A 488/B 516, A 532-58 = B 560-86.]

PREFACE

5

Now the concept of freedom, insofar as its reality is proved by an apodeictic law of practical reason, forms the keystone of the whole edifice of a
system of pure reason, even of speculative reason.19 All other concepts
(those of God and immortality) that, as mere ideas, remain unsupported in
speculative reason now attach themselves to the concept of freedom and acquire, with it and through it, stability and objective reality.20 I.e., their possibility21 is proved by freedom's being actual,22 for this idea reveals itself
through the moral law.
But freedom, among all the ideas of speculative reason, is also the only
one whose possibility we know23 a priori—though without having insight into
it24—because it is the condition25 of the moral law, which we do know.26
The ideas of God and immortality, on the other hand, are not conditions of

19

[See below, Ak. V, 28-57.]

20

[See below, Ak. V, 119-34.]

21

[Their real, not just logical, possibility.]

22

[wirklich. Here again, translating this term as 'real' distorts what Kant is saying, especially
since here too reality in Kant's sense has just been mentioned.]
23

[wissen.]

24

[sie . . . einzusehen. Insight (Einsicht), in Kant, is theoretical (rather than practical) cognition; cf. the etymology of 'theoretical.']
25

Lest anyone surmise that he encounters inconsistencies here if I now call freedom
the condition of the moral law and afterwards, in the treatise, maintain a that the
moral law is the condition under which we can first of all become awareh of freedom, I wish only to point ouF that whereas freedom is indeed the ratio essendi of
the moral law, the moral law is the ratio cognoscendid of freedom. For if the moral
law were not previously thought distinctly in our reason, we would never consider
ourselves entitled to assume such a thing e as freedom (even though freedom is not
self-contradictory). But if there were no freedom, then the moral law could not be
encountered1 in us at all.
a
[behaupten.]
b
[Or 'conscious': bewußt.]
c
[erinnern.]
d
[Respectively, 'reason for the being' and 'reason for the cognizing.']
e
[so etwas.]
f
[Literally, 'would not be [there] to be encountered': würde . . . nicht anzutreffen sein. This
second case thus illustrates how freedom is the moral law's ratio essendi, whereas the preceding case illustrated how the moral law (as thought by us) is the ratio cognoscendi of freedom.]
26

[See below, Ak. V, 27-33, 42-50.]

4

6

PREFACE

the moral law,27 but conditions only of the necessary object28 of a will determined by this law, i.e., conditions of the merely practical29 use of our
reason. Hence concerning those ideas we cannot claim30 to cognize31 and
have insight into—I wish to say not merely their actuality, but even their
possibility. But they are nonetheless conditions32 for the application of the
morally determined will to its object that is given to it a priori (the highest
good).33 Consequently their possibility can and must in this practical reference34 be assumed even without our theoretically cognizing and having insight into them. For this latter demand [that we assume the possibility of
these ideas] it suffices, for a practical aim,35 that they contain no intrinsic
impossibility (contradiction). Here there is, then, a basis of assent36—
merely subjective in comparison to speculative reason, yet valid objectively
for an equally pure but practical reason—whereby the ideas of God and immortality are provided, by means of the concept of freedom, with objective
27

[des moralischen Gesetzes.]

28

[Viz., the highest good. Cf. just below.]

29

[Rather than theoretical.]

30

[behaupten.]

31

[Kant here means (cf. just below) cognize theoretically: [theoretisch] erkennen; on Kant's
view we do have practical cognition of God and (our soul's) immortality—not, however, theoretical cognition and hence insight. It is essential, moreover, that erkennen (similarly for the
noun, Erkenntnis) be translated throughout not as Ho know,' but as 'to cognize,' precisely because on Kant's view—as this passage begins to indicate—our practical cognitions (Erkenntnisse) of God and immortality are not instances of knowledge (Wissen) but of rational (moral)
faith. See below, Ak. V, 122-48, esp. 132-38 and 144-46, cf. 57. See also the Critique of Pure
Reason, B xxi and the famous passage at B xxx, as well as A 633-34 = B 661-62 and
A 828-29 = B 856-57; and cf. the Critique of Judgment, Ak. V, 467, 469-70, 472, and 475.]
32

[Reading sind sie Bedingungen for sind die Bedingungen. Karl Vorländer instead reads sind
sie die Bedingungen, i.e., 'they are . . . the conditions.' The reading adopted here fits best with
what Kant has just said.]
33

[On the highest good, see below, Ak. V, 107-19.]

34

[Beziehung.]

35

[in praktischer Absicht.]

36

[Literally, 'basis of considering-true': Grund des Fürwahrhaltens. With a few exceptions, I
translate Grund as 'basis' rather than 'ground.' One advantage of this rendering is that the corresponding 'based on' is rather less awkward than 'grounded in.' But the main advantage is
that whereas the 'ground' terminology tends to suggest a logical relation, the 'basis' terminology is much broader—almost always appropriately so. E.g., a Bestimmungsgrund, i.e., a basis
determining something, can be all sorts of things.]

PREFACE

7

reality and with an authority,37 indeed a subjective necessity (a need of pure
reason), to assume them. This,38 however, does not expand reason in its theoretical cognition, but only gives us the possibility39 [of God and immortality], which previously was only ^problem and here becomes an assertion,40
and thus connects41 the practical use of reason with the elements of the theoretical use. And this need [of pure reason] is by no means a hypothetical
one for a discretionary42 aim of speculation, where one must assume something if one wants to ascend to the completion43 of reason's use in speculation; rather, it is a legal need44 to assume something without which what
one ought to set irremissibly as the aim of one's doing and refraining45 cannot be done.46
It would indeed be more satisfying for our speculative reason to solve
those problems47 on its own, without this detour, and to preserve them as
insight for practical use; but it so happens that our power of speculation is
not so well off. Those who boast of such lofty cognitions should not keep
them back but should exhibit them publicly to be tested and highly esteemed. They wish48 to prove; very well, let them prove, and the critique49
will lay all its weaponry at their feet, [acknowledging them] as victors.
Quid statis? Nolint. Atqui licet esse beatis.50 Since, then, they are in fact not
37

[Befugnis.]

38

[I.e., the providing of the ideas of God and immortality with objective reality and with an authority and subjective necessity to assume them.]
39

[The real, not just logical, possibility.]

40

[Assertion.]

41

[verknüpfen.]

42

[Or 'optional': beliebig.]

43

[Or 'perfection': Vollendung.]

44

[I.e., a need arising from the (moral) law: ein gesetzliches. I have deleted the emphasis on
cm ('a').]

45

[seines Tuns und Lassens.]

46

[geschehen.]

47

[Of God and immortality: Aufgaben.]

48

[wollen.]

49

[The (activity of) critique in general. Likewise at the beginning of the next paragraph.]

50

[The quote is from Horace's Satires, I, i, 19. A god (who turns out to be Jupiter), having offered to people unhappy with their lives the opportunity to change places with others, yet find-

8

6

PREFACE

willing,51 presumably because they are unable, we must only take up that
weaponry again in order to seek the concepts of God, freedom, and immortality—-for the possibility52 of which speculation does not find sufficient
warrant—in a moral use of reason, and to base them on this use.53
Here the critique's puzzle as to how one can deny objective reality to the
suprasensible54 use of the categories and yet grant them55 this reality in regard to the objects of pure practical reason is also for the first time explained. For beforehand, as long as such a practical use is familiar56 only by
name, this must necessarily look inconsistent. But now one becomes aware,
by a complete dissection of reason's practical use,57 that here the reality at
issue does not aim at any determination of the categories and expansion of
cognition to the suprasensible, but that what is meant by this reality is only
that in this [practical] reference an object belongs to them at all, because
they are either contained in the necessary a priori determination of the will
or inseparably linked with the object of this determination. Hence that inconsistency vanishes, because a different use is being made of those
concepts58 from the use that speculative reason requires. On the contrary,
there now discloses itself a very satisfying confirmation, hardly to be expected before, of the speculative critique's consistent way of thinking. For
while that critique urged us to allow objects of experience taken as such59—
ing them reluctant, says to them, "What are you waiting for?" (literally, "Why are you standing still?"), and then comments, "They are not willing; yet they could be happy" All translations given in footnotes are my own, though I do not say so on each occasion. As regards this
particular translation, however, I am indebted to Garrett G. Fagan for his valuable and insightful assistance concerning both a grammatical subtlety in the passage (viz., the role of the dative in beatis) and Horace's most likely intended meaning,]
51

[nicht wollen.]

52

[I.e., again, real possibility.]

53

[See below, Ak. V, 119-21, 134-41.]

54

[übersinnlich.]

55

[ihnen. Erdmann instead reads ihm, i.e., 'it,' which then refers not to the categories but to
their suprasensible use.]
56

[man . . . kennt. See below, Ak. V, 35 br. n. 120.]

57

[Reading, with Erich Adickes and with Paul Natorp in the Akademie edition, des letzteren
for der letzteren, which would refer (implicitly) to practical reason.]
58
59

[I.e., the categories.]

[I.e., taken as objects of experience, not as the things that these objects are in themselves.
For Kant's view that the things that appear are things in themselves (although we can have the-

PREFACE

9

including even our own subject60—to hold only as appearances, but yet to
base them on things in themselves, and therefore not to regard everything
suprasensible as invention and the concept of the suprasensible as empty of
content, [practical reason now yields confirmation]: practical reason, on its
own and without having made an agreement with speculative reason, now
provides a suprasensible object of the category of causality, namely freedom, with reality (although—since this [freedom] is a practical concept—it
also does so only for practical use); thus it confirms by a fact61 what in the
speculative critique could only be thought^2 With this, at the same time, the
strange though indisputable assertion of the speculative critique, that in
inner intuition even the thinking subject is merely an appearance to himself,^ now also receives in the critique of practical reason its full confirmation—and is here confirmed so well that one must arrive at it even if the former critique had not proved this proposition at all.64
oretical cognition of them only as appearances), see the Critique of Pure Reason,
B xxvi-xxvii, 56, 59, 305n, 333.]
60

[I.e., ourselves as subjects.]

61

[Faktum. On the fact of reason, see below, Ak. V, 31 incl. br. n. 75.]

62

[See below, Ak. V, 27-33, 42-50.]

63

[See the Paralogisms of Pure Reason in the Critique of Pure Reason, A 341-405/
B 399-428, esp.B 406-13.]
64

The reconciliation 3 of causality as freedom with causality as natural mechanism—the first of which is establishedb through the moral law,c the second through
the law of nature, and indeed in one and the same subject, the human being—is impossible without presenting 0 the human being in reference to the first as a being in
itself but in reference to the second as an appearance, the former m pure and the latter in empirical consciousness. Otherwise the contradiction of reason with itself is
unavoidable.
a
[Vereinigung.]
b
[feststehen.]
c
[Sittengesetz.]
d
[vorstellen, traditionally translated as 'to represent'; the noun, Vorstellung, is similarly
translated here as 'presentation' rather than as 'representation.' (In contexts where 'to present'
and 'presentation' might sound misleading and the original terms are applied narrowly, I use
'to conceive' and 'conception' instead.) Presentations, as the term is here used, are such objects of our direct awareness as sensations, intuitions, perceptions, concepts, cognitions, ideas,
and schemata; see the Critique of Pure Reason, A 320/B 376-77 and A 140/B 179. I have
abandoned the traditional rendering of Vorstellung (similarly for the verb) because it suggests
that Kant's theory of sensation, perception, cognition, etc., is representational, which it is not.
For one thing, vorstellen, in the Kantian use of the term that is relevant here, is not—as the
'representation' terminology tends to suggest—something that Vorstellungen do; it is some-

10

7

PREFACE

Through this [explanation] I also understand why the most significant
objections against the Critique [of Pure Reason] that I have so far encountered revolve precisely about these two points: viz., on the one hand, an objective reality of the categories [as] applied to noumena that is denied in
theoretical and asserted in practical cognition; on the other hand, the paradoxical demand to make oneself, as subject of freedom, a noumenon, but
simultaneously also, with regard to nature, a phenomenon in one's own
empirical consciousness. For, as long as people had not yet framed any
determinate concepts of morality and freedom, they could not divine, on the
one hand, on what, as noumenon, they were to base the alleged appearance,
and, on the other hand, whether indeed framing a concept of this noumenon
was still possible at all, if all the concepts of pure understanding in its theoretical use had already been dedicated beforehand exclusively to mere appearances. Only a comprehensive Critique of Practical Reason can remove
all this misinterpretation and put the consistent way of thinking, which indeed amounts to its greatest merit, in a clear light.65
So much by way of justification as to why the concepts and principles66
of pure speculative reason, which, after all, have already undergone their
special critique, are in this work now and then subjected to examination
thing that we do. Above all, however, vorstellen as so used never means anything like 'to represent' in the sense of 'to stand for.' Even an empirical intuition, e.g., does not stand for—does
not represent—an object of experience (let alone a thing in itself), but rather enters into the experience which that object of experience is. This already serious problem with the 'representation' terminology has traditionally been aggravated further by the fact that another Kantian
term, Darstellung (similarly for the verb), has simultaneously been translated most commonly
as 'presentation' (less often, but appropriately, as 'exhibition'), which suggests an incorrect
and very misleading relation between Vorstellung and Darstellung. The traditional rendering
of Vorstellung as 'representation' seems to have been prompted by Kant's own linking of
Vorstellung to the Latin repraesentatio. However, this Latin term actually means no more than
a 'making present to oneself—cf. German Vergegenwärtigung—and thus, like Kant's Vorstellung, carries no implication whatsoever that perception, cognition, etc., are representational.
Latin praesentatio, on the other hand, means only a 'handing over' (of something); and although Kant could have attached a new meaning to praesentatio—as I have done with 'presentation'—he had no need to, since repraesentatio, unlike 'representation,' already fit his
meaning of Vorstellung. The terminological adjustments that I have here described are not
new; I already made them in my translations of Kant's Critique of Judgment and Critique of
Pure Reason (both listed in the Selected Bibliography).]
65
66

[See below, Ak. V, 42-57.]

[Grundsätze. In this Critique, as in the other two, I render both Grundsatz and Prinzip as
'principle,' since Kant does seem to use the two terms interchangeably. Cf. Kant's Logic, Ak.
IX, 110, where this interchangeability is made explicit.]

PREFACE

11

once more. Ordinarily67 this is not very fitting for the systematic progression of a science that is to be built (since matters that have been adjudicated
must properly only be cited and not be raised again). Yet here it was permitted—indeed, necessary. For reason, with those concepts, is being considered in transition to a use of them that is entirely different from the use that
it made of them there. Such a transition, however, makes it necessary to
compare the older with the newer use, in order to distinguish carefully the
new track from the previous one and to draw attention simultaneously to
their coherence.68 Hence considerations of this kind, including the consideration that has once more been directed—but in pure reason's practical
use—to the concept of freedom, should not be regarded as interpolations
that might serve only to fill gaps in the critical system of speculative reason
(for this system is complete in its aim) and to be supplemented,69 as tends to
come about when a building is rushed, by props and buttresses attached afterwards. They should be regarded, rather, as true members that make discernible the coherence of the system, so that concepts that could there be
presented70 only problematically are now made accessible to insight71 in
their real exhibition.72 This reminder concerns above all the concept of freedom. One cannot help noting with astonishment that so many people still
boast of being capable of ready insight into this concept and of explaining
the possibility of freedom.73 They boast of these abilities because they consider the concept merely in psychological reference, whereas if they had
previously examined it in transcendental reference they would have had to
cognize74 its indispensability as a problematic concept in a complete use of

67

[sonst]

68

[Zusammenhang. Cf. 'coherence of the system,' below.]

69

[nock]

70

[vorgestellt]

71

[jetzt...

72

[Darstellung.]

einsehen zu lassen.]

73

[I follow the Akademie edition in reading derselben, in accordance with the first edition (of
1788). The second edition (of 1792) has desselben, which makes the possibility be that of the
concept of freedom. It should be noted that the second edition does not seem to have been edited
by Kant himself. See Paul Natorp's introduction to the Akademie edition of the work, Ak. V,
498, and Karl Vorländer's introduction to the Philosophische Bibliothek edition, v. 38, xlv-xlvi.]
74

[Or 'recognize': erkennen.]

12

8

PREFACE

speculative reason as well as its utter incomprehensibility;15 and if thereafter they had proceeded with it to the practical use, they would have had to
arrive on their own at exactly the same determination of it in regard to its
principles, which they are ordinarily so reluctant to accept.76 The concept of
freedom is the stumbling block for all empiricists, but also the key to the
most sublime practical principles for critical moralists, who thereby gain
the insight that they must necessarily proceed rationally. I therefore beseech the reader not to survey with merely a cursory glance what is said
about this concept at the conclusion of the Analytic.77
I must leave it to the experts in this sort of work to judge78 whether such
a system of pure practical reason as is here being developed from the critique of this power79 has made it a matter of much or little trouble not to
miss, above all, the right viewpoint from which the whole of this power can
be traced out correctly. The system80 does presuppose the Grounding for
the Metaphysics of Morals?1 but only insofar as that work provides82 a preliminary acquaintance with the principle of duty and indicates as well as
justifies a determinate formula of duty;83 otherwise it subsists on its own.
75

[Unbegreiflichkeit.]

76

[sichzu.. . verstehen.]

77

[See below, Ak. V, 89-106.]

78

[beurteilen. In most Kantian texts and in German generally, this is simply the transitive analogue of urteilen—cf. English 'bemoan' and 'moan.' By the same token, the corresponding
nouns are likewise synonymous, except that Beurteilung means 'judgment' only in the sense of
(act of) judging whereas Urteil means 'judgment' in this sense or in the sense of proposition.]
79

[Of practical reason (as such; cf. the beginning of this Preface): der letzteren.]

80

[The system of the critique, not of the science (cf. below): Es.]

81

[Kant's Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten of 1785.]

82

[Literally, 'makes': macht.]

83

A reviewer3 who wanted to say something to censure that work hit the mark better
than he himself may have intended when he said that no new principle of morality0
has been put forth in it0 but only a new formula. But who indeed couldd introduce a
principle of all morality e and, as it were, first invent morality—just as if before him
the world had been in ignorance or in thoroughgoing error concerning what [one's]
duty isf? But whoever knows what a. formula means to a mathematician, a formula
that determines quite precisely and keeps one from missing what is to be done in
order to comply with an assignment,^ will not consider a formula that does this with
regard to all duty as such to be something insignificant and dispensable.
a
[Although there has been some disagreement on this point, it does seem clear that Kant is

PREFACE

13

That the division of all practical sciences to the point of completeness, such
as the critique of speculative reason accomplished, has not been added—for
this too a valid basis can be found in the constitution84 of this practical
power of reason. For, the particular determination of duties as human duties, which is needed in order to divide them, is possible only if the subject
referring to Gottlob August Tittel (1739-1816), ecclesiastical counselor at Karlsruhe, and his
Über Herrn Kant's Moralreform—i.e., On Mr. Kant's Moral Reform—(Frankfurt and
Leipzig: Gebrüder Pfahler, 1786; reprinted, Brussels: Culture et civilisation, 1969). In that
work, Tittel speaks (ibid., 55) of Kant's "alleged new principle of the doctrine of morals" and
asks (ibid., 35), "Is the entire Kantian moral reform indeed to limit itself just to a new formula?" See Paul Natorp's comments on the Akademie edition of this Critique, Ak. V, 506-07
(cf. 497), and Karl Vorländer's introduction to the Philosophische Bibliothek edition of the
same work, vol. 38, xvi-xvii. Both Natorp and Vorländer (loc. cit.) do also mention another reviewer of the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, viz., Johann Friedrich Flatt
(1759-1821), a theologian and philosopher at Tübingen who was the regular philosophical reviewer for the Tübingische gelehrte Anzeigen (Vorländer modernizes Tübingische to
Tübinger), i.e., Tübingen Scholarly Announcements. The review by Flatt (who was later ennobled to von Flatt) appeared there on February 16, 1786 (item 14, 105-12). However, both Natorp and Vorländer (loc. cit.) expressly link Tittel, not Flatt, to this location in Kant's Preface,
presumably because the cited passages from Tittel fit the present context so perfectly. It is true
that when Natorp, in his comments on Kant's Metaphysics of Morals of 1797 (Ak. VI, 521, cf.
V, 497, 506-07), points out that Kant's reference in that work (at Ak. VI, 207) to "a Tübingen
reviewer" is to Flatt, he adds that this "is in all probability the same reviewer whom Kant already had to fend off in the Preface to the Critique of Practical Reason." But although Kant
does in this Preface respond (without giving a name) to some of Flatt's charges (several of
which, including that of "inconsistency," can also be found in Tittel's book), this comment by
Natorp is entirely consistent with those cited above, since it does not imply that the reviewer
alluded to at this location of the Preface is Flatt rather than Tittel.]
b
[Prinzip der Moralität.]
c
[See the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 403-04.]
d
[wollte, in one of its less common senses.]
e
[Grundsatz aller Sittlichkeit.]
f
[was Pflicht sei, which can refer either to duty per se or to the actions that are one's duty.
The reading adopted here fits the continuation of Kant's note. See also Kant's characterization
of duty below, Ak. V, 80.]
g [Aufgabe.]
84

[Beschaffenheit. In my translations of the first and third Critiques I have, wherever possible,
translated this term—in the sense in which it occurs here—as 'character' (and beschaffen sein
similarly as 'to be of [this or that] character' rather than 'to be constituted [in this or that
way]'), in order to keep this term from being linked erroneously with Kant's technical term
'constitutive' as distinguished from 'regulative.'In this Critique, on the other hand, the paramount concern must be to keep the term Beschaffenheit—when used in this sense—from being
confused with Charakter ('character') in the sense that is central to morality. However,
Beschaffenheit has also another sense—in which things can be said to have eine Beschaffenheit—and when it occurs in that other sense I translate it, as I did in the other two Critiques, as
'characteristic.']

14

9

PREFACE

of this determination (the human being) has previously been cognized in
terms of85 the constitution with which he is actual, although only to the extent necessary in reference to duty as such.86 This constitution,87 however,
does not belong in a critique of practical reason as such; such a critique is to
indicate completely only the principles of this power's possibility, of its
range and bounds, without particular reference to human nature. Here,
therefore, the division belongs to the system of the science, not to the system of the critique.
A certain reviewer88 of that Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals—
truth-loving and acute, therefore always still worthy of respect—raised the
objection that the concept of the good was not there established (as, in his
opinion, would have been necessary) before the moral principle; I have, I
hope, dealt adequately with this objection in the second chapter89 of the Analytic.90 I have also taken into account—and I shall continue to do so—
85

[nach.]

86

[On human duties, cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 216-17, 394-95.]

87

[The human being's actual constitution, i.e., his nature (cf. below), which thus includes the
particular: diese.]
88

[The reviewer was Hermann Andreas Pistorius (1730-98). The review, which appeared in
Allgemeine deutsche Bibliothek (vol. 66, part II, 447-63), was anonymous. However, Daniel
Jenisch (1762-1804), in a letter to Kant dated May 14,1787 (Ak. X, 486 [second edition, published in 1922, of Kant's Correspondence; in the first edition, published in 1900, the page is
463]), says that the reviewer in question "is supposed to be [soil.. . seyn] Provost Pistorius on
[the Baltic island of] Fehmarn, the translator of [David] Hartley [1705-57]," which identifies
him as the Pistorius named above.]
89
90

[See below, Ak. V, 57-71.]

A further objection could be raised against me, viz., why I also did not explicate3
beforehand the concept of our power of desire, or of the feeling of pleasure—although this reproach would be improper, because one should properly be able to
presuppose this explication as given in psychology. However, in psychology the definition might indeed be so framed that the feeling of pleasure would (as is actually
commonly done) be laid at the basis of the determination of our power of desire; but
thus the supreme principle of practical philosophy would necessarily have to turn
out to be empirical—which surely must first of all be established, and is utterly refuted in this Critique. Here, therefore, I want to give the explication as it must be
[given] in order to leave this disputed point undecided at the beginning, as is proper.
— Life b is a being's power0 to act according to laws of the power of desire. The
power of desired is the being's power to be, through its presentations, [the] cause of
the actuality of the objects of these presentations. Pleasure e is the presentation of
the agreement* of the object or of the action^ with the subjective conditions of life,

PREFACE

15

many other objections that have reached me from men who reveal by their
will[power] that they have at heart the discovery of truth (for, those who
have only their old system before their eyes and for whom it is already settled beforehand what is to be approved or disapproved are not about to demand a discussion that might stand in the way of their private aim).
When one is concerned to determine a particular power of the human
soul in terms of its sources, contents, and bounds, then indeed, by the nature
of human cognition, one cannot start except from the soul's parts, their exact
and (as far as is possible according to the current situation of what elements
of the soul we have already acquired) complete exhibition. But there is also
a second attentiveness that is more philosophical and architectonic: viz., to
i.e., with the power [consisting] of the causality of a presentation in regard to the
actuality of its object (or [in regard to] the determination of the subject's forces*1 to
action in order to produce the object). I need [say] no more on behalf of a critique of
concepts borrowed from psychology; the rest is accomplished by the Critique itself.
This explication [of those concepts], one readily becomes aware, leaves undecided
the question as to whether pleasure must always be laid at the basis of the power of
desire, or whether under certain conditions it only follows upon that power's determination; for this explication is composed of none but characteristicsi of pure understanding, i.e., categories, which contain nothing empirical. Such caution—viz.,
not to anticipate one's judgments by ariskydefinition before the concept has been
dissected completely, which often is not achieved until very late—is very commendable in all of philosophy, and yet is often neglected. Indeed, it will be noticed
in the entire course of the critique (of theoretical as well as practical reason) that one
finds in this course ample* occasion to compensate for many deficiencies in the old
dogmatic progression of philosophy, and to correct mistakes that remain unnoticed
until a use of reason is made of concepts1 that aims at the whole of reason.
a

[erklären.]
[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 211-14.]
c
[Or 'ability*: Vermögen.]
d
[Cf. the Critique of Judgment, Ak. V, 177n, and Kant's First Introduction to that work, Ak.
XX, 230n.]
e
[Cf. (and contrast) the Critique of Judgment, Ak. V, 204, 220, 222, and the First Introduction thereto, Ak. XX, 230-31, also 206.]
f
[Übereinstimmung.]
s [Handlung.]
h
[Or 'powers': Kräfte.]
1
[Merkmalen.]
J [mannigfaltig.]
k
[Literally, 'alter': abändern,]
1
[von Begriffen einen Gebrauch der Vernunft macht. Natorp wonders if we should read, instead, von Begriffen der Vernunft einen Gebrauch macht, i.e., *a use is made of concepts of reason/]
b

16

11

PREFACE

grasp correctly the idea of the whole and, on the basis of this idea and in a
pure power of reason, to fix one's eyes upon all those parts in their reciprocal reference to one another by means of their derivation from the concept
of that whole. This examination and warrant is possible only through the
most intimate acquaintance with the system. Those who were irked by the
first investigation and hence did not consider acquiring that acquaintance
worth the trouble do not reach the second level, viz., that of the overview,
which is a synthetic return to what had previously been given analytically;
and it is no wonder if theyfindinconsistencies everywhere even though the
gaps that suggest these inconsistencies are to be encountered not in the system itself but merely in their own incoherent progression of thought.
I am not worried at all, in regard to this treatise, about the reproach that I
want to introduce a new language,91 because here the kind of cognition is
one that by itself approaches popularity. Even in regard to thefirstCritique
this reproach could not have occurred to anyone who had thought it through
rather than merely leafed through it. To contrive new words where the language already has no lack of expressions for given concepts is a childish endeavor to distinguish oneself from the crowd, if not by new and true
thoughts then at least by new patches on the old garment» If, therefore, the
readers of that work know of more popular expressions that are yet just as
adequate to the thought as mine seemed to me, or if perhaps they would
venture to establish the nullity of these thoughts themselves and thus simultaneously of any expressions designating them, then by the first they would
greatly oblige me, for I want only to be understood, but for the second they
would deserve well of philosophy. However, as long as those thoughts continue to stand, I very much doubt that expressions adequate to them and
nonetheless more prevalent are likely92 to be found for them.93
91

[Kant's retort is directed mainly against Gottlob August Tittel (see above, Ak. V, 8 br. n.
83a), who in his book had chastised Kant for his "overly frequent use of abstract terminologies" (op. cit., 4), and for "promulgating long since familiar things as new in an inarticulate
language" (ibid., 25).]
92
93

[dürflen.]

Here I am worried more (than about not being understood) about being now and
then misinterpreted with regard to some expressions that I selected with the greatest
care in order to keep them from missing the concepts] to which they point. Thus in
the table of categories of practical reason,3 under the heading of modality, the permitted and not permitted (practically objectively possible and impossible) have
almost the same sense in the ordinary use of language0 as do the immediately following categories duty and contrary to duty. Here, however, the first [pair] is to

PREFACE

17

In this way, then, it would seem that the a priori principles of two powers of the mind, the power of cognition and that of desire, have now
mean what is in agreement or conflict with a merely possible practical precept (as,
say, the solution of all problems of geometry and mechanics), but the second, what
stands in such a relation0 to a law actually residing in reason as such; and this distinction in meaning, although somewhat unusual, is not entirely foreign even to the
ordinary use of language. Thus, e.g., to an orator, as such, it is not permitted to coin
new words or constructions; to a poet this is to some extent permitted. In neither of
these two [cases] is one thinking of duty. For if someone wants to forfeit his reputation as an orator, no one can bar him from doing it. The concern here is only with the
distinction of imperatives in terms of1 a problematic, assertoric, and apodeictic determining basis.e Similarly, in the note where I contrasted the moral ideas of practical perfection in different philosophical schools/1 distinguished the idea of wisdom
from that of holiness, although I myself have declared them to be^ basically and objectively one and the same.h In that note, however, I mean by wisdom only that wisdom to which the human being (the Stoic) lays claim, hence wisdom attributed to
the human being subjectively [and] fictitiously1 as a property. (Perhaps the expression virtue, [a property] which the Stoic also paraded, might designate better what is
characteristic of his school.) But most of all the expression, postulate of pure practical reason,^ was capable of occasioning misinterpretation, if confused with the
meaning that postulates of pure mathematics have, which carry with them apodeictic certainty. However, the latter postulate the possibility of an action whose object
has previously with complete certainty been cognized theoretically a priori as possible. The postulate of pure practical reason, on the other hand, postulates the
possibility of an object itself (God and the immortality of the soul) from apodeictic
practical laws, and therefore only on behalf of a practical reason. This certainty of
the postulated possibility is thus not at all theoretical, hence also not apodeictic, i.e.,
a necessity cognized with regard to the object, but is, rather, an assumption necessary, with regard to the subject, for complying with practical reason's objective but
practical laws, hence merely a necessary hypothesis. I could not find a better
expressionk for this subjective but nonetheless unconditioned necessity.
a
[See below, Ak. V, 65-67.]
b
[Kant's point here, at least in part, is that in ordinary German unerlaubt—just like 'not permitted' in ordinary English—means not merely 'permission has not been given' but, in effect,
'forbidden' or 'prohibited.' By the same token, translating the German term as either of these
latter terms would obscure Kant's point. For the table that Kant has just mentioned, see below,
Ak. V, 66.]
c
[Beziehung.]
d
[unter.]
e
[Bestimmungsgrund.]
f
[See below, Ak. V, 127 n. 151.]
s [erklären . . .für.]
h
[The reference is probably to Ak. V, 130-31 incl. n. 178.]
1
['attributedfictitiously'translates angedichtet]

18

PREFACE

been94 ascertained and determined as to the conditions, range, and bounds
of their use» and that a secure basis has been laid for a systematic theoretical as well as practical philosophy as science.
However, presumably nothing worse could befall these endeavors than
that someone should make the unexpected discovery that there is and can be
no a priori cognition at all.95 But there is no danger of this. It would be tantamount to someone's wishing to prove by reason that there is no reason.
For we say that we cognize something by reason only when we are conscious that we could have known it even if we had not encountered it thus in
experience; hence reason's cognition and a priori cognition are one and the
same. It is a direct contradiction to try to squeeze necessity out of an experiential96 proposition {ex pumice aquam)?1 and to try to impart to a judgment, along with this necessity, also true universality (without which no
inference of reason [is possible], and hence also no inference by analogy,
i [See below, Ak. V, 122-33.]
k
[Than postulate.]
94

['it would seem that,.. have now been* renders wären.,. nunmehr]

95

[Kant is referring to Johann Georg Heinrich Feder (1740-1821), the author of Über Raum
und Caussalität, zur Prüfimg der Kantischen Philosophie (Göttingen: Johann Christian Dieterich, 1787; reprinted, Brussels: Culture et Civilisation, 1968). In a letter to Christian
Gottfried Schütz (1747-1832) dated June 25,1787 (Ak. X, 490 [second edition of Kant's Correspondence; in the first edition the page is 467]), Kant says, "Better than any controversies
with Feder and Abel [Jacob Friedrich von Abel (1751-1829), another critic of Kant] (the former of whom maintains that there is no a priori cognition at a l l . . . ), this Critique will prove
and make graspable that pure practical reason is possible, and that it compensates for what I
denied to speculative reason...." Feder is also the editor who wrote a notorious revision of an
already shoddy review by Christian Garve (1742-98) of Kant's first Critique and published it
in the supplement {Zugaben) to the Göttingische gelehrte Anzeigen, i.e., Göttingen Scholarly
Announcements, on January 19,1782 (item 3, 40-48; reprinted as Attachment [Beilage] II in
the Philosophische Bibliothek edition of Kant's Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (vol.
40,167-74). Kant's reply to that review is contained in the Appendix {Anhang) to the Prolegomena, Ak. IV, 371-83.]
96

[Erfahrungs-. In Kant, 'experiential' is not synonymous with 'empirical.' Whereas experience is indeed empirical (insofar as it includes sensation), perception (which includes sensation) is empirical (viz., empirical intuition) without as yet being experience. In order for
perception to become experience, it must be given the synthetic unity provided by the understanding's categories. See the Critique of Pure Reason, B 422n, A 183/B 226 (cf. B vii, 12,
161), and the Prolegomena, Ak. IV, 297-98.]
97

['Water from a pumice stone.' The quote—more fully, aquam a pumice nunc postulas, i.e.,
*you now demand water from a pumice stone [namely, money from a pauper] *—isfromPersa
{The Persian)* I, i, 41, by Titus Maccius Plautus (c. 250-184 B.C.), Roman comic dramatist.]

PREFACE

19

which is an at least presumed universality and objective necessity and
therefore does always presuppose it98). To substitute subjective necessity—
i.e., habit"—for objective100 necessity, which occurs only in a priori judgments, is to deny to reason the ability to make a judgment about the object,101 i.e., to cognize it and what belongs to it. For example, it is to say,
concerning what repeatedly and always follows upon a certain prior state,
not that one can infer it from that state (for this would mean objective necessity and the concept of an a priori linkage), but only that one may (in a
way similar to animals) expect similar cases; i.e., it is to repudiate the concept of cause basically as false and a mere deception of thought.102 As for
trying to remedy this lack of objective and therefore universal validity by
saying that, after all, one sees no basis for attributing to other rational beings a different way of presenting,103 if that attempt yielded a valid inference, then our ignorance would render us greater services for expanding our
cognition than any meditation. For merely because we are not familiar
with104 rational beings other than the human being, we would have a right
to assume them to be constituted just as we cognize ourselves to be, 105 i.e.,
we actually would be familiar with them. I am not even mentioning here
that universality of assent106 does not prove a judgment's objective validity
(i.e., its validity as cognition). I am saying, rather, that even if that universal
assent107 were contingently correct, this could still not yield a proof of [its]
agreement108 with the object, but that, on the contrary, objective validity
alone amounts to the basis of a necessary universal agreement.

98

[I.e., does always presuppose (true) universality and (thus) objective necessity: diese.]

99

[Or 'custom': Gewohnheit]

100

[objektiv.]

101

[Gegenstand, which Kant uses interchangeably with Objekt]

102

[See below, Ak. V, 50-57.]

103 [Q r 'kind 0 f presentation': Vorstellungsart.]
104

[kennen. See below, Ak. V, 35 br. n. 120.]

105

[Cf. the Critique of Judgment, Ak. V, 290n.]

106

[Literally, 'of considering-true': des Fürwahrhaltens.]

107

[jene, which stnctly speaking refers to 'universality of assent.']

108

[Übereinstimmung here, Einstimmung below.]

20

PREFACE

Hume109 also would be quite comfortable with this system of the universal empiricism concerning principles. For, as is familiar, he demanded nothing more than that, instead of any objective meaning of necessity in the
concept of cause, a merely subjective meaning be assumed, viz., habit, in
order to deny to reason any judgment about God,freedom,and immortality;
and, provided that the principles were granted to him, he certainly knew
very well how to draw inferences from them with all logical cogency.110
But even Hume did not make empiricism so universal as to include in it
mathematics also. He considered the propositions111 of mathematics to be
analytic; and if this were correct, they would indeed also be apodeictic, yet
no inference could be drawn from this to an ability112 of reason to make
apodeictic judgments in philosophy as well, viz., such as would be synthetic (as [e.g.] the principle113 of causality). However, if the empiricism
concerning principles were assumed [as] universal, then mathematics too
would be implicated in it.114
109

[David Hume (1711-76), Scottish empiricist philosopher, historian, economist, essayist,
and author of numerous works. Hume's empiricism is one of the two major philosophical traditions to which Kant's philosophy responds—the other being the rationalism of Leibniz, especially as developed by Christian Wolff. (Kant credits Hume with having awakened him from
his "dogmatic slumber," which had been induced by that rationalism.) Hume's most important
philosophical works are A Treatise of Human Nature (London: J, Noon, 1739-40); contemporary edition: edited, with an analytical index, by L.A. Selby-Bigge; 2nd ed. with text rev. and
variant readings by P. H. Nidditch (Oxford: Clarendon Press; New York: Oxford University
Press, 1978); and the Philosophical Essays Concerning Human Understanding (later renamed
to An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding) (London: A. Millar, 1748); contemporary
edition: An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding; A Letter from a Gentleman to His
Friend in Edinburgh; An Abstract of a Treatise of Human Nature; edited and introduced by
Eric Steinberg; 2nd ed, (Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett, 1993).]
110

[Ci the Critique of Pure Reason, A 760-69 = B 788-97.]

111

[Sätze. Sometimes Satz means 'principle' instead; see below.)

112

[Or 'power': Vermögen.]

m

[Satz.]

114

[On this whole paragraph, cf. below, Ak. V, 50-57. As regards Hume's views on the propositions of mathematics, in An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding (Sect. IV, Pt I), he
does indeed hold that the propositions of geometry, algebra, and arithmetic express "relations
of ideas," i.e., to use Kant's term, they are analytic, in A Treatise of Human Nature, Hume had
considered (Bk. I, Pt. Ill, Sect. I) the propositions of geometry, though not those of algebra and
arithmetic, to be empirical and thus, to use Kant's term, synthetic. However, Kant became familiär with the Treatise (it is not known when) only indirectly, through citations (translated
into German) from James Beattie's Essay on the Nature and Immutability of Truth, in Opposi-

PREFACE

21

Now if mathematics comes into conflict with that reason which admits
only empirical principles,115 as is unavoidable in the antinomy where mathematics proves incontestably the infinite divisibility of space but empiricism cannot permit this infinite divisibility,116 then the greatest possible
evidence of demonstration is in manifest contradiction with the alleged
inferences from experiential principles;117 and now one cannot help asking,
like Cheselden's blind man, Which deceives me, sight or touch [feeling]?118
(For empiricism is based on a felt necessity, but rationalism on a necessity
into which one has insight.) And thus universal empiricism reveals itself as
genuine skepticism, which has falsely been ascribed to Hume in such an
unlimited meaning;119 for, with mathematics, he left us at least one secure
touchstone of experience, whereas genuine skepticism permits absolutely120
no such touchstone (which can never be encountered except in a priori principles) even though experience consists indeed not of mere feelings, but
also of judgments.
tion to Sophistry and Scepticism (Edinburgh: A. Kincaid & J. Bell, 1770; reprinted, New York:
Garland Pub., 1983).]
115

[empirische Grundsätze.]

116

[See, in the Critique of Pure Reason, the Second Antinomy of Pure Reason, A 434-43 =
B 462-71, and cf. A 487-88/B 515-16, A 523-27 = B 551-55. Cf. also the Metaphysical
Foundations of Natural Science, Ak. IV, 503-08.]
117

[Erfahrungsprinzipien.]

118

[William Cheselden (1688-1752), an English anatomist and surgeon who succeeded in
curing certain forms of blindness, reported the reaction of one of his patients in Philosophical
Transactions, XXXV (1728), 447. Kant's source for this report probably was a work on optics
by Robert Smith (1689-1768), A Compleat System ofOpticks (Cambridge: Printed for the author, sold by Cornelius Crownfield, 1738), as translated and adapted by Abraham Gotthelf
Kästner (1719-1800) as Vollständiger Lehrbegriff der Optik (Altenburg: Richterische Buchhandlung, 1755).]
119

Names designating the adherents of a sect have at all times carried with them
much perversion of justice, roughly as if someone said, AT is an idealist. For although he definitely not only concedes but insists that for our presentations of external things there are corresponding actual objects as external things, 3 he nonetheless
wants the forms of intuition of these [objects] to attach not to them but only to the
human mind.b
a
[Literally, Kant says 'actual objects of external things': wirkliche Gegenstände äußerer
Dinge.]
b
[On this entire note, which is probably directed against the mentioned Feder-Garve review
of the first Critique, cf. the Prolegomena, Ak. IV, 375n and 376n.]
120

[schlechterdings.]

22

PREFACE

Since, however, in this philosophical and critical age such an empiricism
can scarcely be taken seriously, and is presumably being put forth only as
an exercise for judgment and in order to put the necessity of rational a priori
principles in a clearer light by contrast, one may still be grateful to those
who want to take the trouble to do this otherwise indeed uninstructive work.

INTRODUCTION

On the Idea of a
Critique of Practical Reason
The theoretical use of reason dealt with objects of the cognitive power
alone, and a critique of reason with regard to this use concerned in fact only
the pure cognitive power, because this power raised the suspicion—which
was indeed confirmed thereafter—that it might easily stray beyond its
bounds, losing itself among unattainable objects or even among concepts
conflicting with one another. With the practical use of reason the situation is
indeed different. In this use, reason deals with determining bases121 of the
will, which is a power either to produce objects corresponding to one's presentations, or, at any rate, to determine itself to bring about these objects
(whether or not one's physical power is sufficient), i.e., to determine its
causality. For there reason can at least succeed in determining the will and,
insofar as volition122 alone is at issue, always has objective reality. Here,
therefore, the first question is whether pure reason is sufficient by itself
alone to determine the will, or whether reason123 can be a determining basis
of the will124 only as empirically conditioned. Now at this point there enters
a concept of causality justified by the Critique of Pure Reason although incapable of being exhibited empirically, viz., the concept of freedom; and if
we can now discover grounds for proving that this property does in fact be121

[Bestimmungsgründe.]

122

[Literally, 'the willing': das Wollen.]

123

[Kant actually says sie, which strictly grammatically—but incorrectly—refers back to pure
reason.]
124

[Reading, with Gustav Hartenstein, desselben for derselben.]

23

24

INTRODUCTION

long to the human will (and thus also to the will of all rational beings), then
this establishes not only that pure reason can be practical, but that it alone,
and not the empirically limited reason, is unconditionally practical125 Consequently we shall have to work on a critique not of pure practical, but only
of practical reason as such. For pure [practical]126 reason, once one has
established that there is such a reason, needs no critique. It itself is what
contains the standard for the critique of all its use. Hence the critique of
practical reason as such has the obligation127 to keep the empirically conditioned reason from presuming to seek to provide, alone and exclusively, the
determining basis of the will.128 The use of pure [practical] reason, if one
has established that there is such a reason, is alone immanent;129 the empirically conditioned use [of practical reason] that presumes to be sole ruler is,
on the contrary, transcendent and expresses itself in demands130 and in
commands that go entirely beyond that reason's domain—which is exactly
the inverse relation of the one that we were able to state concerning pure
reason in its speculative use.131
However, since it is still pure reason whose cognition here lies at the
basis of reason's practical use, the division of a critique of practical reason
will nonetheless have to be arranged, in its general outline, in conformity
with that of the critique of speculative reason. Hence we shall have to have
in this critique a Doctrine of Elements and a Doctrine of Method; and
within the former an Analytic, as rule of truth, as the first part, and a Dialectic as exhibition and resolution of the illusion132 in judgments of practical reason. Only the order in the subdivision of the Analytic will once again
be the inverse of that in the critique of pure speculative reason.133 For in the
present critique we shall, starting from principles, proceed to concepts and
125

[See below, Ak. V, 42-57.]

126

[Cf. thefirstparagraph of Kant's Preface, Ak. V, 3.]

127

[Obliegenheit, which is a synonym of Verbindlichkeit]

m

[See below, Ak. V, 22-26.]

129

[I.e., keeps within the limits of possible experience. For the distinction between 'immanent'
and 'transcendent' (below), see the Critique of Pure Reason, A 295-96/B 352-53, cf>
A 326/B 383, A 643 = B 671, A 799 = B 827.]
130

[Zumutungen,]

131

[See below, Ak. V, 89-106.]

m

[des Scheins.]

133

[Cf. below, Ak.V, 90.]

INTRODUCTION

25

only then, if possible, from these to the senses, whereas in the case of speculative reason we started from the senses and had to end with the principles.
Now, the basis for this lies again in this: that we are now concerned with a
will and have to examine reason not in relation to objects but in relation to
this will and its causality; and thus the principles of the empirically unconditioned causality must come at the beginning,134 and only thereafter can
the attempt be made to establish our concepts of the determining basis of
such a will, of their application to objects135 and finally to the subject and
his sensibility.136 The law of the causality from freedom, i.e., some pure
practical principle, here unavoidably comes at the beginning and determines the objects to which alone it can be referred.

[See Chapter I below, Ak. V, 19-57.]
[See Chapter II below, Ak. V, 57-71.]
[See Chapter III below, Ak. V, 71-106.]

CRITIQUE OF
PRACTICAL REASON
PART I
DOCTRINE OF THE ELEMENTS
OF
PURE PRACTICAL REASON

BOOK I
ANALYTIC OF
PURE PRACTICAL REASON
Chapter I
On the Principles of
Pure Practical Reason

§1
EXPLICATION1
Practical principles2 are propositions that contain a general3 determination
of the will, having under it several practical rules. They are subjective, or
maxims, if the condition [under which they apply] is regarded by the subject
as valid only for his will; but they are objective, or practical laws, if the condition is cognized as objective, i.e., as valid for the will of every rational
being.

Comment
If one assumes that pure reason can contain within itself a basis that is sufficient practically, i.e., sufficient to determine the will, then there are practical laws; but if not,4 then all practical principles will be mere maxims. In a
1

[Erklärung, This term has a variety of different meanings; see the Critique of Pure Reason,
A 730 = B 758. Sometimes, including here, it could legitimately be rendered as 'définition' instead of as 'explication/ but I prefer to reserve 'definition' for the German term Definition in
order to enable the reader to identify Kant's uses of this latter term.]
2

[Grundsätze, the literal meaning of which is 'basic propositions.']

3

[allgemein, which can also mean 'universal.']

4

[I.e., if (wo) one does not make that assumption.]

29

30

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

pathologically affected will5 of a rational being one can find a conflict of
maxims with the practical laws cognized by that being himself.6 For example, someone can make it his maxim to endure no affront unavenged and yet
at the same time see7 that this is not a practical law but only his maxim, and
that, on the contrary, as a rule for the will of every rational being it could
not—in one and the same maxim—harmonize8 with itself.
In the cognition of nature the principles of what occurs (e.g., the principle of the equality of action and reaction9 in the communication of
motion) are at the same time laws of nature;10 for there the use of reason is
theoretical and determined by the constitution of the object. In practical
cognition—i.e., cognition that deals merely with determining bases of the
will—principles that one makes for oneself are not yet, on that account,
laws by which one is unavoidably bound,11 because in the practical [sphere]
reason deals with the subject, namely with his power of desire, 12
to whose particular constitution the rule can multifariously conform. A
practical rule is always a product of reason, because it prescribes13 action14 as a means to an effect that is the aim.15 However, for a being in
whom reason is not the sole determining basis of the will, this rule is an imperative, i.e., a rule which is designated by an ought,16 expressing the ob-

5

[I.e., in a will affected by motivating causes of sensibility (see the Critique of Pure Reason,
A 534 = B 562, cf. A 802 - B 830, as well as below, Ak. V, 80, 120), which as such are subjective (Ak. V, 79, 32) and physical (Ak. V, 44).
6

[Following Kant, I use 'it' with 'being' and 'creature,' but 'he' with 'human being' and 'subject,' despite the neuter gender of the German expressions. But unlike Kant, I also use—to preserve clarity—'he' when the being or creature in question is said or implied to be rational.]
7

[Literally, 'have insight': einsehen.]

8
9
10

[zusammenstimmen.]
[Gleichheit der Wirkung und Gegenwirkung.]
[Cf. the Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science, Ak. IV, 544-51.]

1]

[More literally, 'laws to which one is unavoidably subject' : darunter man unvermeidlich
steht.]
12

[Begehrungsvermögen.]

13

[vorschreiben—the corresponding noun being Vorschrift.]

14

[Handlung.]

15

[Absicht]
[Emphasis added.]

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

31

jective necessitation17 of the action, and which signifies that if reason entirely determined the will then the action would unfailingly occur in accordance with this rule. Hence imperatives hold objectively and are entirely
distinct from maxims, which are subjective principles.18 Imperatives, however, either determine the conditions of the causality of a rational being—as
an efficient cause—merely in regard to the effect and the [causality's] adequacy to it; or they determine only the will, whether or not it is sufficient for
the effect. The first would be hypothetical imperatives and would contain
mere precepts19 of skill; the second, on the contrary, would be categorical
and would alone be practical laws.20 Hence maxims are indeed principles,
but not imperatives. Imperatives themselves, however, when they are conditional—i.e., when they determine the will not absolutely21 as will but only
in regard to a desired effect, i.e., when they are hypothetical imperatives—
are indeed practical precepts, but not laws.22 Laws must sufficiently determine the will as will even before I ask whether I do perhaps have the ability
required for a desired effect, or what I am to do in order to produce it.
Hence they must be categorical; otherwise they are not laws, for they lack
the necessity which, if it is to be practical, must be independent of conditions that are pathological and that hence adhere to the will contingently.
Tell someone, for example, that he must work and save in his youth in order
not to want in his old age. This is a correct and at the same time important
practical precept of the will. We readily see, however, that the will is here
being directed to something else that one is presupposing to be desired by
it; and this desire must be left to him, the agent himself, whether he foresees
further resources apart from the assets acquired by himself, or whether perhaps he does not hope to grow old, or thinks that in case of future need he
can manage [by living] plainly. Reason, from which alone can arise any rule
that is to contain necessity, does indeed put necessity also into this its precept (for without it the precept would not be an imperative), but this neces17

[Nötigung. The corresponding verb is nötigen, which Kant himself equates with necessitieren {Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 222). However, since the English 'to necessitate' is unsuitable (very awkward, at best) in most contexts, I use 'to compel' instead.]
18

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 420-21n.]

19

[Vorschriften.]

20

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 414-16.]

21

[schlechthin.]

22

[Gesetze.]

32

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

sity is conditioned only subjectively and cannot be presupposed to the same
degree in all subjects. For reason's legislation»23 however, it is requisite that
reason need presuppose merely itself, because the rule [it gives] is objectively and universally valid only when it holds without contingent, subjective conditions, which distinguish one rational being from another Now tell
someone that he ought never to make a lying promise. This is a rule that
pertains merely to his will, whether or not the aims that the human being
may have can be achieved by this will. The mere volition is what is to be determined by this rule completely a priori. If, now, it is found that this rule is
practically correct, then it is a law, because it is a categorical imperative.
Therefore practical laws refer solely to the will, without regard to what is
accomplished through its causality, and one can abstractfromthis causality
(as belonging to the world of sense) in order to have them pure.

§2
THEOREM I
AH practical principles that presuppose an object24 (matter) of the power of
desire as determining basis of the will25 are, one and all, empirical and cannot provide any practical laws.
By the matter of the power of desire I mean an object whose actuality is
desired. Now if the desire for this object precedes the practical rule and is
the condition for making the rule one's principle, then, I say (first), the principle is always empirical. For the determining basis of the power of
choice26 is then the presentation27 of an object and [also] that relation of the
presentation to the subject by which the power of desire is determined to
23

[Le,, lawgiving (not the product îfaereof): Gesetzgebung, I am refraining from translating
this term as 'lawgiving' because this rendering does not work in all contexts, and because it
would also obscure the link between the German noun and gesetzgebend, for which (likewise)
no term but legislative' works consistently.]
24

[Objekt here, Gegenstand below. Kant uses the two terms interchangeably.]

25

[Wille.)

26

[Willkür, the root meaning of which is 'will-choice/ On Wille and Willkür, cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 213-14, 226, and the Critique of Judgment, Ak. V, 172. On the
power of choice, see also the Critique of Pure Reason, A 534 = B 562, A 549-50 = B 577-78,
A 552-53 = B 580-81, A 800 = B 828, A 802 = B 830.]
27

[Vorstellung.)

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

33

make the object actual. Such a relation to the subject, however, is called
pleasure in the actuality of an object.28 Therefore this pleasure would have
to be presupposed as condition for the possibility of the determination of
the power of choice. However, one cannot cognize a priori concerning any
presentation of some object, whatever the presentation may be, whether it
will be linked with pleasure or displeasure or be indifferent. Therefore in
such a case the determining basis of the power of choice must always be
empirical, and hence so must be the practical material principle that presupposed it as a condition.
Now (second), a principle that is based only on the subjective condition
of receptivity to a pleasure or displeasure ([a receptivity] which can always
be cognized only empirically and cannot be valid in the same way for all rational beings) can indeed serve the subject—who possesses this receptivity—as his maxim, but it cannot serve even the subject himself29 as a law
(because it is lacking in objective necessity, which must be cognized a
priori); and hence such a principle can never provide a practical law.

§3
THEOREM II
All material principles—as such—are, one and all, of one and the same kind
and belong under the general principle of self-love or one's own happiness.
Pleasure from the existence30 of a thing, insofar as it is to be a determining basis of desire for this thing, is based on the receptivity of the subject,
because it depends on the existence of an object; hence it belongs to sense
(feeling) and not to understanding, [a term] which expresses a referring of a
presentation to an object according to concepts, but not to the subject according to feelings. Therefore pleasure is practical only insofar as the sensation31 of agreeableness that the subject expects from the object's actuality
28

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 211-12.]

29

[Reading, with Emil Wille, seiner.. . dieses for ihrer.. . diese.]

30

[Existenz here, Dasein below.]

31

[Empfindung. This term (similarly for empfinden, 'to sense,' near the end of the present paragraph), like its English equivalent, can refer either to a sensation involving one of the senses,
or to a feeling {Gefühl), Kant sometimes attempts to restrict the term to the first of these
meanings, most explicitly in the Critique of Judgment, Ak. V, 205-06, cf. 295; cf. also the
Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 400, and the Anthropology, Ak. VII, 153. But he does not

34

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

determines his power of desire. However, a rational being's consciousness
of the agreeableness of life as uninterruptedly accompanying his whole existence is happiness, and the principle whereby one makes happiness the
highest determining basis of the power of choice is the principle of selflove.32 Hence all material principles, which posit the determining basis of
the power of choice in the pleasure or displeasure to be sensed from the actuality of some object, are entirely of the same kind insofar as they belong,
one and all, to the principle of self-love or one's own happiness.

COROLLARY
All material practical rules posit the determining basis of the will in our
lower power of desire, and if there were no merely formal laws of the will
that sufficiently determined it, then one also could not admit any higher
power of desire.

Comment I
It is surprising how otherwise acute men can believe that they find a distinction between the lower and the higher power of desire according to
whether the presentations linked with the feeling of pleasure have their
origin in the senses or in understanding. For if one inquires about the determining bases of desire and posits them in an agreeableness expected from
something or other, then it does not matter at all where the presentation of
this gratifying object comes from, but only how much the presentation gratifies. If a presentation, even though it may have its seat and origin in the understanding, can determine the power of choice only by presupposing a
feeling of a pleasure in the subject, then its being a determining basis of the
consistently adhere to this restriction; apart from the present instance (cf. also Kant's use of
'sense' above), see, e.g., the Critique of Pure Reason, A 374, and cf. the Grounding for the
Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 399. By the same token, Kant often distinguishes sensation in
the first meaning by calling it Sinnesempfindung, which literally means 'sensation of sense.'
On this expression and the issues involved in it, see my translation of the Critique of Judgment,
Ak. V, 291 br. n. 19. Since the ambiguity between the two meanings is invariably resolved by
the context, I have chosen in this translation (as I did in the previous two) to display Kant's terminological choices, rather than conceal them from the reader by translating not only Gefühl
but also some occurrences of Empfindung as 'feeling.']
32

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 395-96.]

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

35

power of choice depends entirely on the constitution of inner sense, viz.,
[on the fact] that this sense can be affected with agreeableness by that presentation. However different in kind the presentations of objects may be—
whether they be presentations of understanding or even of reason, in contrast to presentations of the senses—the feeling of pleasure by which alone
they properly amount to the determining basis of the will (the agreeableness, the gratification that one expects from them and that impels the activity to produce the object) is nonetheless of the same kind.33 It is so not only
insofar as it can always be cognized merely empirically, but also insofar as
it affects one and the same vital force manifesting itself in our power of desire, and in this regard can differ from any other determining basis in nothing but degree. How, otherwise, could one make a comparison in magnitude
between two determining bases entirely different in terms of the kind of
presentation [involved], in order to prefer the one that most affects one's
power of desire? The same human being can return an instructive book,
available to him only once, in order not to miss the hunt; he can leave in the
middle of a beautiful speech in order not to be late for a meal; he can abandon an entertainment [marked] by rational conversations, which he otherwise greatly esteems, in order to sit down at the gambling table; he can even
turn away a pauper to whom ordinarily34 he is glad to be charitable, because
he happens to have no more money in his pocket than he needs in order to
pay for admission to the theater.35 If the determination of the will rests on
the feeling of agreeableness or disagreeableness that he expects from some
cause, then it is all the same to him by what kind of presentation he is
affected. All that concerns him, in order to decide on a choice,36 is how intense, how long, how easily acquired, and how often repeated this agreeableness is. Just as, to someone who needs gold [coins] for his expenditure
it is all the same whether the material therein, the gold, was dug from the
mountains or washed from the sand, provided it is accepted everywhere at
the same value, so no one asks, when he is concerned merely with the
agreeableness of life, whether presentations of understanding or of sense
[furnish him with gratification,] but only how much and how great is the
gratification they furnish him for the longest time. Only those who would
33

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 377-78.]

34

[sonst]

35

[Komödie, in an older and broader meaning of the term.]

36

[Wahl.]

36

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

like to deny to pure reason the ability to determine the will without the presupposition of some feeling can stray so far—from their own explication—
that what they have themselves previously brought under one and the same
principle they nonetheless explicate thereafter as entirely different in kind.
Thus we find, e.g., that one can find gratification also in the mere application of strength, in the consciousness of one's fortitude of soul in overcoming obstacles opposing one's project, in the cultivation of spiritual37
talents, etc.; and we rightly call these the more refined joys and delights,
because they are more under our control38 than others, do not wear out, but
rather fortify our feeling for still further enjoyment of them, and in delighting us they at the same time cultivate us. Yet to pass them off, on that account, as a way of determining the will different from that by mere sense,
even though for the possibility of those gratifications they do presuppose in
us, as the primary39 condition of this liking,40 a feeling aimed at them, [is a
mistake]; it is just as when ignorant people who would like to dabble in
metaphysics think of matter as so refined—so overrefined—that they could
themselves get dizzy from it, and then believe that in this way they have devised a spiritual and yet extended being.41 If in the case of virtue we rely,
with Epicurus, on the will's being determined by the mere gratification that
virtue promises, we cannot thereafter rebuke him for holding that this gratification is of entirely the same kind as those of the coarsest senses. For we
have no basis at all for charging him with having assigned the presentations
by which this feeling is aroused in us to the bodily senses only; as far as we
can divine, he sought the source of many of these presentations just as
much in the use of the higher cognitive power. But this did not and could
not prevent him from holding, in accordance with the principle mentioned

37

[Or 'intellectual': Geistes-.]

38

[Or 'in our power': in unserer Gewalt]

39

[Or'first': erste.]

40

[Wohlgefallen.]

41

[Kant may have in mind the English philosopher and poet Henry More (1614-87), a contemporary of Sir Isaac Newton who espoused the existence of effluences, which are spiritual
substances that are extended in space (whereas most thinkers claimed that spiritual substances,
e.g., God, angelic intellects, human souls, etc., do not occupy space at all). Some commentators on Newton suggest that he employed such effluences in his claim—which Kant never took
seriously—that God (an unextended spiritual substance) is the ultimate cause of the gravitational attraction of all bodies for one another through the agency of effluences that are active in
all the regions of space.]

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

37

above, that the gratification itself which those—even if intellectual—presentations afford us and by which alone they can be determining bases of
the will is of entirely the same kind. To be consistent is the greatest obligation of a philosopher, and yet [consistency] is most rarely encountered. The
ancient Greek schools give us more examples of it than we encounter in our
syncretistic age, where a certain coalition system of contradictory principles is contrived—[a system] full of insincerity and shallowness—because
it commends itself better to a public that is satisfied to know something of
everything, and on the whole nothing, while yet being fit for anything. The
principle of one's own happiness, however much understanding and reason
may be used with this principle, would still comprise no determining bases
for the will different from those that are appropriate to our lower power of
desire; and thus either there is no higher42 power of desire at all, or pure
reason must be practical by itself alone, i.e., it must be able to determine the
will by the mere form of the practical rule without the presupposition of any
feeling, and hence without presentations of the agreeable or disagreeable as
the matter of the power of desire, the matter which is always an empirical
condition of principles. Only then, insofar as reason by itself determines the
will (instead of being in the service of the inclinations), is reason a true
higher power of desire, to which the pathologically determinable power of
desire is subordinate, and only then is reason actually distinct—indeed, distinct in kind43—from the latter power, so that even the slightest admixture
of the latter power's impulses impairs44 reason's fortitude and superiority,
just as the slightest empirical [component] as condition in a mathematical
demonstration degrades and annihilates the demonstration's dignity and
force.45 In a practical law reason determines the will directly,46 not by
means of an intervening feeling of pleasure and displeasure, not even [one
42

['higher' {oberes) inserted by Kant in his working copy.]

43

[spezifisch unterschieden.]

44

[Abbruch tut An appropriate alternative rendering for this expression would be 'infringes';
'infringes upon,' on the other hand, is slightly weaker than what Kant has in mind, as is most
evident in contexts in which Abbruch tun is paired with the comparably graphic niederschlagen,
i.e., 'to strike down': see Ak. V, 73, also 78, and cf. 37-38; cf. also the Critique of Pure Reason, A 134/B 173, A 274/B 330, A 545 = B 573, A 570 = B 598, A 714 = B 742, A 776 =
B 804, A 851 = B 879. Since 'to infringe' is now rarely used without 'upon,' it seems to me that
'to impair' is preferable.]
45

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 376-77.]

46

[unmittelbar.]

38

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

taken] in this law, and only [the fact] that reason can be practical as pure
reason makes it possible for it to be legislative.

Comment II
To be happy is necessarily the longing47 of every rational but finite being,
and hence is an unavoidable determining basis of its power of desire. For
[the being's] satisfaction with its own existence is by no means an original
possession and a bliss, a bliss that would presuppose [in the being] a consciousness of its independent self-sufficiency. Rather, this satisfaction is a
problem48 thrust upon the being by its finite nature itself; for the being is
needy, and this need pertains to the matter of its power of desire, i.e., to
something that refers to a subjectively underlying feeling of pleasure or displeasure which determines what the being needs in order to be satisfied
with its [own] state. But precisely because this material determining basis
can be cognized by the subject only empirically, this problem cannot possibly be regarded as a law, because a law, as objective, would have to contain
the same49 determining basis of the will in all cases and for all rational beings. For although the concept of happiness everywhere underlies the practical reference of objects to the power of desire, it is still only the general50
heading for subjective determining bases and determines nothing specifically, even though this specific determination is the sole concern in this
practical problem and without it the problem cannot be solved at all. For in
what each [subject] has to posit his happiness hinges51 on everyone's particular feeling of pleasure and displeasure and, even in one and the same
subject, on the difference of the need according to the modifications of this
feeling. Therefore a law that is subjectively necessary (as a law of nature) is
objectively a very contingent practical principle that can and must be very
different in different subjects. Hence it can never yield a [practical] law, because, in the desire for happiness, what counts is not the form of lawfulness
47

[Verlangen, which can also mean 'demand']

48

[Problem here, Aufgabe in the next two sentences.]

49

[eben denselben. Here—and in similar constructions elsewhere—Kant adds eben not in
order to add force to 'the same* (as in 'the very same') but because in Kant's German derselbe,
dieselbe, etc., are standardly used simply as pronouns referring back to some earlier noun (cf.
the similar use of 'the same' in English legal jargon).]
50

[allgemein, which most often—e.g., later in this paragraph—is translated as 'universal.']

51

[ankommen.]

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

39

but solely the matter, viz., whether in complying with the law I am to expect
gratification, and how much. Principles of self-love can indeed contain universal rules of skill (for discovering means to [one's] aims), but then they
are merely theoretical principles52 (e.g., how someone who would like to
eat bread has to devise a mill). But practical precepts that are based on them
can never be universal; for the determining basis of the power of desire is
[then] based on the feeling of pleasure and displeasure, and this feeling can
never be assumed to be directed universally to the same objects.
But suppose that finite rational beings did think thoroughly alike also in
regard to what they had to assume as objects of their feelings of gratification and pain, and likewise even in regard to the means they have to employ
in order to attain the former objects and keep the others away. Even then
they definitely could not pass off the principle of self-love as a practical
law, because this agreement itself would still be only contingent. The determining basis would still be only subjectively valid and merely empirical
and would not have that necessity which is thought in every law. I.e., it
would not have the objective necessity from a priori bases, unless this necessity were passed off as not practical at all but as physical, viz., [by claiming] that the action is just as unfailingly forced from us by our inclination as
is yawning when we see others yawn. One could sooner maintain that there
are no practical laws at all but only counsels on behalf of our desires, than
that merely subjective principles are being elevated to the rank of practical
laws, which definitely must have objective and not merely subjective necessity and which must be cognized a priori by reason, not cognized by experience (however empirically universal this experience may be). Even the
rules of accordant appearances are called laws of nature (e.g., the mechanical laws) only if either we actually cognize them a priori, or, at any rate (as
with the chemical laws), we assume that we would cognize them a priori
from objective bases if our insight went deeper.53 But in the case of merely

52

Propositions that are called practical in mathematics or natural science should
properly be named technical, for these sciences3 are not concerned with the determination of the will. These propositions indicate only the manifold—of the possible
action—that is sufficient to produce a certain effect, and are therefore just as theoretical as are all propositions asserting the connection of the cause [at issue] with an
effect. Thus whoever opts for the effect must also put up with being the cause.
a
53

[Lehren; similarly in 'natural science1 above.]

[Cf. the Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science, Ak. IV, 468-69; also the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 215.]

40

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

subjective practical principles it is expressly made a condition that they must
be based not on objective but on subjective conditions of the power of
choice, and hence that they must always be presented54 only as mere maxims
and never as practical laws. This latter comment55 seems at first glance to be
mere word-splitting; however, it defines the words for the most important
distinction of all that can ever be considered in practical investigations.

§4
THEOREM III
If a rational being is to think of his maxims as practical universal laws, then
he can think of them only as principles that contain the determining basis of
the will not by their matter but merely by their form.
The matter of a practical principle is the object of the will. This object
either is the determining basis of the will or it is not. If it [were to] be the
will's determining basis, then the rule of the will would be subject to an empirical condition (viz., to the determining presentation's relation to the feeling of pleasure and displeasure), and consequently would not be a practical
law. Now if from a law all the matter, i.e., every object of the will, is separated (as determining basis), nothing remains of the law but the mere form
of a universal legislation.56 Therefore a rational being either cannot think of
his subjectively practical principles, i.e., maxims, at the same time as universal laws at all, or he must assume that the principles' mere form by itself
alone, whereby they arefittingfor universal legislation, makes them practical laws.

Comment
What form in a maxim is fitting for universal legislation, and what form is
not, can be distinguished without instruction by the commonest understanding. I have, for example, made it my maxim to increase my assets by every
safe means. Now I have a deposit in my hands, the owner of which is deceased and has left no record of it. Naturally, this is a case for my maxim.
54

[vorstellig gemacht]

55

[I.e., Comment II.]

56

[Gesetzgebung. See above, Ak. V, 20 br. n. 23.]

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

41

Now I want only to know whether that maxim can also hold as a universal
practical law. I therefore apply the maxim to the present case and ask
whether it could indeed take the form of a law and I could thus indeed, at the
same time, give through my maxim such a law as this: that everyone may
deny a deposit which no one can prove to him to have been made. I immediately become aware that such a principle, as a law, would annihilate itself,
because it would bring it about that there would be no deposits] at all. A
practical law that I cognize as such must qualify for universal legislation;
this is an identical57 proposition and therefore self-evident. Now if I say that
my will is subject to a practical law, then I cannot cite my inclination (e.g.,
in the present case, my greed) as my will's determining basis fitting for a universal practical law; for this inclination, far from being suitable for a universal legislation, rather must, in the form of a universal law, erase itself.
Thus it is odd how it could have occurred to intelligent men, [merely]
because the desire for happiness and hence also the maxim whereby everyone posits this happiness58 as the determining basis of his will is universal,
to therefore pass this [maxim]59 off as a universal practical law. For although ordinarily a universal law of nature makes everything accordant,
here, if one wanted to give to the maxim the universality of a law, precisely
the extreme opposite of accordance would result: the gravest conflict, and
the utter annihilation of the maxim itself and of its aim. For then the will of
all does not have one and the same object, but each person has his [own] object (viz., his own well-being60); and although contingently this object may
indeed be compatible with the aims of other people as well, who likewise
direct them at themselves, it is far from being sufficient for a law, because
the exceptions that one is occasionally authorized to make are endless and
cannot at all be encompassed determinately in a universal rule. In this way
there results a harmony similar to that depicted by a certain satirical poem61
on the concord of soul between a married couple who are [bent on] bringing
themselves to ruin: O marvelous harmony, what he wants she also wants,
etc.; or to what is reported about the pledge made by King Francis I against
57

[I.e., analytic]

58

[diese letztere. Grammatically, this could refer back to 'desire' instead; however, see above,
Ak.V, 22 (and cf. 23-25).]
59

[Cf. the next sentence. Although Kant actually says es rather than sie, probably by anticipation of 'law' {Gesetz), he clearly does mean the maxim. Cf. above, Ak. V, 26.]
60

[Wohlbefinden, which—like Wohlsein—is roughly synonymous with Wohl.]

61

[I have not been able to identify this poem.]

42

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

Emperor Charles V:62 What my brother Charles wants to have (Milan) I
also want to have. Empirical determining bases are not suitable for any universal external legislation, but just as little also for an internal one; for each
person lays at the basis of inclination his [own] subject, but another person
another subject; and in each subject himself now this inclination and now
another is superior in influence. Discovering a law that under this condition
would govern them 63 all—viz., with accordance on all sides—is absolutely
impossible.

§5
PROBLEM I
Supposing that the mere legislative form of maxims is alone the sufficient
determining basis of a will: to find the constitution of that will which is determinable by this form alone.
Since the mere form of a law can be presented solely by reason and
hence is not an object of the senses and thus also does not belong among
appearances, the presentation of this form as determining basis of the will is
distinct from all determining bases of events [occurring] in nature according to the law of causality, because in the case of these events the determining bases must themselves be appearances. But if, moreover, no determining
basis of the will other than that universal legislative form can serve as a law
for this will, then such a will must be thought as entirely independent of the
natural law governing appearances in reference to one another, viz., the law
of causality. Such independence, however, is called freedom in the strictest,
i.e., the transcendental, meaning. Therefore a will which is such that the mere
legislative form of a maxim can alone serve it as a law is a free will.

§6
PROBLEM II
Supposing that a will is free: to find the law that alone is suitable for determining it necessarily.
62

[I have deleted the emphasis on Franz ('Francis') and on Karl ('Charles').]

63

[I.e., the empirical determining bases.]

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

43

Since the matter of a practical law, i.e., the object of a maxim, can never
be given except empirically, but a free will—as independent of empirical
conditions (i.e., conditions belonging to the world of sense)—must
nonetheless be determinable, a free will must, independently of the matter
of the law, nonetheless find a determining basis in the law. But the law,
apart from its matter, contains nothing more than the legislative form.
Therefore solely the legislative form, insofar as it is contained in the
maxim, can amount to a determining basis of the will.

Comment
Thus freedom and unconditional practical law reciprocally refer to each
other.64 Now, I do not ask here whether even in fact65 they are different,
or—rather—an unconditional law is merely the self-consciousness of a
practical reason and this practical reason is entirely the same as the positive
concept of freedom.66 Instead I ask from what our cognition of the unconditionally practical starts, whether from freedom or from the practical
law.67 It cannot start from freedom, for we can neither become conscious of
freedom directly, because the first concept of it is negative, nor infer it from
experience, since experience allows us to cognize only the law of appearances and hence the mechanism of nature, the exact opposite of freedom.
Therefore it is the moral law of which we become conscious directly (as
soon as we draft maxims of the will for ourselves), which first offers itself
to us, and which—inasmuch as reason exhibits it as a determining basis not
to be outweighed by any sensible conditions and indeed entirely independent of them—leads straight to the concept of freedom. But how is even the
consciousness of that moral law possible? We can become conscious of
pure practical laws just as we are conscious of pure theoretical principles,
by attending to the necessity with which reason prescribes them to us, and
to the separating [from them] of all empirical conditions, to which that necessity points us. The concept of a pure will arises from the consciousness
64

[I.e., they—more accurately, their concepts—are interchangeable: weisen . . . wechselweise
aufeinander zurück. Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 450, where
Kant says that "freedom and the will's own legislation are both autonomy and hence reciprocal concepts [or 'interchangeable concepts': Wechselbegriffe]." (Translation mine.)]
65

[Rather than merely in relation to our cognition; see below.]

66

[I.e., entirely the same as freedom under the positive concept.]

67

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 446-48.]

44

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

of pure practical laws, as the consciousness of a pure understanding arises
from that of pure theoretical principles.68 That this is the true subordination
of our concepts and that morality first reveals the concept of freedom to us,
and hence that practical reason, with this concept, first poses the most insoluble problem to speculative reason so as to put it in the greatest perplexity through that concept, is evident already from this: since nothing in
appearances can be explained on the basis of the concept of freedom, but
there the guide must always consist in the mechanism of nature; since,
moreover, the antinomy of pure reason, when [reason] wants to ascend to
the unconditioned in the series69 of causes, gets [it] entangled in incomprehensibilities with the one as much as with the other, while yet the latter
(mechanism) at least has its usefulness in the explanation of appearances,
one would never have committed the daring deed of introducing freedom
into science had not the moral law, and with it practical reason, come in and
thrust this concept upon us. However, experience also confirms this order of
concepts in us. Suppose someone alleges that his lustful inclination is quite
irresistible to him when he encounters the favored object and the opportunity. [Ask him] whether, if in front of the house where he finds this opportunity a gallows were erected on which he would be strung up immediately
after gratifying his lust, he would not then conquer his inclination. One
does not have to guess long what he would reply. But ask him whether, if
his prince demanded, on the threat of the same prompt penalty of death, that
he give false testimony against an honest man whom the prince would like
to ruin under specious pretenses, he might consider it possible to overcome
his love of life, however great it may be. He will perhaps not venture to assure us whether or not he would overcome that love, but he must concede
without hesitation that doing so would be possible for him. He judges,
therefore, that he can do something because he is conscious that he ought to
do it, and he cognizes freedom within himself—the freedom with which
otherwise, without the moral law, he would have remained unacquainted.

68

[Reading dem ersteren ... dem letzteren for den ersteren . .. dem letzteren, inasmuch as the
context is concerned with consciousness. Another, less plausible, alternative would be to read
den ersteren . . . den letzteren: 'The concept of a pure will arises from pure practical laws, as
the consciousness of a pure understanding arises from pure theoretical principles.']
69

[Here again the term is singular: Reihe.]

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

45

§7
BASIC LAW OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON70
So act that the maxim of your will could always hold at the same time as a
principle of a universal legislation.71

Comment
Pure geometry has postulates that are practical propositions, which, however, contain nothing more than the presupposition that one can do something if perhaps it were demanded that one should72 do it; and these are the
only propositions of pure geometry that concern an existence [of something]. They are therefore practical rules under a problematic condition of
the will. Here, however, the rule says: one ought absolutely to proceed in a
certain way. The practical rule is therefore unconditional,73 and hence is
conceived a priori as a categorical practical proposition by which the will is
objectively determined absolutely and directly (by the practical rule itself,
which therefore is here a law). For pure [and] in itself practical reason is
here directly legislative. The will is thought as independent of empirical
conditions and hence, qua14 pure will, as determined by the mere form of
law, and this determining basis is regarded as the supreme condition of all
maxims. The thing is strange enough and has no equal in all the rest of practical cognition. For the a priori thought of a possible universal legislation, a
thought which is therefore merely problematic, is commanded unconditionally as a law, without borrowing anything from experience or from any external will. On the other hand, this thought is not a precept according to
which an action by which a desired effect is possible should be done (for
then the rule would always be physically conditioned). Rather, it is a rule
that determines the will a priori merely with regard to the form of its maxims; and thus there is at least no impossibility in thinking of a law that
serves merely on behalf of the subjective form of principles as [yet being] a
70

[The categorical imperative (moral law) is discussed extensively in Kant's earlier work, the
Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 406-45.]
71

[Gesetzgebung. See above, Ak. V, 20 br. n. 23.]

72

[solle, rendered as 'ought' below.]

73

[Or 'unconditioned': unbedingt.]

74

[als, usually rendered as 'as'; see above and below.]

46

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

determining basis through the objective form of a law as such. The consciousness of this basic law may be called a fact of reason, because one
cannot reason it out from antecedent data75 of reason—e.g., from the consciousness of freedom (for this is not antecedently given to us)—and
because, rather, it thrusts itself upon us on its own as a synthetic a priori
proposition not based on any intuition, whether pure or empirical. This
proposition would indeed be analytic if the freedom of the will were presupposed;76 but for this, as a positive concept, an intellectual intuition
would be required, which certainly cannot be assumed here at all.77 However, in order to regard this law—without any misinterpretation—as given,
one must note carefully that it is not an empirical fact but the sole fact of
pure reason, which thereby announces itself as originally legislative (sic
volOy sic iubeo).1*

COROLLARY
Pure reason is practical by itself alone and gives (to the human being) a universal law, which we call the moral law.19

Comment
The previously mentioned fact is undeniable. One need only dissect the
judgment which human beings make about the lawfulness of their actions:
75

[I.e., from the Latin, givens. On the fact of reason, cf. below as well as Ak. V, 6, 32, 42, 43,
47,55,91,104.]
76

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 446-47.]

77

[On intellectual (original) intuition (and the intuitive understanding that would have it), see
my translation of the Critique of Pure Reason, B 138-39, 145, A 166/B 207 incl. br. n. 67, A
249-52, B 307-09, A 256/B 311-12, and A 279-80 = B 335-36, and cf. B xl incl. br. n. 144g,
B 68, 135, 149. See also the Critique of Judgment, Ak. 402-08, and cf. 418. For a discussion
of how the concept of an intellectual intuition (and of an intuitive understanding) unites Kant's
three Critiques in one system, see the Translator's Introduction to my translation of that work,
lxxxvi-cii.]
7S

['This I will, this I command/ The quote is from Juvenal, Satires, VI, 223, and is a Roman
woman's retort to her husband, who has dared to object to her demand that an innocent slave
be nailed to the cross. The actual text reads, Hoc volo, sic iubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas; i.e.,
'That [is what] I will, this I command, instead of reasoning let there be the will.']
[Sittengesetz.}

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

47

one will always find that, whatever [their] inclination may interject, their
reason, incorruptible and self-constrained, nonetheless always holds the
will's maxim in an action up to the pure will, i.e., to itself inasmuch as it regards itself as practical a priori. Now, this principle of morality, precisely
on account of the universality of the legislation that makes it the formal
supreme determining basis of the will regardless of all subjective differences of the will [among individuals], is declared by reason at the same
time to be a law for all rational beings insofar as they have a will at all, i.e.,
a power80 to determine their causality by the presentation of rules, hence
insofar as they are capable of [performing] actions according to principles81 and consequently also according to practical a priori principles (for
these alone have that necessity which reason demands for a principle).
Therefore this principle of morality does not restrict itself to human beings
only, but applies to all finite beings having reason and will, and indeed includes even the infinite being as supreme intelligence.82 In the case of
those finite beings, however, the law has the form of an imperative, because
in them, as rational beings, one can indeed presuppose a pure will, but, as
beings affected by needs and sensible motivating causes,83 not a holy will,
i.e., a will that would not be capable of [drafting] any maxims conflicting
with the moral law.84 Hence in the case of those finite beings the moral law
is an imperative that commands categorically because the law is unconditional.85 The relation of such a will to this law is dependence, under the
name of obligation, which [name] means a necessitating although only
by reason and its objective law, to an action that is called duty. The action is
called duty because a pathologically affected (although not thereby deter-

80

[Or 'ability': Vermögen.]

81

[Grundsätze here, Prinzipien below and similarly earlier in this paragraph. See above, Ak. V,
7 br. n. 66.]
82

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 412-14.]

83

[I.e., motivating causes of sensibility. I render Bewegursache as 'motivating cause' rather
than as 'motive' in order to preserve the reference to 'cause' {Ursache), which is especially important in contexts where causes are explicitly discussed, as indeed they are here.]
84

[moralisches Gesetz here and below, Sittengesetz later in this paragraph and in the preceding
Corollary. Kant uses the two expressions interchangeably.]
85

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 412-13.]

86

[Nötigung. Cf. below, Ak. V, 81.]

48

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

mined, and hence always also free) power of choice87 carries with it a wish
that arises from subjective causes and that hence can often be opposed to
the pure objective determining basis and therefore requires, as moral necessitation, a resistance of practical reason that may be called an inner but intellectual constraint. In the most sufficient intelligence of all, the power of
choice is rightly presented as not capable of [drafting] any maxim that
could not at the same time be objectively a law; and the concept of holiness,
which on that account belongs to this power of choice, places it, not indeed
beyond88 all practical laws, but still beyond all practically restricting laws,
and hence beyond obligation and duty. This holiness of will is nonetheless a
practical idea that must necessarily serve as an archetype, which to approach ad infinitum is alone incumbent upon89 all finite rational beings; and
the pure moral law, which is itself called holy because of this, constantly
and rightly holds this idea before their eyes. Being sure of this progression
ad infinitum of one's maxims and sure of their immutability in [this] constant
advance, i.e., virtue, is the highest [result] that finite practical reason can
bring about.90 Virtue itself, in turn, at least as a naturally acquired power,91
can never be complete,92 because the assurance in such a case never becomes
apodeictic certainty and, as persuasion, is very dangerous.

§8
THEOREM IV
Autonomy of the will is the sole principle of all moral laws and of the duties
conforming to them; any heteronomy of the power of choice, on the other
hand, not only is no basis for any obligation at all but is, rather, opposed to
the principle of obligation and to the morality of the will. For the sole principle of morality consists in the independence from all matter of the law
(i.e., from a desired object) and yet, at the same time, the determination of
87

[Willkür, See above, Ak. V, 21 br. n. 26. On 'pathologically affected,' see above, Ak. V, 19 br.
n.5.]
88
89

[über. .. weg.]
[zusieht]

90

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 392-93, 446-47.]

91

[Or 'ability': Vermögen.]

92

[Or 'perfect': vollendet]

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

49

the power of choice by the mere universal legislative form which a maxim
must be capable of [having]. That independence, however, is freedom in the
negative meaning, whereas this legislation—pure and, as such, practical
reason's own legislation—is freedom in the positive meaning.93 Therefore
the moral law expresses nothing other than the autonomy of pure practical
reason, i.e., freedom;94 and this [autonomy] is itself the formal condition of
all maxims, under which alone they can harmonize95 with the supreme
practical law. If, therefore, the matter of volition, which can be nothing
other than the object of a desire that is being linked with the law, enters into
the practical law as the condition of its possibility, then there results heteronomy of the power of choice, namely dependence on the natural law of
following some impulse or inclination, and the will gives to itself not the
law but only the precept for rational compliance with pathological laws.
But the maxim, which in this way can never contain the universally legislative form within itself, not only brings about no obligation in this way, but
is itself opposed to the principle of a pure practical reason and therefore
also to the moral attitude,96 even if the action arising from it were to be
lawrai.97

Comment I
Thus a practical precept that carries with it a material (hence empirical)
condition must never be classed with the practical law. For the law of the
pure will—which is free—places the will in a sphere entirely different from
the empirical one, and the necessity expressed by the law, since it is not to
be a natural necessity, can therefore consist only in formal conditions of the
possibility of a law as such. Any matter of practical rules rests always on
subjective conditions, which impart to them98 no universality for rational
93

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 446-47, 452-53, 458-59,
461-62.]
94

[Literally, 'of freedom': der Freiheit. Kant is using a limiting genitive (such as we find in
'the city of Berlin'). Cf. below, Ak. V, 87.]

95

[zusammenstimmen.]

96

[Gesinnung, I prefer 'attitude' to 'disposition* because, like the German term, it sounds
somewhat more occurrent than dispositional]
97

[I.e., law-conforming: gesetzmäßig. I render this term as 'lawful' throughout the Critique,
similarly for the noun.]
98

[Reading ihnen for ihr ('it'—i.e., here, the matter), as suggested by Natorp.]

50

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

beings except merely the conditional one (in case I desire this or that, what
I must then do in order to make it actual), and they all revolve about the
principle of one ys own happiness. Now, it is indeed undeniable that any
volition must also have an object and hence a matter. But the matter is not,
•just because of this, the determining basis and condition of the maxim. For
if it is, then the maxim cannot be exhibited in universally legislative form,
since then the expectation of the object's existence would be the determining cause of the power of choice," and the dependence of the power of
desire100 on some thing's existence would have to be laid at the basis of
volition—a dependence which can always be sought only in empirical conditions and hence can never provide the basis for a necessary and universal
rule. Thus presumably101 the happiness of other102 beings can be the object
of a rational being's will 103 But if it were the maxim's determining basis,
then one would have to presuppose that we find not only a natural gratification in the well-being104 of others but also a need, such as the sympathetic
mentality105 brings with it in human beings» But this need I cannot presuppose in every rational being (and in God not at all). Hence the matter of the
maxim can indeed remain, but it must not be the maxim's condition, for
otherwise the maxim would not be suitable for a law. Therefore the mere
form of a law, which106 restricts the matter, must at the same time be a basis
for adding this matter to the will, but not for presupposing it. Let the matter
be, for example, my own happiness. This happiness, if I attribute it to every*
one (as in fact I may in the case of finite beings), can become an objective
practical law only if I include in it also the happiness of others. Therefore
the law to further the happiness of others arises not from the presupposition
that this is an object for everyone's power of choice, but merely from [the
fact] that the form of universality, which reason requires as condition for
giving to a maxim of self-love the objective validity of a law, becomes the
determining basis of the will. Hence not the object (the happiness of others)
99
100
101

[Willkür.]
[Begehrungsvermögen.]
[wird.]

102

[fremder; 'of others,' below, renders anderer.]

103

[Cf. fat Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VÏ, 387-88» 393-94, 401-02.]

104 [Wohlsein, which—like Wohlbefinden—is
J05
106

roughly synonymous with Wohl]

[Sinnesart]
[Reading welche for welches, as suggested by both Natorp and Vorländer.]

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

51

was the determining basis of the pure will, but this determining basis was
solely the mere legal107 form by which I restricted my maxim—which was
based on inclination—in order to impart to the maxim the universality of a
law and thus to make it adequate to pure practical reason. Solely this restriction, and not the addition of an external incentive,108 could then give
rise to the concept of the obligation to expand the maxim of my self-love to
the happiness of others as well.

Comment II
The exact opposite of the principle of morality is [what results] when the
principle of one's own happiness is made the determining basis of the
will;109 in this must be included, as I have shown above, any [theory] in
general whereby the determining basis that is to serve as a law is posited in
anything other than the legislative form of the maxim. This conflict, however, is not merely logical, as is that between empirically conditioned rules
that one might nonetheless want to elevate to necessary principles of cognition. Rather, it is practical and would utterly destroy morality were not the
voice of reason in reference to the will so distinct, so incapable of being
shouted down, and even for the commonest human being so perceptible. As
things are, however, this [theory]110 can continue to maintain itself only in
the bewildering speculations of the schools, which are audacious enough to
turn a deaf ear to that heavenly voice in order to uphold a theory that does
not require them to rack their brains.
Suppose that a social friend,111 whom you otherwise liked, sought to justify himself to you for having given false testimony by first pleading what
he alleges to be the holy112 duty of [furthering] one's own happiness, by
then enumerating all the advantages he had gained by that [action], and by
pointing to the prudence he is observing in order to be secure from any dis107

[gesetzlich.]

108

[Triebfeder. See below, Ak. V, 71-89, and cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals,
Ak. IV, 427.]
109

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 399, 442; also the Metaphysics
of Morals, Ak. VI, 387-88, 493-94.]
110

[The theory whereby the principle of one's own happiness is the determining basis of the
will: sie, used apparently by anticipation of the rest of this sentence.]
111

[Umgangsfreund.]

112

[Or 'sacred': heilig.]

52

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

covery, even on the part of yourself, to whom he is revealing the secret
solely inasmuch as113 he can deny it at any time; but that he then alleged» in
all seriousness, that he had performed a true human duty. You would either
laugh straight in his face or recoil from it all114 with loathing,115 even
though, if someone has geared his principles merely to advantages of his
own, you would not have the slightest objection against these guidelines.116
Or suppose that someone recornrnend[ed] to you117 as a steward a man to
whom you can blindly entrust all your concerns, and that, in order to instill
trust in you, he extolled the man as a prudent human being with a masterly
understanding of his own advantage and also as a tirelessly active118 one
who passes up no opportunity for [promoting] it; and that finally, lest any
worries about a vulgar self-interest119 in the man stand in the way, he extolled the man because he understands how to live with great refinement,
seeks his gratification not in the accumulation of money or in brutish
opulence but in the expansion of his knowledge,120 in select and instrutive
society, even in beneficence to the needy, while otherwise he is not scrupulous as to the means (which, after all, derive their worth or lack of worth
only from the purpose121), and other people's money or property are as
good for this [purpose] as his own, provided he knows that he can use it122
113

[damit]

114

[davon.]

115

[Abscheu. Cf. below, Ak. V, 58 incL br. n. 247.]

116

[Maßregeln.]

117

[euch. Kant is now addressing his readers in the plural; in the previous example he had spoken to the individual reader in the singular.]
118

[wirksam.]

119

[Eigennutz.]

120

[Kenntnisse. Wherever possible, I translate this term—similarly for the singular,
Kenntnis—as * acquaintance,' reserving 'knowledge' for Wissen; see above, Ak. V, 4 br. n, 31.
The same applies to the verb, kennen, which I translate sometimes as 'to be acquainted with'
but most often as 'to be familiar with' because the 'acquaintance' terminology is usually too
awkward—as it does also with the participle bekannt, i.e., 'familiar.']
i2i

[Or 'end': Zweck. I consistently translate this term as 'purpose' because 'end,* which also
has a temporal meaning, frequently creates ambiguities, most devastatingly so in the Critique
of Judgment, but in the present work as well. See my article on Zweckmäßigkeit ('purposiveness'): "How to Render Zweckmäßigkeit in Kant's Third Critique," in Interpreting Kant, ed.
Moltke S. Gram, 85-98 (Iowa City, la.: University of Iowa Press, 1982).]
[Literally, Kant just says 'do it': es.,. tun.]

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

53

without being discovered or thwarted. You would believe either that the recommending person is pulling your leg, or that he has lost his mind. So distinctly and sharply cut are the boundaries of morality and self-love that
even the commonest eye can in no way miss the distinction whether something belongs to the one or the other. The few comments that follow may
indeed, in the case of so obvious a truth, seem superfluous, but they
nonetheless serve at least to provide the judgment of common human reason with somewhat greater distinctness.
The principle of happiness can indeed yield maxims, but never maxims
that would be suitable for laws of the will, even if one made universal123
happiness one's object.124 For since cognition of this [happiness] rests on
none but experiential data, because each judgment about it depends very
much on each person's opinion which is even itself very changeable, the
principle of happiness can indeed give general but never universal125 rules;
i.e., it can give rules that on the average are most often correct but not rules
that must be valid126 always and necessarily, and hence one cannot base on
it any practical laws. Precisely because an object of the power of choice is
here laid at the basis of this power's rule and hence must precede it, the rule
can be referred to and based on nothing other than what one approves,127
and hence referred to and based on experience, and thus the variety of judgment must be endless. This principle, therefore, does not prescribe to all
rational beings the same practical rules, even though they fall under a common heading, viz., that of happiness. The moral law, however, is thought as
objectively necessary only because it is to hold128 for everyone having reason and will.
The maxim of self-love (prudence) merely counsels; the law of morality
commands.129 But surely there is a great difference between what we are
counseled to do and what we are obligated to do.
123

[allgemein.]

124

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 395-96, 399, 405, 415-16,
418-19.]
125

[Respectively, generell, universell.]

126

[gültig.]

127

[empfiehlt. Hartenstein instead reads empfindet ('senses,' in the broad meaning of the term
that includes feeling).]
128

[gelten soll.]

129

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 414-21.]

54

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

On the principle of the autonomy of the power of choice, what is to be
done can quite easily and without hesitation be seen130 by the commonest
understanding; under the presupposition of the heteronomy of the power of
choice, what is to be done is difficult to see and requires acquaintance131
with the world. I.e., what [one's] duty is 132 offers itself on its own to everyone; but what brings true, lasting advantage, if this advantage is to be extended to [one's] entire existence, is shrouded in impenetrable obscurity
and requires much prudence in order that the practical rule attuned to that
[aim can] be adapted even tolerably to life's purposes by means of suitable
exceptions. Nonetheless, the moral law commands compliance, and indeed
the most meticulous compliance, from everyone. Therefore, judging what
according to it is to be done must not be so difficult that the commonest and
most unpracticed understanding could not deal with this law, even without
worldly prudence.
Satisfying the categorical command of morality is under everyone's control133 at any time; satisfying the empirically conditioned precept of happiness is only rarely possible, and is far from being possible for everyone
even just in regard to one single aim. This is so because in the case of the
command of morality what counts is only the maxim, which must be genuine and pure, but in the case of the precept of happiness it is also one's
powers and one's physical ability134 to make a desired object actual. A command whereby everyone ought to seek to make himself happy would be
foolish, for one never commands someone to do what already on his own he
unfailingly wants to do; one would have to command him merely the guidelines135 [for doing so], or rather offer them to him, because he is unable to
do all that he wants136 to do. But to command morality under the name of
duty is entirely reasonable;137 for, first, not everyone does willingly138 obey
130

[einsehen.]

131

[Or 'familiarity' : -kenntnis. See above, Ak. V, 35 br. n. 120, and 4 br. n. 31.]

132

[was Pflicht sei. See Ak. V, 8 n. 83 incl. n. 83f.]

133

[Or 'in everyone's power': in jedes Gewalt.]

134

[die Kräfte und das physische Vermögen.]

135

[Maßregeln.]

136 [ o r 'wills': will; likewise at the end of the sentence.]
137

[vernünftig, which I usually translate as 'rational.']

138

[will. . . gerne.]

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

55

its precept when it is in conflict with inclinations; and as for the guidelines
as to how he can comply with this law, here these need not be taught, since
what in this regard he wants to do he is also able to do.
Someone who has lost at play can indeed be angry at himself and his imprudence; but if he is conscious of having cheated at play (even though he
has gained thereby), he must despise13,9 himself as soon as he compares
himself with the moral law. Hence this law must surely be something different from the principle of one's own happiness. For having to say to oneself, I am a worthless person140 even though I have filled my purse, must
surely have a different standard of judgment from applauding oneself and
saying, I am a prudent human being, for I have enriched my coffer.
Finally, there is in the idea of our practical reason something else that accompanies the transgression of a moral law, viz., its deserving punishment. 141 Now, surely, coming to partake of happiness cannot be linked at all
with the concept of a punishment, as such. For although the person who
punishes can indeed at the same time have the benign intention of directing
that punishment to this purpose as well, yet it must first be justified by itself
as punishment,142 i.e., as something merely bad,143 so that the punished person, even if things stopped there and he looked to no indulgence hidden behind this harshness, must himself admit that he has been dealt with rightly
and that his lot is perfectly appropriate to his conduct. In every punishment,
as such, there must first be justice, and this amounts to what is essential in
this concept.144 Although benignity too can be linked with punishment, the
person who deserves punishment has, according to his behavior,145 not the
slightest cause to count on it. Therefore punishment is something physically bad that, even if it were not linked with the morally evil146 as a natural
consequence [thereof], would still have to be linked [with it] as a conse139

[verachten.]

140

[Nichtswürdiger]

141

[Strafwürdigkeit]

142

[Strafe. This term means 'punishment' in the sense of what is inflicted—viz., something
bad—on someone. The German term for 'punishment' in the sense of the act of inflicting
something bad is Bestrafung.]
143

[als bloßes Übel. On Übel and 'bad,' see below, Ak. V, 59 br. n. 259.]

144

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 227-28, 460-61.]

145

[Aufführung.]

146

[dem moralisch Bösen. See below, Ak. V, 59 br. n. 259.]

56

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

quence according to principles of a moral legislation. Now if all crime, even
without taking account of the physical consequences regarding the agent, is
by itself punishable—i.e., [involves] forfeiture of happiness (at least in
part)—then it would obviously be absurd to say that the crime consisted
precisely in the agent's having brought a punishment upon himself by impairing his own happiness (which according to the principle of self-love
would have to be the proper concept of all crime). The punishment would in
this way be the basis for calling something a crime, and justice would have
to consist, rather, in omitting all punishment and preventing even natural
punishment. For then there would no longer be any evil in the action, because the bad things147 that ordinarily followed upon it and on account of
which alone the action was called evil would now be kept away. But to regard all punishing and rewarding as being altogether only the machinery in
the hands of a higher power,148 a machinery that is to serve solely to thereby
put rational beings into activity toward their final aim (happiness), is very
manifestly a mechanism of their will that annuls all freedom, and thus we
need not dwell upon it.
Even more refined, although just as untrue, is the allegation of those who
assume a certain special moral sense149 which, instead of reason, determines the moral law. According to this allegation, the consciousness of
virtue would be linked directly with satisfaction and gratification, and the
consciousness of vice with unease of soul and with pain. Thus these
[philosophers] do, after all, stake everything on the longing150 for one's
own happiness. Without here drawing on what has been said above, I want
only to note the delusion151 that takes place in this. In order to conceive the
vicious person as tormented with unease of mind by the consciousness of
his offenses, they must conceive him already in advance as at least to some
degree morally good in terms of the foremost foundation of his character,
just as the person who is delighted by the consciousness of actions conforming to duty must be conceived by these [philosophers] already beforehand as virtuous. Therefore the concept of morality and duty surely had to
precede any regard for this satisfaction and cannot at all be derived from it.
147

[die Übel]

148

[Or 'might': Macht]

149

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 442-43.]

150 [Verfangen, which can also mean 'demand']
151

[Täuschung.]

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

57

Now surely one must [already] beforehand esteem the importance of what
we call duty, [and esteem] the authority152 of the moral law and the direct
worth that compliance with it gives a person in his own eyes, in order to feel
this satisfaction in the consciousness of one's own adequacy to that law153
and the bitter reprimand if one can reproach oneself with having transgressed it. Therefore one cannot feel this satisfaction or this unease of soul
prior to the cognition of obligation and cannot make it the basis of obligation. One must be at least halfway an honest man already in order to be able
even to frame a presentation of those sensations.154 For the rest, I am in no
way denying that, just as the human will by virtue of freedom is directly
determinable by the moral law, so also can repeated performance in conformity with this determining basis ultimately bring about subjectively a
feeling of satisfaction with oneself.155 On the contrary, to establish and
cultivate this feeling, which—properly—alone deserves156 to be called
moral feeling, itself belongs to duty.157 But the concept of duty cannot be
derived from it, for otherwise we would have to think of a feeling of a law
qua law158 and turn into an object of sensation what can only be thought by
reason—which, if it is not to become a flat contradiction, would entirely
annul any concept of duty and would put in its place merely a mechanical
play of more refined inclinations sometimes falling into discord with the
coarser.
If we now compare our formal supreme principle159 of pure practical
reason (as an autonomy of the will) with all hitherto [proposed] material
principles of morality, we can present in a table all the[se] others as principles by which all possible other cases are actually at the same time exhausted except for a singlef,] formal case, and can thus prove, as manifest
to the eye, that it is futile to look around for any other principle than the one
152

[Ansehen.]

153

[Reading, with Vorländer, desselben for derselben, which would refer to duty here, even
though below the original does have desselben, and thus does there refer to the moral law.]
154

[In the broad meaning of the term that includes feelings: Empfindungen. See above, Ak. V,
22br.n. 31.]
155

156

[Cf. the Metaphysics

of Morals, Ak. VI, 377-78.]

\yerdienen.]

157

[Cf. the Metaphysics

158

[eines Gesetzes als eines

159

[Grundsatz here, Prinzipien below. See above, Ak. V, 7 br. n. 66.]

of Morals, Ak. VI, 3 9 9 - 4 0 0 . ]
solchen.]

58

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

set forth here. For, all possible determining bases of the will are either
merely subjective and hence empirical, or else objective and rational; but
both are either external or internal.
PRACTICAL MATERIAL DETERMINING BASES
IN THE PRINCIPLE OF MORALITY ARE

Subjective
external
Of education
(according to
Montaigne)
Of the civil
constitution
(according to
Mandeville)
160

Objective

internal

internal

Of physical
feeling (according to
Epicurus)

Of perfection
(according to
Wolff and the
Stoics)

Of moral feeling (according
to Hutcheson)

external
Of the will of
God (according to Crusius
and other
theological
moralists)

[Some information pertaining to the names that appear in Kant's table: Epicurus (341-270
Greek philosopher and founder of the school known as Epicureanism; in this work, see
Ak.V, 4 0 - 4 1 , 88, 111, 115-16,120,126-27 incl. n. 151, 141; for an introduction to Epicurus,
see The Epicurus Reader: Selected Writings and Testimonia, trans. Brad Inwood and Lloyd P.
Gerson; introduction by D. S. Hutchinson (Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett, 1994). The Stoics,
members of the school known as Stoicism (which began in the third century B.C. and lasted for
approximately 500 years); in this work, see Ak. V, 11 n. 93, 40, 60, 86, 111-12, 115, 126-27
incl. n. 151; for an introduction to Stoicism, see The Stoics, reprint of the Chatto and Windus
edition of 1975 (Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett, 1994; copublished in the U.K. by Gerald Duckworth and Company Ltd.). Michel Eyquem de Montaigne (1533-92), French writer (to whom
we owe the term 'essay' in the literary sense) and philosopher; his philosophical skepticism is
stated most fully in his "Apology" (i.e., "Defense"): "Apologie de Raymond Sebond," in the
Essais (Bordeaux, France: S. Millanges, 1580); translation, An Apology for Raymond Sebond,
translated and edited with introduction and notes by M. A. Screech (London: Penguin Books,
1993). Bernard Mandeville (1670-1733), Dutch physician who made his name in England as
a satirist and philosopher; he is best known (cf. the work by Hutcheson, below) for his The
Fable of the Bees: or, Private Vices, Publick Benefits: Containing Several Discourses to
Demonstrate That Human Frailties, During the Degeneracy of Mankind, May Be Turn 'd to the
Advantage of the Civil Society, and Made to Supply the Place of Moral Virtues (London: J.
Roberts, 1714); edited, with introduction, by E. J. Hundert (Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett, 1997).
Francis Hutcheson (1694-1746), British philosopher and proponent of the "moral sense" theory in ethics; he first introduced this theory in his An Inquiry into the Original of Our Ideas of
Beauty and Virtue; in Two Treatises, in Which the Principles of the Earl of Shaftesbury Are
Explain 'd and Defended Against the Author of The Fable of The Bees, and the Ideas of Moral
Good and Evil are Establish'd According to the Sentiments of the Antient Moralists. With an
B.C.),

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

59

The determining bases on the left side161 are, one and all, empirical and are
obviously not suitable at all for [being] the universal principle of morality.
But those on the right side are based on reason (for perfection as a characteristic of things, and the highest perfection conceived in substance, i.e.,
God, can both be thought only through rational concepts). However, the
first concept [on the right side], viz., that of perfection, can be taken either
in a theoretical [or in a practical] signification. [In the former] it signifies
nothing but the completeness of each thing in its kind (transcendental perfection) or of a thing merely as thing as such162 (metaphysical perfection),
and this cannot be the issue here. But the concept of perfection in the
practical signification is the suitability or adequacy of a thing to all sorts of
purposes.163 This perfection, as a characteristic of the human being and
consequently as internal, is nothing other than talent and what strengthens
or complements it, skill. The highest perfection in substance, i.e., God, and
consequently as external, is (as considered for a practical aim)164 the adequacy of this being to all purposes165 as such. Suppose, then, that purposes
must be given to us beforehand, in reference to which alone the concept of
perfection (an internal perfection in ourselves166 or an external one in
God167) can become a determining basis of the will; and that a purpose—as
Attempt to Introduce a Mathematical Calculation in Subjects of Morality (London: J. Darby,
1725); 4th, corrected, edition, (London: for D. Medwinter, 1738), reprinted (Westmead, Farnborough, Haunts, England: Gregg International, 1969). Baron Christian von Wolff
(1679-1754), German mathematician, natural scientist, and rationalist philosopher of the enlightenment; he is the author of numerous works. Christian August Crusius (1715-75), German theologian and philosopher, and critic of Wolffianism. His main works are Entwurf der
notwendigen Vernunft-Wahrheiten, wiefern sie den zufälligen entgegen gesetzet werden {Outline of Necessary Truths insofar as They Are Contrasted with Contingent Truths) (Leipzig:
Gleditsch, 1745); repnnted (Hildesheim, Germany: G. Olms, 1964); and Weg zur Gewissheit
und Zuverlässigkeit der menschlichen Erkenntniss (Path to Certainty and Reliability ofHuman
Cognition) (Leipzig: Gleditsch, 1747); reprinted (Hildesheim, Germany: G. Olms, 1965).]
161

[I.e., the subjective determining bases.]

162

[überhaupt. See above, Ak. V, 3 br. n. 3.]

163

[Or 'ends': Zwecke. See above, Ak. V, 35 br. n. 121.]

164

[in praktischer Absicht betrachtet. On Vorländer's reading of the punctuation this parenthetical insertion occurs immediately after *and consequently external' and hence is associated
with that clause.]
165

[Or 'ends': Zwecke. See above, Ak. V, 35 br. n. 121.]

166

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 391-93, 446-47.]

167

[Cf. ibid., Ak. VI, 487-89.]

60

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

an object that must precede the will's determination by a practical rule and
contain the basis of the possibility of such a determination—and hence the
matter of the will, taken as the will's determining basis, is always empirical
and hence can serve as the Epicurean principle of the doctrine of happiness
but never as the pure rational principle of the doctrine of morals and of duty.
(For, indeed, talents and their furtherance can then become a motivating
cause of the will only because they contribute to the advantages of life; or
the will of God—if agreement with it has been taken as the will's object
without an antecedent practical principle independent of the idea of God's
will—can become such a motivating cause only through the happiness that
we expect from it.) If we suppose this, it follows, first, that all the principles
listed here are material; second, that they encompass all possible material
principles; and, finally, the conclusion from this, that, since (as has been
proved) material principles are entirely unsuitable for [being] the supreme
moral law, the formal practical principle of pure reason—according to
which the supreme and direct determining basis of the will must consist in
the mere form of a universal legislation possible through our maxims—is
the only possible principle that is suitable for categorical imperatives, i.e.,
practical laws (which make action duties), and in general for the principle
of morality both in judging and in applying it to the human will in determining that will.

I
On the Deduction of the Principles
of Pure Practical Reason
This Analytic establishes that pure reason can be practical, i.e., that it can
on its own, independently of everything empirical, determine the will;
specifically, it establishes this through a fact168 wherein pure reason does
indeed prove itself in us practically, viz., the autonomy in the principle of
morality by which pure reason determines the will to the deed. At the same
time the Analytic shows that this fact is inseparably linked with the consciousness of the freedom of the will—indeed, that it and this consciousness are one and the same. Through this consciousness of its freedom the
168

[On the fact of reason, see above, Ak. V, 31 incl. br. n. 75.]

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

61

will of a rational being that, as belonging to the world of sense, cognizes itself as necessarily subject to the laws of causality like other efficient causes,
is yet in the practical [sphere] at the same time conscious—on another side,
viz., as a being in itself—of its existence [as] determinable in an intelligible
order of things. It is conscious of this not, indeed, in conformity with a special intuition169 of itself, but in conformity with certain dynamical laws that
can determine its causality in the world of sense. For, [my assertion] that
freedom, if it is attributed to us, transfers us into an intelligible order of
things has been proved sufficiently elsewhere.170
Now if we compare with this Analytic the analytical part of the critique
of pure speculative reason,171 we can see a noteworthy contrast between the
two. Not principles but pure sensible intuition (space and time) was there
the first datum that made a priori cognition possible, although only for objects of the senses. Synthetic principles [derived] from mere concepts without intuition were impossible; rather, these principles could occur only in
reference to intuition, which was sensible, and thus only in reference to objects of possible experience; for solely the concepts of understanding, combined172 with this intuition, make possible that cognition which we call
experience. Beyond objects of experience, hence concerning things as
noumena, speculative reason was quite rightly denied anything positive [by
way] of cognition. Speculative reason did, however, accomplish this much:
it secured the concept of noumena—i.e., the possibility, indeed the necessity, of thinking such [things]—and, e.g., rescued from all objections the assumption of freedom, considered negatively, as entirely compatible with
those principles and restrictions of pure theoretical reason, yet without allowing us to cognize anything determinate and expansive,173 since it rather
cut off any such prospect entirely.
On the other hand, although the moral law does not provide us with a
prospect, it nonetheless provides us with a fact that is absolutely inexplicable from any data of the world of sense and from the entire range of our theoretical use of reason—a fact that points to a pure world of understanding,
169

[Viz., intellectual intuition (of a pure world of understanding, about to be mentioned in the
next paragraph). See above, Ak. V, 31 br. n. 77.]
170

{Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Section III: Ak. IV, 446-63.]

171

[See the Critique of Pure Reason, A 19-292/B 33-349.]

172

[Or 'linked': verbunden.]

173

[I.e., anything that would expand (erweitern) cognition.]

62

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

and indeed even positively determines that world and allows us to cognize
something of it, viz., a law.
This law is to furnish to the world of sense, as a sensible nature, the form
(as far as rational beings are concerned)174 of a world of understanding, i.e.,
a suprasensible nature, yet without impairing the mechanism of sensible
nature. Now, nature in the most general meaning is the existence of things
under laws. The sensible nature of rational beings in general is their existence under empirically conditioned laws, and hence is, for reason, heteronomy. The suprasensible nature of the same beings, on the other hand, is
their existence according to laws that are independent of any empirical condition and that hence belong to the autonomy of pure reason. And since the
laws according to which the existence175 of things depends on cognition are
practical, suprasensible nature, insofar as we can frame a concept of it, is
nothing other than a nature under the autonomy of pure practical reason.
The law of this autonomy, however, is the moral law, which is therefore the
basic law of a suprasensible nature and of a pure world of understanding
whose counterpart176 ought to exist in the world of sense, yet without impairing that world's laws. The former nature could be called the archetypal111 nature {natura archetypa), which we cognize merely in reason,
whereas the latter—because it contains the possible effect of the idea of the
former nature as determining basis of the will—could be called the ectypal178 nature (natura ectypa). For in fact the moral law transfers us, in
[our] idea, into a nature in which pure reason, if it were accompanied by the
physical power adequate to it, would produce the highest good, and determines our will to confer the form [of a world of understanding] on the
world of sense as a whole of rational beings.179
That this idea actually serves as the model for our determinations of the
will—as a pattern, as it were—is confirmed by the commonest attentiveness
to oneself.

174

[On Vorländer's reading of the punctuation, this parenthetical insertion occurs immediately
after 'as a sensible nature' and hence qualifies that clause.]
175

[Dasein here, Existenz in all the preceding occurrences in this paragraph.]

176

[Literally, 'counterimage': Gegenbild.]

177

[urbildlich, from Urbild ('archetype'), literally 'original image.']

178

[nachgebildete, i.e., roughly, 'reproduced' or 'copied.']

179

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 807-11 = B 835-39.]

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

63

When the maxim according to which I intend to give testimony is tested
by practical reason, I always consider how the maxim would be if it held as
a universal law of nature. Obviously, in this mode the [maxim as such a]
law would compel180 everyone to be truthful. For to accept statements as
proof and yet as deliberately untrue is not consistent with the universality of
a law of nature. Similarly, the maxim that I adopt concerning the free disposition of my life is at once determined when I ask myself how this maxim
would have to be in order for a nature to maintain itself according to a law
based thereon.181 Obviously, in such a nature no one could end his life by
choice,™2 for such a constitution183 would not be an enduring order of nature. And thus in all other cases. However, in actual nature, as far as it is an
object of experience, the free will by itself is not determined to such maxims as could on their own establish a nature according to universal laws, or
as would by themselves even fit into a nature arranged according to such
laws; rather, its maxims are private inclinations that do indeed amount to a
whole of nature according to pathological (physical) laws, but not to a nature [of the sort] that would be possible only through our will according to
pure practical laws. Nonetheless, through reason we are conscious of a law
to which all our maxims are subject, as if through our will an order of nature must at the same time arise. Therefore this law must be the idea of a nature not given empirically and yet possible through freedom, hence of a
suprasensible nature to which, at least in a practical reference, we give objective reality,184 since we regard it as an object of the will of ourselves as
pure rational beings.
Hence the difference between the laws of a nature to which the will is
subject and those of a nature that is subject to a will™5 (in regard to what
refers the will to its free actions) rests on this: that in the former nature the
objects must be causes of the presentations that determine the will, but in
the latter nature the will is to be the cause of the objects, so that the will's
causality has its determining basis solely in the pure power of reason, a
power that can therefore also be called a pure practical reason.
180

[nötigen. See above, Ak. V, 20 br. n. 17.]

181

[nach einem Gesetze derselben.]

182

[willkürlich.]

183

[I.e., of nature: Verfassung.]

184

[I.e., applicability to things as objects.]

185

[Emphasis expanded to include 'is subject/ to improve readability.]

64

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

There are, therefore, two very different problems: how, on the one hand,
pure reason can a priori cognize objects; and how, on the other hand, it can
be directly a determining basis of the will, i.e., of the rational being's
causality regarding the actuality of objects (merely through the thought of
the universal validity of its own maxims as law).
The first problem, as belonging to the critique of pure speculative reason, requires that we explain beforehand how intuitions, without which no
object can be given to us and hence none can be cognized [by us] synthetically at all, are possible a priori; and its solution turns out to be that these
intuitions are, one and all, only sensible and hence do not make possible
any speculative cognition that would go further than possible experience
extends, and that therefore all the principles of that pure speculative reason
accomplish nothing more than making experience possible, either of given
objects or of those that may be given ad infinitum but are never completely
given.
The second problem, as belonging to the critique1*6 of practical reason,
requires no explanation as to how the objects of the power of desire are possible, for this, as a problem of the theoretical cognition of nature, is left to
the critique of speculative reason, but only as to how reason can determine
the will's maxim, whether this occurs only by means of empirical presentations as determining bases, or whether even pure reason would be practical
and be a law of a possible order of nature not cognizable empirically at all.
The possibility of such a suprasensible nature, the concept of which can at
the same time be the basis of that nature's actuality through our free will,
requires no a priori intuition (of an intelligible world), which in this case, as
suprasensible,187 would also have to be impossible for us. For what counts
is only the determining basis of volition in the maxims thereof: whether this
determining basis is empirical or a concept of pure reason (of its lawfulness
as such), and how it can be the latter. Whether or not the causality of the
will is sufficient for [bringing about] the actuality of the objects is left to
reason's theoretical principles to judge; for this is an investigation of the
possibility of the objects of volition, and hence in the practical problem
the intuition of these objects does not at all amount to a moment188 of the
problem. What counts here is only the determination of the will and the determining basis of the maxim of this will as a free will, not the result. For
186

[The aims of the critique of practical reason are limited; cf. the end of this paragraph.]

187

[Viz., as intellectual intuition. Cf. above, Ak. V, 42 br. n. 169, and 31 br n. 77.]

188

[I.e., key element: (das) Moment]

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

65

provided that the will is lawful for pure reason, then its power in carrying
out [its aims] may be what it may, and a nature may or may not actually
arise according to these maxims of the legislation of a possible nature, the
critique that investigates whether and how reason can be practical, i.e., can
directly determine the will, does not worry about this at all.
In this task, therefore, the critique of practical reason can, without being
censured, start from pure practical laws and their actuality, and must do so.
But rather than on intuition, it bases these laws on the concept of their existence in the intelligible world, viz., the concept of freedom. For this concept
signifies nothing else, and those laws are possible only in reference to freedom of the will; but on the presupposition of freedom they are necessary, or,
conversely, freedom is necessary because those laws, as practical postulates, are necessary. How this consciousness of the moral law or, what is the
same thing, the consciousness of freedom is possible cannot be further explained, but the admissibility of freedom can readily be defended in the theoretical critique.
The exposition of the supreme principle of practical reason is now done;
i.e., we have shown, first, what the principle contains, that it subsists on its
own entirely a priori and independently of empirical principles, and then
what distinguishes it from all other practical principles. With the deduction,
i.e., the justification of the principle's objective and universal validity and
of insight into the possibility of such a synthetic a priori proposition, one
cannot hope to get on so well as was feasible with the principles of pure
theoretical understanding. For the latter principles referred to objects of possible experience, viz., appearances, and we were able to prove that these appearances can be cognized as objects of experience only by being brought
under the categories in accordance with these laws, and that consequently
all possible experience must be commensurate with these laws. Such a
course, however, I cannot take in the deduction of the moral law. For this
law pertains not to the cognition of the constitution of objects that may be
given to reason from elsewhere by something or other, but to a cognition insofar as it can itself become the basis of the existence of objects and insofar
as reason, through this cognition, has causality in a rational being, i.e., [as
a] pure reason that can be regarded as a power directly determining the will.
However, all human insight is at an end as soon as we have arrived at
basic powers or basic abilities;189 for their possibility cannot be compre-

[Grundkräfien oder Grundvermögen.]

66

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

hended190 through anything,191 but neither must it be invented and assumed
at one's discretion.192 Hence in the theoretical use of reason only experience can entitle us to assume them. But this substitute, adducing empirical
proofs in place of a deduction from a priori sources of cognition, is also denied us here with regard to the pure practical power of reason. For, whatever
requires that the basis for proving its actuality be brought from experience
must be dependent, as regards the bases of its possibility, on principles of
experience; but pure and yet practical reason, by its very concept, cannot
possibly be considered to be of that sort. Moreover, the moral law is given
as a fact,193 as it were, of pure reason of which we are conscious a priori and
which is apodeictically certain, even supposing that in experience no example could be hunted up 194 where it is complied with exactly. Therefore the
objective reality of the moral law cannot be proved through any deduction,
through any endeavor of theoretical reason, speculative or empirically supported, and hence could not, even if one wanted to forgo apodeictic certainty, be confirmed through experience and thus proved a posteriori, and
yet is—on its own—established.
However, something different and paradoxical [now] steps into the place
of this vainly sought deduction of the moral principle, namely that, conversely, this principle itself serves as the principle of the deduction of an inscrutable power that no experience was able to prove but that speculative
reason had to assume as at least possible (in order to find among its cosmological ideas what is unconditioned in terms of its causality, so as not to
contradict itself): viz., the power of freedom, the freedom of which the
moral law, which itself needs no justifying grounds, proves not only the
possibility but the actuality in beings who cognize this law as obligating for
them. The moral law is in fact a law of the causality through freedom and
hence a law of the possibility of a suprasensible nature, just as the metaphysical law of the events in the world of sense was a law of the causality of
190 [Or 'grasped': begriffen. Although in different contexts begreifen can also mean 'to
comprise' and in that meaning is related to Begriff, i.e., 'concept,' it never means merely 'to
conceive' (as this latter term is used in philosophy). Cf. my translation of the Critique of Pure
Reason, A 792 = B 820 incl. br. n. 394.]
191

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, B 110, B 145-46, A 141/B 180-81; also the Prolegomena, Ak. IV, 318.]
192

[Or 'optionally,' or perhaps 'arbitrarily': beliebig.]

193

[On the fact of reason, see above, Ak. V, 31 incl. br. n. 75.]
{auftreiben.}

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

67

sensible nature. Thus the moral law determines that which speculative philosophy had to leave undetermined, viz., the law for a causality the concept
of which was only negative in speculative philosophy; and it thus first provides this concept with objective reality.
This kind of credential of the moral law, where it is itself put forth as a
principle of the deduction of freedom as a causality of pure reason, is fully
sufficient in place of any a priori justification, since theoretical reason was
compelled to assume at least the possibility of [such] a freedom in order to
fill a need that it has. For the moral law satisfactorily proves its [own] reality, even for the critique of speculative reason, by supplementing a causality
thought merely negatively, the possibility of which was incomprehensible
to speculative reason but which it nonetheless needed to assume, by positive determination [of this causality], viz., the concept of a reason directly
determining the will (through the condition of a universal lawful form of
the will's maxims). Thus the moral law is able for the first time to give to
reason—which always became extravagant195 when it wanted to proceed
speculatively with its ideas—objective although only practical reality, and
converts reason's transcendent use into an immanent use (wherein reason,
through ideas, is itself an efficient cause in the realm of experience).
The determination of the causality of beings in the world of sense, as
such a world, can never be unconditioned, and yet for every series of conditions there must necessarily be something unconditioned, and hence there
must also be a causality that determines itself entirely on its own. Therefore
the idea of freedom as a power of absolute spontaneity was not a requirement, but—as far as its possibility is concerned—an analytic principle, of
pure speculative reason. However, since it is absolutely impossible to give
an example in conformity with this idea in any experience, because no
determination of causality that would be absolutely unconditioned can be
encountered among the causes of things as appearances, we were able to
defend the thought of a freely acting cause, when we apply this thought to a
being in the world of sense, [on the one hand,] only insofar as this being is
also regarded as a noumenon, on the other hand. We defended this thought
by showing that there is no contradiction in regarding all actions of the
being as physically conditioned insofar as they are appearances, and yet at
the same time regarding their causality as physically unconditioned insofar
as the acting being is a being of the understanding, and in thus making the
concept of freedom a regulative principle of reason. Although through this
[I.e., transcendent: überschwenglich.]

68

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

[principle] I do not at all cognize the object to which such a causality is attributed, as to what this object is, I nonetheless remove the obstacle inasmuch as on the one hand, in the explanation of events in the world and
hence also of the actions of rational beings, I do justice to the mechanism of
natural necessity by going back from the conditioned to the condition ad
infinitum, while on the other hand I keep open for speculative reason the
place that is vacant for it, namely the intelligible, in order to transfer the unconditioned there. However, I was not able to realize this thought, i.e., to
convert it into cognition of a being acting in this way, not even as regards
merely its possibility. Pure practical reason now fills this vacant place with
a determinate law of causality in an intelligible world (causality through
freedom), viz., the moral law. Although speculative reason does not gain
anything through this as regards its insight, it does gain something as regards securing its problematic concept of freedom, which is here provided
with objective reality that, although only practical, is yet indubitable. Even
the concept of causality, which properly has application and hence also signification (as the Critique of Pure Reason proves) only in reference to appearances in order to connect them into experiences—even this concept
reason does not expand in such a way as to extend its use beyond the mentioned boundaries. For if it sought to do this, it would have to try to show
how the logical relation of basis196 and consequence could be used synthetically with a kind of intuition different from the sensible,197 i.e., how a
causa noumenonm is possible. This it cannot accomplish at all; but as practical reason it is also in no way concerned with this, for it only posits the determining basis of the causality of the human being as a being of sense (a
causality that is given) in pure reason (which is therefore called practical).
Thus it needs the concept of the cause itself—from whose application to
objects for the sake of theoretical cognition it can here abstract entirely
(since this concept is always found a priori in the understanding, even independently of any intuition)—not in order to cognize objects but in order to
determine the causality with regard to objects as such, and hence for none
but a practical aim; and thus it can transfer the determining basis of the will
into the intelligible order of things, inasmuch as it gladly199 admits at the
196 j p r «ground': Grund; cf. above, Ak. V, 4 br. n. 36. Even here 'basis' is preferable, because
the relation, although logical, is being taken beyond l o g i c ]
197

[I.e., an intellectual intuition. See above, Ak. V, 31 br. n. 77.]

198

[Noumenal cause.]

199

[gerne.]

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

69

same time that it does not understand at all what sort of determination the
concept of cause may have [that would allow] for cognition of these things.
Of course, causality with regard to actions of the will in the world of sense
must be cognized by reason in a determinate way, for otherwise practical
reason could not actually give rise to any deed. But as for the concept that it
frames of its own causality as noumenon, this concept it need not determine
theoretically for the sake of cognizing this causality's suprasensible existence, and thus it need not be able to give it signification to this extent. For
this concept acquires signification anyway, even if only for practical use,
viz., through the moral law. Even regarded theoretically it always remains a
pure, a priori given concept of the understanding, which can be applied to
objects whether these are given sensibly or not sensibly, although in the latter case the concept has no determinate theoretical signification and application but is merely the understanding's formal but nonetheless essential
thought of an object as such. The signification that reason provides to this
concept through the moral law is solely practical, inasmuch as the idea of
the law of a causality (causality of the will) itself has causality, or is its determining basis.

II
On the Authority200 of Pure Reason
in Its Practical Use to an Expansion
That Is Not Possible for It in Its
Speculative Use
In the moral principle we have put forth a law of causality which posits the
determining basis of this causality beyond all conditions of the world of
sense; and, as regards the will—as to how, as belonging to an intelligible
world, it is determinable—and hence as regards the subject of this will, the
human being,201 we have not merely thought it (as could be done [even]
200
201

[Befugnis.]

[I have removed the parentheses around 'the human being' (den Menschen) in order to
allow ihn below—'it,' in 'determined it'—to refer not only to the will but also to the human
being, as I believe Kant (appropriately) intended, just as he did in the case of 'thought it' (even
though there the grammar of the original sentence happens to obviate the use of ihn).]

70

51

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

according to the critique of speculative reason) as belonging to a pure world
of understanding though as unfamiliar202 to us in this reference, but have
also determined it, with regard to its causality, by means of a law that cannot be classed with any natural law of the world of sense; and thus we have
expanded our cognition beyond the boundaries of that world—a claim that,
after all, the Critique of Pure Reason declared void in all speculation. How,
then, is the practical use of pure reason here to be reconciled203 with that
same pure reason's theoretical use as regards determining the boundaries of
pure reason's power?
David Hume, who can be said to have in fact started all those challenges
of the rights of a pure reason which made a complete investigation of these
rights necessary,204 inferred as follows. The concept of cause is a concept
that contains the necessity of the connection205 of the existence of what is
different and, specifically, insofar as it is different—so that, if A is posited,
I cognize that something entirely different from it, B, must necessarily also
exist.206 However, necessity can be attributed to a connection only insofar
as the connection is cognized a priori; for experience would allow us to
cognize concerning a linkage only that it is, but not that it is necessarily so.
Now, it is impossible, he says, to cognize a priori and as necessary the connection between207 one thing and another (or between one determination208
and another entirely different from it), when [i.e.] they are not given in perception. Therefore the concept of a cause is itself fraudulent and deceptive.
To talk about it in the mildest way: it is a delusion that can still be excused
insofar as we have the habit209 (a subjective necessity) of perceiving certain
things or their determinations [seen] repeatedly alongside or after one another as associated with one another in their existence, and this habit is inadvertently taken for an objective necessity of positing such a connection in
202

[unbekannt See above, Ak. V, 35 br. n. 120.]

203

[zu vereinigen. Cf. above, Ak. V, 6 n. 64 incl. br. n. 64a.]

204

[Cf. the Prolegomena, Ak. Ill, 257-62, 310-13; also the Critique of Pure Reason, B 5,
B 19-20, A 760 = B 788, A 764-67 = B 792-95.]
205 [Verknüpfung; 'linkage,' below, renders Verbindung.

206

See above, Ak. V, 3 br. n. 14.]

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 90/B 122.]

207

[Reading, with Karl Rosenkranz, die Verbindung zwischen for die Verbindung, die zwischen.]
208

[Or 'attribute': Bestimmung.]

209 [Q r 'custom':

Gewohnheit.]

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

71

the objects themselves. Thus the concept of cause is acquired surreptitiously and not legitimately; indeed, it can never be acquired [legitimately]
or authenticated, because it demands a connection in itself void, chimerical,
untenable before any reason, to which no object at all can ever correspond.
Thus, with regard to all cognition that concerns the existence of things
(hence mathematics still remained excepted), empiricism was first introduced as the sole source of principles,210 but with it at the same time the
toughest skepticism with regard even to the whole of natural science (as
philosophy). For on such principles we can never infer a consequence from
given determinations of things in terms of their existence (because for this
the concept of a cause, which contains the necessity of such a connection,
would be required), but can only expect, according to the rule of our power
of imagination,211 cases that are similar to what happens ordinarily; but this
expectation is never secure, no matter how often it may have been fulfilled.
Indeed, of no event could one say: something must have preceded it upon
which it necessarily followed, i.e., it must have a cause; and hence, even if
one were familiar with ever so frequent cases where such [an earlier event]
preceded, so that a rule could be abstracted therefrom, one still could not,
on that account, assume it as happening in this way always and necessarily.
Thus one must also grant blind chance its right, and with blind chance all
use of reason ceases; and this then firmly establishes, and makes irrefutable,
skepticism regarding inferences ascending from effects to causes.
Mathematics had still come off well until then because Hume supposed
that its propositions were all analytic, i.e., that they advanced from one determination to another on account of identity and hence according to the
principle212 of contradiction.213 (However, this is false, for they are, rather,
all synthetic;214 and although geometry, e.g., deals not with the existence of
things but only with their a priori determination in a possible intuition, it
nonetheless passes—just as well as [we do] through causal concepts—from
one determination, A, to an entirely different one, B, as nonetheless connected with the former necessarily.) But in the end that science, so highly
praised for its apodeictic certainty, must also succumb to empiricism in
210

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 761-69 = B 789-797.]

211

[Einbildungskraft.]

212

[Satz. In most contexts, e.g., above, this term is translated as 'proposition.']

213

[Cf. the Prolegomena, Ak. Ill, 272-73.]

214

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, B 14-17.]

72

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

principles on the same basis on which Hume posited habit in the place of
objective necessity in the concept of cause. Regardless of all its pride, it
must put up with toning down its bold claims commanding a priori assent,
and must expect approbation for the universal validity of its propositions
from the indulgence of the observers who, as witnesses, would surely not
refuse to admit that what the geometrician sets forth as principles they too
had always perceived [to be] thus, and would consequently grant that, even
though it is indeed not necessary, one may yet continue to expect it to be
thus. In this way Hume's empiricism in principles also leads unavoidably to
skepticism even in regard to mathematics and consequently in every scientific theoretical use of reason (for this use belongs either to philosophy or to
mathematics).2151 will let each person judge on his own whether (in view
of such a terrible overthrow as we see befalling the leaders216 of cognition)
the common use of reason will come through any better, and will not rather
become entangled even more irretrievably in this same destruction of all
science, and hence whether from the same principles a universal skepticism
will not have to follow (although this skepticism would, to be sure, concern
only scholars).
Now, as for my work in the Critique of Pure Reason—which was indeed
prompted by that Humean skepticism217 but yet went much further and encompassed the entire realm of pure theoretical reason in its synthetic use
and hence also the realm of what is called metaphysics as such218—I proceeded as follows as regards the doubt of the Scottish philosopher concerning the concept of causality. When Hume, taking objects of experience to be
things in themselves (as, indeed, is done almost everywhere), declared the
concept of cause to be deceptive and a false illusion,219 he acted quite
rightly. For concerning things in themselves and the determinations that
they have as such, one cannot have insight into why because something, A,
is posited, something else, B, must necessarily also be posited; and thus he
could in no way grant such an a priori cognition of things in themselves.
Still less could this acute man permit an empirical origin of this concept,
since this [empirical] concept straightforwardly contradicts the connec2,5

[Cf. ibid, A 761-69 = B 789-797.]

216

[Literally, 'heads': Häupter.]

217

[Zweifellehre here, Skeptizismus elsewhere.]

218

[Cf. the Prolegomena, Ak. Ill, 257-62.]

219

[Blendwerk.]

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

73

tion's necessity which amounts to what is essential in the concept of causality. Hence the concept was proscribed, and into its place stepped habit in
observing the course of perceptions.
From my investigations, however, it resulted that the objects with which
we deal in experience are by no means things in themselves but merely appearances, and that, although with things in themselves one cannot at all
tell220 and indeed cannot possibly have insight into how, if A is posited, it is
to be contradictory for B, which is entirely different from A, not to be
posited (the necessity of the connection between A as cause and B as effect), yet one can readily think that as appearances they must necessarily be
linked in one experience in a certain way (e.g., with regard to time relations) and cannot be separated without contradicting that linkage by means
of which this experience, wherein they are objects and wherein alone they
are cognizable by us, is possible. And this is indeed what was found; and
thus I was able not only to prove the concept of cause as to its objective reality with regard to objects of experience, but also to deduce it as an a priori
concept because of the connection's necessity that the concept carries with
it, i.e., to establish its possibility from pure understanding without empirical sources.221 And thus, after removing the empiricism concerning the
concept's origin, I was able to uproot its inevitable consequence, namely
skepticism, first regarding natural science and then also regarding mathematics because the skepticism there follows from quite completely the
same bases—thus regarding both of the sciences that are referred to objects
of possible experience—and thereby to uproot the total doubt of everything
into which theoretical reason claims to have insight.
But what becomes of the application of this category of causality (and
thus also of all the other categories, for without them no cognition of what
exists can be brought about) to things that are not objects of possible experience but lie beyond the boundary of experience? For I was able to deduce
the objective reality of these concepts only with regard to objects of possible experience. However, I have saved these concepts even in the mere case
of my having shown that objects can at any rate be thought through them although not determined a priori; and it is precisely this that gives them a
place in pure understanding, from which they are referred to objects as such
220
221

[absehen.]

[Cf., in the Critique of Pure Reason, the Second Analogy of Experience, A 189-211/
B 232-56, where Kant presents his own critical view regarding the necessary connection between cause and effect.]

74

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

(sensible or not sensible). If anything is still lacking, it is the condition for
the application of these categories, and specifically that of causality, to objects. This condition is intuition, which, where it is not given, makes impossible the application of the categories for the sake of theoretical cognition
of the object as noumenon. Hence such cognition, if anyone ventures upon
it, is utterly blocked (as indeed happened in the Critique of Pure Reason),
whereas the objective reality of the concept [of causality] nonetheless always remains and can be used even for noumena, but without our being
able to determine the concept theoretically in the least and thereby bring
about a cognition.222 For that this concept, even in reference to an object,
contains nothing impossible was proved by this: that its seat in pure understanding was secured in all application to objects of the senses; and even if
perhaps thereafter, [as] referred to things in themselves (which cannot be
objects of experience), it is not capable of being determined so that [one
can] present a determinate object for the sake of a theoretical cognition, yet
for the sake of something else (perhaps the practical) the concept could always still be capable of being determined for its application. This would not
be so if, in accordance with Hume, this concept of causality contained
something which it is not possible to think at all.
Now in order to discover this condition for the application of the mentioned concept to noumena we need only consider why we are not satisfied
with its application to objects of experience but would like to use it also for
things in themselves. For then we soon find that it is not a theoretical but a
practical aim that makes this a necessity for us. Even if we were successful
in this [application to noumena], for speculation we would still not be making any true acquisition in cognition of nature and, in general, with regard
to objects that may perhaps be given to us. At most we would be taking a
long step from the sensibly conditioned (as it is, we already have enough to
do to stay with it and to wander diligently through the chain of causes) to
the suprasensible, in order to complete223 and to bound our cognition from
the side of the bases—even though an infinite gulf between that boundary
and what we are acquainted with224 would always remain unfilled, and we
would have listened more to an idle inquisitiveness than to a solid desire for
knowledge.

222

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 235-60/B 294-315.]

223

[Or 'to perfect': vollenden.]

224

[kennen. See above, Ak. V, 35 br. n. 120.]

CHAPTER I PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

75

However, apart from the relation in which (in theoretical cognition) the
understanding stands to objects, it also has one to the power of desire,
which is therefore called the will and is called the pure will insofar as the
pure understanding (which in that case is called reason) is practical through
the mere presentation of a law. The objective reality of a pure will or—what
is the same thing—of a pure practical reason is, in the moral law, given a
priori through a fact,225 as it were; for so we may call a determination of the
will which is unavoidable, even though it does not rest on empirical principles. The concept of a will, however, already contains the concept of causality, and hence the concept of a pure will already contains the concept of a
causality with freedom—i.e., a causality that is not determinable according
to laws of nature and consequently not capable of any empirical intuition as
proof of its reality, but that nonetheless completely226 justifies its objective
reality a priori in the pure practical law, though (as one can easily see227) for
the sake not of the theoretical but merely of the practical use of reason.
Now, the concept of a being that has free will is the concept of a causa
noumenon;22* and one is already assured that this concept does not contradict itself, because the concept of a cause, as having arisen entirely from
pure understanding, as also—through the deduction—assured at the same
time of its objective reality with regard to objects as such, while yet in its
origin independent of all sensible conditions and therefore not by itself restricted to phenomena (unless one wanted to make a theoretical determinate
use of it), can229 indeed be applied to things as pure beings of the understanding.230 But because one cannot base this application on any intuition,
which always can only be sensible, causa noumenon is with regard to the
theoretical use of reason indeed a possible, thinkable concept, but nonetheless an empty one. However, I also do not demand that through this concept
I should be theoretically acquainted with231 the constitution of a being insofar as it has a pure will; it is enough for me that through this concept I
225

[On the fact of reason, see above, Ak. V, 31 incl. br. n. 75.]

226

[Or 'perfectly': vollkommen.]

227

[Literally, 'have insight into': einsehen.]

228

[Noumenal cause.]

229

[könne. Vorländer instead reads könnte, 'could.']

230

[reine Verstandeswesen. Beings of the understanding are noumena; see the Critique of Pure
Reason, B 306.]
231

[kennen. See above, Ak. V, 35 br. n. 120.]

76

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

only designate it as such a being, and hence that I only link the concept of
causality with that of freedom (and with what is inseparable from it, the
moral law as determining basis ofthat [causality]).232 The authority for this
does indeed belong to me by virtue of the pure rather than empirical origin
of the concept of cause, inasmuch as I consider myself authorized to make
no other use of it than in reference to the moral law that determines its reality, i.e., only a practical use.
If, with Hume, I had removed the objective reality from the concept of
causality in its theoretical233 use not only with regard to things in themselves (the suprasensible) but also with regard to objects of the senses, then
the concept would have lost all signification and, as a theoretically impossible concept, would have been declared entirely unusable; and since one also
can make no use of nothing, the practical use of a theoretically null concept
would have been entirely absurd. In fact,234 however, the concept of an empirically unconditioned causality, although theoretically empty (without an
intuition that fits it), is nonetheless always possible and refers to an undetermined235 object; and in place of this [lacking signification] the concept is
nonetheless given signification in236 the moral law and consequently in a
practical reference. Therefore the concept, even though I do not have an intuition that would determine its objective theoretical reality for it, does
nonetheless have actual application that can be exhibited in concreto in attitudes or maxims, i.e., it has practical reality that can be indicated; and this
is indeed sufficient to justify it even with regard to noumena.
But this objective reality of a pure concept of understanding in the realm
of the suprasensible, once introduced, now gives objective reality to all the
other categories as well—though always only insofar as they are linked
necessarily with the determining basis of the will (the moral law)—except
that this objective reality is one that has merely practical applicability,
while having not the slightest influence on theoretical cognition of these objects, as insight into their nature by pure reason, so as to expand this cognition. As indeed we shall find later, these categories always have reference
232

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 450-63.]

233

[Reading, with Otto Schöndörffer and with Paul Natorp in the Akademie edition, theoretischen for praktischen.]
234

[Nun.]

235

[Or 'indeterminate': unbestimmt]

236

[Or 'through': an.]

CHAPTER II OBJECT OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

77

only to beings as intelligences and, in them, also only to the relation of reason to the will and consequently always only to the practical, and beyond
this lay no claim to any cognition of these beings. But whatever further
properties belonging to the theoretical way of presenting such suprasensible things may be brought forward in connection237 with these categories,
all of these are then classed not at all with knowledge, but only with the authority (however, for a practical aim, even with the necessity) to assume and
presuppose them.238 This holds even where one assumes239 suprasensible
beings (such as God) by an analogy, i.e., by the pure rational relation that
we employ practically with regard to what is sensible. Thus by applying
these categories to the suprasensible—but only for a practical aim—one
does not give to pure theoretical reason the slightest encouragement to rove
into the transcendent.

Analytic of Pure Practical Reason
Chapter II
On the Concept of an Object of
Pure Practical Reason
By a concept of an object240 of practical reason I mean the presentation of
an object241 as an effect possible through freedom. Therefore, to be an object of a practical cognition, as such, signifies only the reference of the will
to the action through which the object or its opposite would be made actual;
237 [Verbindung.]
238

[Cf. the Prolegomena, Ak. Ill, 362-64.]

239

[Inserting, with Hartenstein, annimmt after bedienen and the subsequent comma.]

240

[Inserting eines Gegenstandes ('of an object'), as Natorp does in the Akademie edition and
as is suggested also by Ernst von Aster, Otto Schöndörffer, and Karl Vorländer. I follow
Vorländer in retaining einem Begriffe ('a concept') instead of reading dem Begriffe ('the concept'), as Paul Natorp does in the Akademie edition.]
241

[Objekt here, Gegenstand above and below. In this entire paragraph, and in the work as a
whole, Kant uses the two terms interchangeably.]

78

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

and to judge whether or not something is an object of pure practical reason
is only to distinguish the possibility or impossibility of willing the action
through which, if we had the ability242 for this (and experience must judge
that), a certain object would become actual. If the object is assumed as the
determining basis of our power243 of desire, then the object's physical possibility through the free use of our powers must precede the judgment244 as
to whether or not it is an object of practical reason. By contrast, if the a
priori law can be regarded as the determining basis of the action and hence
the action can be regarded as determined by pure practical reason, then the
judgment as to whether or not something is an object of pure practical reason is entirely independent of that comparison with our physical ability, and
the question is only whether we may will an action that is directed to the
existence of an object if [making] this [object actual] were under our control;245 hence the moral possibility of the action must precede [that judgment], for here the determining basis of the action is not the object but the
law of the will.246
The sole objects of a practical reason are, therefore, those of the good
and the evil. For by the first one means a necessary object of our power of
desire, by the second, of our power of loathing,247 but both according to a
principle of reason.
If the concept of the good is not to be derived from an antecedent practical law but is rather to serve as its basis, then it can only be the concept of
something whose existence promises pleasure and thus determines the
causality of the subject to produce this something. Now, since it is impossible to have insight into which presentation is accompanied by pleasure and
which, on the contrary, by displeasure, experience alone would count in deciding what is directly good or evil. The subject's property in reference to
which alone he can engage in this experience is the feeling of pleasure and
242

[Vermögen.]

243

[-vermögen. Below, 'powers' translates Kräfte; above, as well as later in this paragraph,
Vermögen is rendered as 'ability.']

244

[Beurteilung here, Urteil below; similarly, for these nouns or for the corresponding verbs
in this entire paragraph. See above, Ak. V, 8 br. n. 78.]
245

[Or 'in our power': in unserer Gewalt]

246

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 394-96.]

247

[Verabscheuungs-. The term could also be rendered by 'detestation' or by 'abhorrence';
'aversion/ on the other hand, seems rather too feeble; cf. Kant's example of 'loathing' (Abscheu) above, Ak. V, 35.]

CHAPTER II OBJECT OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

79

displeasure, which is a receptivity248 belonging to inner sense; thus the
concept of what is directly good would apply only to that with which the
sensation249 of gratification is directly linked, and the concept of the absolutely250 evil would have to be referred only to what directly gives rise to
pain. However, this is contrary even to the use of language, which distinguishes the agreeable from the good and the disagreeable from the evil and
which demands that good and evil always be judged by reason and hence
through concepts, which can be communicated universally, rather than by
mere sensation, which restricts itself to individual subjects and their receptivity. Moreover, pleasure and displeasure nonetheless cannot by themselves be linked a priori with any presentation of an object. Therefore a
philosopher who believed himself compelled to base his practical judging
on a feeling of pleasure would call good what is a means to the agreeable,
and evil what is a cause of disagreeableness and of pain; for the judging of
the relation of means to purposes251 does indeed belong to reason. But although reason alone is capable of having insight into the connection of
means with their aims (so that the will could also be defined as the power of
purposes, inasmuch as these are always determining bases of the power
of desire according to principles), yet the practical maxims that would follow from the above concept of the good as merely a means would never
contain as the object of the will anything good by itself, but always only
something good for something or other; the good would always be merely
the useful, and that for which it is useful would always have to lie outside
the will, in sensation. Now if the latter, as agreeable sensation, had to be
distinguished from the concept of the good, then there would be nothing at
all directly good, but the good would have be sought only in the means to
something else, viz., in some agreeableness.252
There is an old formula of the schools:253 nihil appetimus, nisi sub ra248

[Rezeptivität here, Empfänglichkeit a few lines down.]

249

[In the broad meaning of the term that includes feeling: Empfindung; likewise below, near
the end of this paragraph. See above, Ak. V, 22 br. n. 31.]
250

[schlechthin.]

251

[Or 'ends': Zwecke. See above, Ak. V, 35 br. n. 121.]

252

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 414-20; also the Metaphysics of
Morals, Ak. VI, 212-13.]
253

[See Christian von Wolff (1679-1754), Psychologia rationalis (Rational Psychology)
(Frankfurt: Renger, 1734) [cf. Kant's reference to this work in the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 390]; contemporary edition: Psychologia rationalis Christiani

80

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

Hone boni; nihil aversamur, nisi sub ratione mali.25A This formula has a use
that is often correct but also often very detrimental to philosophy, because
the expressions boni and mali contain an ambiguity, owing to the limitation
of the language, whereby they are capable of a double sense. Thus they unavoidably make practical laws equivocal,255 and compel philosophy, which
in using them can indeed become aware of the difference of concepts] for
the same word but still cannot find special expressions for them, to make
subtle distinctions on which one cannot afterwards come to an agreement
because one was unable to designate the difference256 directly by any appropriate expression.257
The German language is fortunate to possess the expressions that keep
this difference from being overlooked. It has two very different concepts
and also equally different expressions for what the Latins designate by a
single word, bonum [or malum]:25* for bonum it has das Gute and das
Wohl; for malum it has das Böse and das Übel (or Weft),259 so that there are
Wolfii; critical edition with (French) introduction, notes, and index, by Jean École (New York:
G. Olms, 1972); sections 880, 881, 892. And see Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten (1714-62),
Metaphysica (Metaphysics), (Magdeburg, Germany: Hemmerde, 1739); second reprint of the
7th edition of 1779 (New York: G. Olms, 1982); section 665.]
254

['We desire nothing except for (literally, 'under') the reason of [its being] good; we loathe
nothing except for the reason of [its being] bad.' (Translation mine.)]
255

[Literally, 'put practical laws on screw propellers': die praktischen Gesetze . . . auf
Schrauben stellen.]
256

[Unterschied here, VerschiedenheitJust above and just below.]

257

Moreover, the expression sub ratione bonia is also ambiguous. For it may be tantamount to saying this: we present something as good when and because we desire
(will) it; but also this: we desire something because we present it as good, so that
either the desire is the determining basis of the concept of the object as a good, or
the concept of the good is the determining basis of the desire (the will). Thus, in the
first case, sub ratione boni would mean that we will something under the idea of the
good; in the second, that we will something in consequence of this idea, which must
precede the volition as its determining basis. b
d
['For the reason of [its being] good.']
b
[Cf., on this note, the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 377-78.]
258
259

[Respectively, 'good,' 'bad.']

[Respectively, and with Kant's precise emphases restored: 'the good' and 'the well-being' ;
'the evil * and 'the bad ' (or 'woe' ). It is true that the meanings of several of the English terms,
as these are used ordinarily, are not so clearly either moral or nonmoral as Kant here intends.
Nor, however, are the German originals. Kant's explications should, rather, be taken as partly

CHAPTER II OBJECT OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

81

two quite different judgments260 according to whether in an action we take
into consideration its good and evil or our well-being and woe (bad). From
this it follows already that the above psychological proposition is at least
still very uncertain if translated thus: we desire nothing except on account
of our well-being or woe; whereas it is 261 indubitably certain and at the
same time quite clearly expressed if one renders it thus: according to reason's instruction we will nothing except insofar as we consider it to be good
or evil.
Well-being or bad always signifies only a reference to our state of agreeableness or disagreeableness, of gratification or pain; and if we desire or
loathe an object on that account then we do so only insofar as it is referred
to our sensibility and the feeling of pleasure and displeasure that it brings
about. But good or evil always signifies a reference to the will insofar as the
will is determined by the law of reason to make something its object—as,
indeed, the will is never determined directly by the object and the presentation of it, but is a power to make a rule of reason the motivating cause of an
action (through which an object can become actual). Hence good or evil is
in fact referred to actions rather than to the person's state of sensation,262
prescnptive: e.g., as used ordinarily, the meaning of 'good' is not exclusively moral (but only
when the good "deserves this name absolutely": see below, Ak. V, 64), nor that of 'bad' exclusively nonmoral. The same applies to the German equivalents. (The standard contemporary
German equivalent of 'bad,' schlecht, rarely occurs in Kant; in this work, it occurs once, at Ak.
V, 78; in the Critique of Pure Reason it occurs once, at A 554 = B 582.) Thus Kant himself
(above, Ak. V, 38) refers to a person as moralisch gut ('morally good') without finding—as on
his explication of 'good' he should—the expression redundant. Likewise, the commonly used
expression ein übler Mensch clearly refers to a morally bad—hence evil—person. In fact,
'evil' is the English cognate of übel and shares this ambiguity: traditionally, the meaning of
this term has included both the moral and the nonmoral (as in the expression 'the problem of
evil'). Therefore, 'evil' is a legitimate rendering for übel in works that are not concerned to distinguish übel from böse. In this work, however, it is best to use 'evil' in its contemporary,
moral meaning, in which it is a legitimate rendering for böse with its predominantly moral
meaning. Even böse, however, can be used in a nonmoral sense: e.g., eine böse Entzündung is
a bad, not an "evil," inflammation; and this is why Kant (above, Ak. V, 37) can speak of dem
moralisch Bösen, i.e., 'the morally evil,' without finding that expression redundant. By the
same token, translating böse as (the somewhat quaint) 'wicked,' which already implies
'moral,' would make the same Kantian expression redundant. (As for quaintness: it is true that
'woe' is quaint; but so is the original Weh.)]
260

[Beurteilungen. See above, Ak. V, 8 br. n. 78.]

261

[Inserting ist ('is') after ungezweifelt gewiß ('indubitably certain').]

262

[In the broad meaning of the term that includes feeling: Empfindung. See above, Ak. V, 22
br. n. 31.]

82

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

and if something is to be good or evil absolutely263 (and in every respect and
without any further condition), or to be considered so, then what could be so
called would be only the way of acting, the maxim of the will, and hence the
acting person himself as a good or evil human being, but not a thing.264
Thus however people may have laughed at the Stoic who in the most intense pains of gout exclaimed: Pain, however much you may torment me, I
will still never admit that you are something evil (KOCKOV, malum)\\ he was
nonetheless right. It was something bad; this he felt, and this his outcry betrayed. But that an evil attached to him on that account, this he had no cause
whatever to grant; for the pain does not in the least diminish the worth of
his person but diminishes only the worth of his [own] state. A single lie of
which he had been conscious would have had to strike down his mettle;265
but the pain served only to prompt him to raise it, when he was conscious
that he had not incurred the pain through any wrong action and thereby
made himself deserving of punishment.
What we are to call good must in every reasonable human being's judgment be an object of the power of desire, and evil must in everyone's eyes
be an object of loathing; hence in addition to sense this judgment266 requires
reason. This is the case with truthfulness as opposed to a lie, with justice as
opposed to violence, etc. However, we can call something a bad thing267
that everyone must yet at the same time declare to be good, sometimes indirectly268 and sometimes even directly good. Someone who has a surgical
operation performed on himself feels it without doubt as something bad;
but through reason he and everyone declares it to be good. But if someone
who likes to tease and agitate peace-loving people finally runs into trouble
and is sent off with a sound thrashing, then this is indeed something bad,
but everyone approves of it and considers it in itself to be good, even if
nothing further were to issue from it; indeed, even the one who receives the
thrashing must in his reason cognize269 that he is being dealt with rightly,
263

[schlechthin. See above, Ak. V, 3 br. n. 2.]

264

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 394-96.]

265

[Mut.]

266

[Beurteilung here, Urteil above.]

267

[ein Übel, which I usually (e.g., twice below) render as 'something bad.']

268 [Qj- 'mediately': mittelbar; 'directly,' below, renders unmittelbar,
is in almost all cases a very misleading translation.]
269

[Or 'recognize': erkennen.]

for which 'immediately'

CHAPTER II OBJECT OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

83

because he sees that the proportion between well-being and well-behaving,270 which reason unavoidably holds before him, has here been carried
out exactly.
Of course, in the judging of our practical reason very much indeed
hinges on our well-being and woe, and, as far as our nature as sensible beings is concerned, everything hinges on our happiness if this is judged, as
reason especially demands, not according to transitory sensation but according to the influence that this contingency has on our entire existence
and our satisfaction with it; but, nonetheless, everything as such does not
hinge on this. The human being insofar as he belongs to the world of sense
is a needy being, and to this extent his reason does indeed have a mandate
from the side of sensibility which he cannot reject, to attend to its interest
and to frame practical maxims also with a view to happiness in this life and,
if possible, in a future life as well. Yet he is not so entirely an animal as to
be indifferent to all that reason says on its own, and so as to use reason
merely as an instrument for satisfying his needs as a being of sense. For,
that he has reason does not at all elevate him in worth above mere animality
if reason is to serve him only for the sake of what instinct accomplishes in
animals; reason would in that case be only a particular manner that nature
had employed in order to equip the human being for the same purpose to
which it has destined271 animals, without destining him to a higher purpose.
Hence he does indeed need reason, according to this arrangement that nature happens to have made for him, in order to take into consideration always his well-being and woe. But besides this he has it also for the sake of
something higher, viz., in order not only to include in his deliberation what
is in itself good or evil—about which solely pure and sensibly not at all interested reason can make a judgment—but to distinguish this judging entirely from the former272 and to make it the supreme condition thereof.273
In this judging of what is in itself good and evil, as distinguished from
what can be called so only in reference to well-being or bad, what counts
are the following points. Either a principle of reason is thought as already in
itself the determining basis of the will without regard to possible objects of
270

[Wohlbefinden und Wohlverhalten; wherever feasible, I translate Verhalten as 'conduct,'
and Wohlverhalten as 'good conduct.']

271

[bestimmen.]

272

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 394-96.]

273

[Reading, with Albert Nolte and with Paul Natorp in the Akademie edition, der letzteren for
des letzteren.]

84

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

the power of desire (hence [as being this determining basis] merely through
the legal form of the maxim); then that principle is a practical a priori law,
and reason is assumed to be practical by itself. The law then determines the
will directly, the action conforming to it is in itself good, and a will whose
maxim always conforms to this law is good absolutely, in every respect, and
is the supreme condition of all good.214 Or else the maxim of the will is preceded by a determining basis of the power of desire which presupposes an
object of pleasure or displeasure and hence something that gratifies or
pains, and the maxim of reason to promote the former and avoid the latter
determines the actions according as they are good in reference to our inclination and hence only indirectly (on account of a further purpose, as a
means thereto); and these maxims can then never be called laws, but still rational practical precepts. The purpose itself, the gratification that we seek, is
in the latter case not a good but a well-being, not a rational concept but an
empirical concept of an object of sensation; however, the use of the means
to it, i.e., the action, is nonetheless called good (because rational deliberation is required for it), yet good not absolutely but only in reference to our
sensibility with regard to its feeling of pleasure and displeasure; but the will
whose maxim is affected by this [feeling] is not a pure will, which is a will
that aims only at that wherein pure reason can be practical by itself.275
Now, this is the place to explain the paradox of method in a critique of
practical reason: viz., that the concept of good and evil must be determined
not prior to the moral law (it276 would, so it seems, even have to be laid at
the basis of this law) but only after it and by means of it (as is indeed being
done here). For even if we did not know that the principle of morality is a
pure law determining the will a priori, yet—in order not to assume principles quite gratuitously277 (gratis)—we would at least have to leave unestablished at first whether the will has only empirical determining bases or
also pure a priori ones. For we go against all basic rules of philosophical
procedure if already in advance we assume something as decided when we
are yet to decide on it in the first place. Suppose, then, that we wanted to
start from the concept of the good in order to derive from it the laws of the

274

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 408-09.]

275

[Cf. ibid, Ak. IV, 414-21.]

276

[Reading, with Hartenstein and with Natorp in the Akademie edition, er for es; the latter
term would refer back not to 'concept' but to 'good and evil.']
277

[umsonst.]

CHAPTER II OBJECT OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

85

will; then this concept of an object (as a good object) would at the same
time indicate it as the one determining basis of the will. Now, because this
concept had no practical a priori law for its standard, the touchstone of good
or evil could be posited in nothing other than the agreement of the object
with our feeling of pleasure or displeasure, and the use of reason could consist only in determining partly this pleasure or displeasure in the[ir] entire
coherence with all the sensations of my existence, and partly the means to
provide myself with the object of this pleasure or displeasure. Now, since
what conforms to the feeling of pleasure can be established only through
experience, and since the practical law, by stipulation, is after all to be
based on this as its condition, the possibility of practical a priori laws would
straightforwardly be excluded—because it was deemed necessary to discover beforehand an object for the will, the concept of which object, as that
of a good,278 would have to constitute the universal though empirical determining basis of the will. In fact, however, it was necessary to investigate beforehand whether there is not also an a priori determining basis of the will
(which would never have been found anywhere else than in a pure practical
law, and, specifically, insofar as this law prescribes to maxims the mere
legal form without regard to an object). But because an object, according to
concepts of good and evil, was already being laid at the basis of any practical law, while this object—without an antecedent law—could be thought
only according to empirical concepts, one had deprived oneself already in
advance of the possibility of even thinking a pure practical law. By contrast,
if one had beforehand investigated this law analytically, one would have
found that, instead of the concept of the good as an object determining and
making possible the moral law, it is, conversely, the moral law which first
determines and makes possible the concept of the good insofar as it deserves this name absolutely.
This comment, which concerns merely the method of the supreme moral
investigations, is important. It explains all at once the basis that occasions
all the strayings of philosophers with regard to the supreme principle of
morality. For these philosophers looked for an object of the will in order to
turn it into the matter and basis of a law (this law was then to be the determining basis of the will not directly, but by means of that object applied to
the feeling of pleasure or displeasure); instead they should have started by
searching for a law that determined the will a priori and directly and that, in
conformity with the will, first determined the object. Now, whether they
[eines Guten. Vorländer instead reads eines guten, i.e., 'of a good object.']

86

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

posited this object of pleasure—which was to yield the supreme concept of
the good—in happiness, in perfection, in moral feeling,279 or in the will of
God, their principle was always heteronomy and they had to come unavoidably upon empirical conditions for a moral law; for they could call their object—as direct determining basis of the will—good or evil only according to
its direct relation to feeling, which is always empirical.280 Only a formal law,
i.e., one that prescribes to reason nothing more than the form of its universal
legislation281 as the supreme condition of maxims, can be a priori a determining basis of practical reason.282 The ancients, however, betrayed this
mistake openly by staking their moral investigation entirely on the determination of the concept of the highest good, hence the concept of an object that
they meant afterwards to make the determining basis of the will in the moral
law—an object that long thereafter, when the moral law has first been legitimated283 on its own and justified as direct determining basis of the will—can
be presented as object to the will that is now determined a priori in terms of
its form; this we shall undertake in the Dialectic of Pure Practical Reason.284
The moderns, among whom the question concerning the highest good has
fallen out of use, or at least seems to have become a subordinate matter only,
conceal the above mistake (as they do in many other cases) behind indeterminate words; but one can still see it peering forth from their systems, since
it then betrays throughout heteronomy of practical reason, from which a
moral law that a priori commands universally can never arise.
Now since the concepts of good and evil, as consequences of the a priori
determination of the will, presuppose also a pure practical principle and
hence a causality of pure reason, they do not (as, say, determinations of the
synthetic unity of the manifold of given intuitions in one consciousness)
refer originally to objects as do the pure concepts of understanding or categories of reason used theoretically,285 but they rather presuppose these ob279

[Reading, with Hartenstein and with Natorp in the Akademie edition, Gefühle for Gesetze
('law').]
280

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 441-44.]

281

[Gesetzgebung. See above, Ak. V, 20 br. n. 23.]

282

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 444-45.]

283

[Literally, 'verified': bewährt,]

284

[See below, Ak. V, 107-48.]

285

[Kant usually refers to the concepts of reason (used speculatively) as "ideas." See the Critique of Pure Reason, A 310-40/B 366-98, and cf. below, Ak. V, 69.]

CHAPTER II OBJECT OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

87

jects as given. Instead they are, one and all, modes of a single category, viz.,
that of causality, insofar as the determining basis of causality consists in
reason's presentation of a law of causality which, as law of freedom, reason
gives to itself and thereby proves itself a priori to be practical. However, although the actions, on the one hand, [are] subject to a law that is not a natural law but a law of freedom, and consequently belong to the conduct of
intelligible beings, yet, on the other hand, as events in the world of sense
they also belong to appearances. Therefore the determinations of a practical
reason will be able to take place only with reference to the world of sense
and hence indeed in conformity with the categories of the understanding,
not however with the aim of a theoretical use of the understanding in order
to bring a priori the manifold of (sensible) intuition under one consciousness,286 but only in order to subject a priori the manifold of desires to the
unity of consciousness of a practical reason commanding in the moral law,
or [i.e.] of a pure will.
These categories of freedom—for so we shall call them in contrast to
those theoretical concepts that are categories of nature—have an obvious
advantage over the latter. For the latter are only forms of thought which, by
means of universal concepts, designate only indeterminately objects as such
for every intuition possible for us. The categories of freedom, by contrast,
aim at the determination of a free power of choice. (Although no intuition
can be given as fully corresponding to this power, yet it—as does not happen with any concepts of the theoretical use of our cognitive power—is
based a priori on a pure practical law.) Hence, as practical elementary concepts, instead of being based on the form of intuition (space and time) that
does not lie in reason itself but must be taken from elsewhere, namely from
sensibility, they are based on the form of a pure will as given in reason and
thus in the power of thought itself. Through this, then, it happens that, since
in all precepts of pure practical reason the concern is only with the determination of the will, not with the natural conditions (of the practical power)
for carrying out its aim, the practical a priori concepts, in reference to the
supreme principle of freedom, immediately become cognitions and do not
need to wait for intuitions in order to acquire signification; specifically, this
happens for the noteworthy reason287 that they themselves give rise to the
actuality of that to which they refer (the attitude of the will), which is not at
286

[I.e., (the unity of) transcendental (original) apperception. See the Critique of Pure Reason,
A 106-07, 117n, B 68, 131-32, 157.]
[Grund.]

88

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

all the business of theoretical concepts. Now, it must be noted carefully that
these categories concern only practical reason in general, and hence they
proceed in their order from those that are morally still undetermined and
sensibly conditioned to those that, being sensibly unconditioned, are determined only by the moral law.
TABLE
OF THE CATEGORIES OF FREEDOM IN REGARD TO
THE CONCEPTS OF GOOD AND EVIL

l
Of Quantity
Subjective, according to maxims (intentions of the will2SS of the individual)
Objective, according to principles (precepts)
A priori objective as well as subjective principles of freedom (laws)
2
Of Quality
Practical rules of commission
(praeceptivae)2*9
Practical rules of omission
(prohibitivae)
Practical rules of exceptions
(exceptivae)

3
Of Relation
To personality
To the state of the person
Reciprocally, of one person
to the state of another

4
Of Modality
The, permitted and not permitted29®
Duty and what is contrary to duty
Perfect and imperfect duty291
Here one soon becomes aware that in this table freedom is regarded as a
kind of causality—which, however, is not subject to empirical determining
288

[Willensmeinungen.]

289

[I.e., regulae (rules) praeceptivae; similarly for the two categories below.]

290

[Cf. above, Ak. V, 11 n. 93 incl. br. n. 93b.]

29 x

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 390-91 ; also the Grounding for the Metaphysics of
Morals, Ak. IV, 421-23, esp. 421n.]

CHAPTER II OBJECT OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

89

bases—with regard to the actions possible through it as appearances in the
world of sense, and that freedom is consequently referred292 to the categories of its293 natural possibility, while yet each category is taken so universally that the determining basis of that causality can be assumed even
outside the world of sense, viz., in freedom as a property of an intelligible
being, until the categories of modality introduce, though only problematically, the transition from practical principles in general to those of morality,
which afterwards can for the first time be exhibited dogmatically through
the moral law.
I add nothing further here to elucidate the present table, because it is understandable enough on its own. This sort of division, drawn up according
to principles, is very beneficial to any science on account of its thoroughness and understandability. Thus, e.g., from the above table and its first item
one knows immediately from what one must start in practical considerations: from the maxims that each person bases on his inclination, the precepts that hold for a genus of rational beings insofar as these agree in
certain inclinations, and finally the law that holds for all regardless of their
inclinations, etc. In this way one surveys the entire plan of what one has to
accomplish, even every question of practical philosophy that is to be answered and simultaneously the order that is to be followed.

On the Typic of the Pure Practical
Power of Judgment294
The concepts of good and evil first determine an object for the will. They
themselves, however, fall under a practical rule of reason which, if the rea292

[Kant—possibly by conflating, as he frequently does, freedom and the concept of freedom— actually says 'refers': sich .. . beziehe.]
293

[ihre, which I take to refer back to 'freedom,' not to 'actions.' First, by Kant's grammar it
refers back to the original subject of the sentence, which is 'freedom'; to refer back to 'actions,' Kant would have used a phrase like der letzteren, 'the latter.' Second, the table lists categories not of action but of freedom: they determine freedom ("a free power of choice": above,
Ak. V, 65); this they do with regard to the actions possible through freedom in nature; the natural possibility of freedom, I take it, simply is this determination. Third, the contrast ("while
yet") implicit in the continuation of this very paragraph seems clearly to pertain to the causality, i.e., to freedom. Fourth, Kant is about to state expressly (below, Ak. V, 68) that the issue is
not the possibility of the action as an event in the world of sense.]
294

[Urteilskraft.]

90

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

son is pure,295 determines the will a priori with regard to its object. Now
whether an action possible for us in sensibility is or is not a case that falls
under the rule requires practical power of judgment, by which what was
said universally (in abstracto) in the rule is applied in concreto to an action.
However, a practical rule of pure reason, first, as practical, concerns the existence296 of an object, and second, as a practical rule of pure reason, carries with it necessity with regard to the existence of the action and hence is
a practical law, and specifically not a law of nature [concerning action]
through empirical determining bases but a law of freedom according to
which the will is to be determinable independently of everything empirical
(merely through the presentation of a law as such and of its form); yet all
occurring cases of possible actions can only be empirical, i.e., can belong
only to experience and nature. Therefore it seems paradoxical to want to
find in the world of sense a case which, while to this extent it always falls
only under the law of nature, nonetheless permits the application of a law of
freedom to it, and to which the suprasensible idea of the morally good to be
exhibited in that world in concreto can be applied. Hence the power of
judgment of pure practical reason is subject to the same difficulties as that
of pure theoretical reason, though the latter had a means available to get out
of them: namely that, since what counted with regard to the theoretical use
were intuitions to which pure concepts of understanding could be applied,
such intuitions (though only of objects of the senses) could yet be given a
priori, and hence, as far as the connection of the manifold in them is concerned, could be given (as schemata)291 in a priori conformity with the pure
concepts of understanding.298 By contrast, the morally good is something
that, in terms of the object, is suprasensible, so that nothing corresponding
to it can be found in any sensible intuition; hence the power of judgment
under laws of pure practical reason seems to be subject to special difficulties which are due to [the fact] that a law of freedom is to be applied to
actions as events that occur in the world of sense and thus, to this extent,
belong to nature.

295

[Literally, Kant says 'if it is pure reason'—wenn sie reine Vernunft ist—which, contrary to
Kant's focus in the sentence, would make not 'rule' but 'reason' the subject of the next clause.]
296

[Existenz here, Dasein below.]

297

[See below, Ak. V, 69.]

298

[Or, possibly, 'given . . . in conformity with the pure a priori concepts of understanding':
den reinen Verstandesbegriffen a priori gemäß.]

CHAPTER II OBJECT OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

91

Yet here again an auspicious prospect opens up for the pure practical
power of judgment. In the subsumption of an action possible for me in the
world of sense under a pure practical law the concern is not with the possibility of the action as an event in the world of sense; for this possibility pertains to the judging of the theoretical use of reason according to the law of
causality, a pure concept of understanding for which reason has a schema in
sensible intuition. Physical causality, or the condition under which it takes
place, belongs under the concepts of nature, and the schema of these concepts
is drafted by the transcendental power of imagination.299 Here, however, the
concern is not with the schema of a case according to laws but with the
schema (if this word is fitting here) of a law itself, because the determination
of the will (not the action in reference to its result) through the law alone and
without any other determining basis ties the concept of causality to conditions
that are entirely different from those that amount to natural connection.
For a law of nature—as a law to which objects of sensible intuition, as
such objects, are subject—there must be a corresponding schema, i.e., a
universal procedure of the power of imagination (for exhibiting a priori to
the senses the pure concept of understanding which the law determines).300
But for the law of freedom (which is a causality not sensibly conditioned at
all), and hence also for the concept of the unconditionally301 good, there is
no intuition and hence no schema that can be laid at its basis for the sake of
its application in concreto. Consequently the moral law has no other cognitive power to mediate its application to objects of nature than the understanding (not the power of imagination). What the understanding can lay at
the basis—as a law for the sake of the power of judgment—of the idea of
reason is not a schema of sensibility but a law, but yet a law that can be exhibited in concreto in objects of the senses, and hence a law of nature,
though only in terms of its form; therefore we can call this law the type of
the moral law.
The rule of the power of judgment under laws of pure practical reason is
this: Ask yourself whether, if the action you propose were to occur according to a law of the nature of which you yourself were a part, you could indeed regard it as possible through your will.302 Everyone does in fact judge
299

[Einbildungskraft.]

300

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 137-47/B 176-87.]

301

[Or 'unconditioned': unbedingt.]

302

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 421.]

92

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

actions according to this rule as to whether they are morally good or evil.
Thus one says, What if everyone permitted himself to deceive when he believed it to be to his advantage, or considered himself authorized to shorten
his life as soon as he was beset by utter weariness of it, or viewed the plight
of others with utter indifference, and if you too belonged to such an order of
things, would you indeed be in it with the agreement of your will?303 Now,
everyone knows well that if he secretly permits himself to deceive, it does
not follow that everyone else does it too, or that if—without being noticed—he is unloving, everyone would not immediately be so toward him
as well; hence, by the same token, this comparison of the maxim of his actions with a universal law of nature is not the determining basis of his will.
But this law is nonetheless a type for the judging of the maxim according to
moral principles. If the maxim of the action is not so constituted as to stand
the test against the form of a natural law in general, then it is morally impossible. Even the commonest understanding judges thus; for the law of
nature lies at the basis of all its most common judgments, even those of experience. Thus it always has the law of nature available, except that in cases
where causality from freedom is to be judged it makes that law of nature
merely the type of a law of freedom, because, without having something
available that it could make an example in a case of experience, it could not
provide to the law of a pure practical reason its use in application.
Hence using the nature of the world of sense as the type of an intelligible
nature is also permitted, so long as I do not transfer to the latter any intuitions and what depends on them, but refer to it merely the form of lawfulness as such (the concept of which occurs even in the commonest304
understanding, though it cannot determinately be cognized a priori for any
aim other than just the pure practical use of reason). For to this extent laws, as
such, are the same, no matter from where they take their determining bases.
For the rest, [I shall offer one comment below.] Of all the intelligible absolutely nothing but freedom (by means of the moral law) has a reality for
us except for the sake of this law and the use of pure practical reason, and
even freedom has such reality only insofar as it is a presupposition inseparable from that law; and, furthermore, all intelligible objects in turn to
which reason might perhaps still lead us under the guidance of that law
have no reality other than this. However, reason is entitled and also required
303
304

[Cf. ibid., Ak. IV, 422-23, 429-30.]

[Reading, with Hartenstein and with Natorp in the Akademie edition, gemeinsten for reinsten ('purest').]

CHAPTER II OBJECT OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

93

to use nature (in terms of nature's pure form of understanding) as the type
of the power of judgment. Hence the present comment will serve to keep
what belongs merely to the typic of concepts from being classed with the
concepts themselves[:] This, then, as the typic of the power of judgment,
guards against the empiricism concerning practical reason, which posits the
practical concepts of good and evil merely in experiential consequences
(so-called happiness);305 and although happiness and the infinite useful
consequences of a will determined by self-love, if this will at the same time
turned itself into a universal law of nature, can indeed serve as an entirely
adequate type for the morally good, it is still not identical therewith. The
same typic guards also against the mysticism concerning practical reason,
which turns what served only as a symbol into a schema, i.e., bases the application of moral concepts on actual and yet not sensible intuitions (of an
invisible kingdom of God) and strays into the transcendent.306 Only the rationalism concerning the power of judgment is adequate to the use of moral
concepts; it takes from sensible nature nothing more than what pure reason
can also think on its own, i.e., lawfulness, and carries into the suprasensible
nothing but what can, conversely, be actually exhibited through actions in
the world of sense according to the formal rule of a natural law in general.
However, guarding against the empiricism concerning practical reason is
much more important and advisable; for, the mysticism [concerning practical reason] is in fact still compatible with the purity and sublimity of the
moral law, and, besides, stretching one's power of imagination all the way
to suprasensible intuitions is not exactly natural and commensurate with the
common way of thinking, so that on this side the danger is not so general.
By contrast, the empiricism [concerning practical reason] eradicates by the
root307 the morality in attitudes (in which, after all, and not merely in actions, consists the high worth that humanity can and ought to procure for itself through morality), and substitutes for it something entirely different,
namely in place of duty an empirical interest, with which inclinations as
such traffic among themselves. Precisely because of this, moreover, empiricism—along with all inclinations which (no matter what style they are
given) degrade humanity if they are elevated to the dignity of a supreme
305

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 442.]

306

[Cf. ibid, Ak. IV, 443; also the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 488-91.]

307

[Although 'root' and 'eradicate' have the same origin, and 'eradicates by the root' may
sound odd to an etymologic ally attuned ear, all of that applies to the respective German terms,
Wurzel and ausrotten. Indeed, all four terms come from the same root!]

94

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

practical principle, and which308 are nonetheless so indulgent to everyone's
mentality309—is for this reason far more dangerous than any fanaticism,310
which can never amount to a lasting state of many human beings.

[Analytic of Pure Practical Reason]
Chapter III
On the Incentives of
Pure Practical Reason
What is essential in all moral worth311 of actions is 312 that the moral law
must determine3™ the will directly. If the determination of the will, although occurring in conformity with the moral law, does so only by means
of a feeling—of whatever kind—that must be presupposed in order for that
law to become a sufficient determining basis of the will, and hence does not
occur on account of the law, then the action will indeed contain legality 3U
but not morality?15 Now if by incentive (elater animi)316 one means the
subjective determining basis of the will of a being whose reason does not by
its very nature necessarily conform to the objective law, then it will follow,
first, that no incentives at all can be attributed to the divine will but that the
[moral] incentive of the human will (and of the will of every created ra-

308

[Reading die for da sie, as suggested by Natorp.]

309

[Sinnesart.]

310

[Le., such as the mysticism concerning practical reason: Schwärmerei]

311

[Or 'value': Wert.]

312

[Kant actually says (redundantly) 'hinges on': kommt darauf an.]

3,3

[Here 'must determine' translates (the subjunctive) bestimme.]

^[Legalität]
315

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 397-400; also the Metaphysics
of Morals, Ak. VI, 219-20.]
316

[Literally, 'driver of the soul.']

CHAPTER III INCENTIVES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

95

tional being) can never be anything other than the moral law;317 [and, second,] that the objective determining basis must therefore always and quite
alone be also the subjectively sufficient determining basis of the action if
this action is not merely to fulfill the letter of the law without containing the
law's spirit?1*
Hence for the sake of the moral law and in order to provide it with influence on the will, one must not search for any further incentive in view of
which the incentive of the moral law could be dispensed with, because this
would bring about nothing but hypocrisy without stability; and it is precarious even to let some further incentives (such as that of advantage) so much
as cooperate alongside the moral law. Thus nothing remains to be done except merely to determine carefully in what way the moral law becomes an
incentive, and what, inasmuch as it is this incentive, happens to the human
power of desire by way of an effect that this determining basis has on it. For
how a law can by itself and directly be a determining basis of the will (this
is, after all, what is essential in all morality) is an insoluble problem for
human reason, and is one and the same problem as the one concerning how
a free will is possible.319 Therefore we shall have to indicate a priori not the
basis on which the moral law intrinsically yields an incentive, but what, insofar it is an incentive, it brings about (or, to put it better, must bring about)
in the mind.
What is essential in all determination of the will by the moral law is that,
as a free will, and hence not merely without the cooperation of sensible impulses but even with rejection of all of them and with impairment of all inclinations insofar as they could be contrary to that law, it be determined
merely by the law.320 Thus to this extent the effect of the moral law as an incentive is only negative, and as such this incentive can be cognized a priori.
For all inclination and every sensible impulse is based on feeling, and the
negative effect on feeling (by the impairment done to the inclinations) is itself a feeling. Consequently we can see321 a priori that the moral law as de317

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 412-14.]

318

Concerning every lawful action that is nonetheless not done on account of the
law one can say that it is morally good merely according to the letter but not according to the spirit (the attitude).
319

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 456, 459,461.]

320

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 391, 446-47.]

321

[Literally, 'have insight into': einsehen.]

96

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

termining basis of the will, by infringing all our inclinations, must bring
about a feeling that can be called pain; and here we have, then, the first and
perhaps also the only case where we have been able to determine a priori
from concepts322 the relation of a cognition (here a cognition of a pure practical reason) to the feeling of pleasure or displeasure. All inclinations together (which presumably can also be brought into a tolerable system, and
the satisfaction of which is then called one's own happiness) amount to selfishness323 (solipsismus). This is either that of self-love,324 a paramount
benevolence325 toward oneself (philautia), or that of liking for oneself (arrogantia). Specifically, the former is called love for oneself326 the latter
conceit for oneself321 Pure practical reason merely impairs32* love for oneself, inasmuch as it only restricts such love—as natural and as astir in us
even prior to the moral law—to the condition of agreement329 with this law,
and this love is then called rational self-love. Self-conceit, however, pure
practical reason strikes down altogether,330 inasmuch as all claims of selfesteem that precede agreement with the moral law are null and without any
authority,331 since precisely the certainty of an attitude agreeing with this
law is the primary condition of all worth of a person (we shall soon make
this more distinct), and all presumption prior to this certainty is false and

322

[aus Begriffen a priori... bestimmen. Grammatically, this could also be taken to mean 'determine from a priori concepts.']
323

[Selbstsucht, literally 'self-seekingness.' Below, the Latin term in parentheses, in the sense
applicable here, could also be translated as 'self-indulgence.' See the Metaphysics of Morals,
Ak. VI, 450.]
324

[Selbstliebe. Below, 'love for oneself translates Eigenliebe. Although Eigen-, unlike 'oneself,' is terminologically differentiated from Selbst- ('self-'), it still has the same meaning.]
325 [Wohlwollen. Below, the Latin term (of Greek etymology) in parentheses means, literally,
'self-love' again; 'liking' translates Wohlgefallen, and the subsequent Latin term in parentheses means, literally, 'arrogance.']
326

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 406-07, 422, 432; also the
Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 451-52, 462.]
327

[Eigendünkel, translated hereafter simply as 'self-conceit.' See the Metaphysics of Morals,
Ak. VI, 437, 462.]
328

[Abbruch tun. See above, Ak. V, 25 br. n. 44.]

329

[Einstimmung here, Übereinstimmung below; the terms are synonymous.]

330

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 437, 462.]

331

[Befugnis. I also use 'authority' to translate Ansehen. See below, Ak. V, 76 br. n. 350.]

CHAPTER III INCENTIVES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

97

unlawful.332 Now, the propensity to self-esteem, insofar as it rests merely
on sensibility,333 also belongs to the inclinations that the moral law impairs.
Therefore the moral law strikes down self-conceit. But this law is, after all,
something in itself positive, viz., the form of an intellectual causality, i.e.,
of freedom. Hence inasmuch as—in contrast to its subjective opposite, viz.,
the inclinations in us—it weakens self-conceit, the moral law is at the same
time an object of respect; and inasmuch as it even strikes down self-conceit,
i.e., humbles334 it, the moral law is an object of the greatest respect and thus
also the basis of a positive feeling that is not of empirical origin and is cognized a priori. Therefore respect for the moral law is a feeling that is
brought about by an intellectual basis, and this feeling is the only one that
we cognize completely a priori and the necessity of which we can have insight into.335
We saw in the preceding chapter that everything that offers itself as object of the will prior to the moral law is excluded from the determining
bases of the will—the will under the name of the unconditionally good—by
this law itself as the supreme condition of practical reason; and we saw that
the mere practical form, which consists in the suitability of maxims for universal legislation, first determines what is good in itself and absolutely and
is the basis for the maxim of a pure will, such a will alone being good in
every respect. In fact, however, we find our nature as sensible beings to be
so constituted that the matter of the power of desire (objects of inclination,
whether of hope or fear) thrusts itself upon us first and that our pathologically determinable self,336 even though by its maxims it is entirely unsuitable for universal legislation, nonetheless endeavors—just as if it amounted
to our entire self—to validate337 its claims beforehand and as primary and
original. This propensity to make oneself, in terms of the subjective determining basis of one's power of choice, an objective determining basis of the
will as such can be called self-love, which, when it makes itself legislative
332

[ Or 'contrary to the law': gesetzwidrig.]

333

[Reading, with Albert Görland, A. Nolte, Erich Adickes, Emil Wille, and with Paul Natorp
in the Akademie edition, Sinnlichkeit for Sittlichkeit ('morality').]
334

[Or 'humiliates': demütigen.]

335

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 400, 401n, 403, 440; also the
Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 402-03.]
336

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 376-77, 399-400.]

337

[Or, less literally, 'to assert': geltend machen.]

98

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

and an unconditional practical principle, can be called self-conceit. Now,
the moral law, which alone is truly objective (viz., objective in every respect), excludes entirely the influence of self-love on the supreme practical
principle and infinitely impairs self-conceit,338 which prescribes the subjective conditions of self-love as laws. Now, what in our own judgment impairs our self-conceit humbles us. Therefore the moral law unavoidably
humbles every human being inasmuch as he compares with it the sensible
propensity of his nature. If the presentation of something as determining
basis of our will humbles us in our self-consciousness, then insofar as this
something is positive and a determining basis it arouses respect for itself.
Therefore the moral law is subjectively too a basis of respect. Now, every- *
thing found in self-love belongs to inclination, and all inclination rests on
feelings; hence what in self-love impairs all of the inclinations has, precisely
thereby, necessarily an influence on feeling. Thus we comprehend how it is
possible to see339 a priori that the moral law—inasmuch as it excludes the
inclinations and the propensity to make them the supreme practical condition, i.e., self-love, from any participation340 in the supreme legislation—
can exert on feeling an effect that on the one hand is merely negative but on
the other hand, specifically in regard to the restricting basis of pure practical reason, is positive; and for this no special kind of feeling need be assumed, under the name of a practical or moral feeling, as preceding the
moral law and lying at its basis.
The negative effect on feeling (disagreeableness) is, like all influence on
feeling and every feeling in general, pathological^1 However, although as
the effect of the consciousness of the moral law and consequently in reference to an intelligible cause—viz., the subject, of pure reason as supreme
legislator—this feeling of a rational subject affected by inclinations is
called humiliation (intellectual contempt), yet in reference to the positive
basis of this humiliation,342 the law, it is at the same time called respect for
the law. No feeling for this law occurs at all; rather, inasmuch as the law
moves the resistance out of the way, in the judgment of reason this removal
of an obstacle is esteemed equal to a positive furtherance of its causality.
338

[I.e., it strikes it down. See above, Ak. V, 73.]

339

[Literally, 'have insight into': einsehen.]

340

[Beitritt]

341

[See above, Ak. V, 19 incl. br. n. 5.]

342

[Or perhaps 'of this effect': derselben.]

CHAPTER III INCENTIVES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

99

Because of this, this feeling can now also be called a feeling of respect for the
moral law, while on both grounds together it can be called a moral feeling.343
Thus the moral law, just as through practical pure reason it is a formal
determining basis of action, and just as it is indeed also a material but only
objective344 determining basis of the objects of the action under the name of
good and evil, so it is also a subjective determining basis—i.e., an incentive—for this action, inasmuch as it has influence on the sensibility345 of the
subject and brings about a feeling that furthers the law's influence on the
will. Here there is in the subject no antecedent feeling that would be attuned
to morality, because this is impossible, since all feeling is sensible whereas
the incentive of the moral attitude must be free from any sensible condition.
Rather, sensible feeling, which underlies all our inclination, is indeed the
condition of that sensation which we call respect. But the cause that determines this sensation346 lies in pure practical reason, and hence this sensation, because of its origin, cannot be called brought about pathologically341
but must be called brought about practically>.348 For, the presentation of the
moral law deprives self-love of its influence and self-conceit of its delusion;349 and thereby pure practical reason's obstacle is diminished and the
presentation of the superiority of its objective law to the impulses of sensibility is produced, and hence—by the removal of the counterweight—so is,
relatively, the law's weight (with regard to a will affected by sensibility) in
the judgment of reason. And thus respect for the law is not an incentive to
morality; rather, it is morality itself regarded subjectively as an incentive
inasmuch as pure practical reason—by rejecting, in contrast to self-love, all
of self-love's claims—imparts authority350 to the law, which now alone has
343

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 442, 460; also the Metaphysics
of Morals, Ak. VI, 387, 399-400, 464.]
344

[objektiv; 'objects,' below, translates Gegenstände.]

345

[Reading, with Nolte, Wille, and with Natorp in the Akademie edition, Sinnlichkeit for Sittlichkeit ('morality').]
346

[Reading derselben for desselben, which would refer back not to Empfindung ('sensation')
but to Gefühl ('feeling') and hence, in this sentence, to 'sensible feeling.']
347

[Emphasis added.]

348

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 212-13, 377-78.]

349

[Wahn.]

350

[Ansehen. I also translate Befugnis as 'authority' because there is no consistently acceptable alternative term for either of the German originals. In particular, although Ansehen as
used in contemporary German could be translated as 'prestige,' this term would make the

100

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

influence. Now, here it must be noted [first,] that, as far as respect is an effect
on feeling and hence on the sensibility of a rational being, it351 presupposes
this sensibility and hence also thefinitudeof such beings on whom the moral
law imposes respect; and [second,] that respect for the law cannot be attributed to a supreme being or even to a being free from all sensibility, for whom
therefore sensibility also cannot be an obstacle to practical reason.352
This feeling (under the name of moral feeling) is thus brought about
solely by reason. It does not serve forjudging actions, let alone for being
the basis of the objective moral law itself, but serves only as an incentive to
make this law a maxim within oneself. But what name could more fittingly
be assigned to this odd feeling which cannot be compared with any pathological feeling? It is of such a peculiar kind that it seems to be at the command solely of reason, specifically of practical pure reason.
Respect always applies only to persons,353 never to things. Things can
arouse in us inclination and, if they are animals (e.g., horses, dogs, etc.),
even love—or else/ear, like the sea, a volcano, a beast of prey—but never
respect. Something that does approach this feeling is admiration, and this
as an affect, amazement, can apply also to things,354 e.g., sky-high mountains, the magnitude, multitude, and distance of the celestial bodies, the
strength and swiftness of many animals, etc. But none of this is respect. A
human being can also be for me an object of love, fear, or admiration even
to the point of amazement, and yet not be for me therefore an object of respect. His jocular temper, his courage and strength, his power due to his
rank among others, can instill such sensations in me, yet inner respect toward him [may] still be lacking. Fontenelle355 says: "Before a prominent
Kantian Ansehen too relative to people's views; and although Befugnis could sometimes be
rendered as 'warrant,' this term has epistemic connotations that would often make it misleading or even unintelligible: see, e.g., 'authority' and the closely related 'authorized' {befugt) at
Ak. V, 56, and especially 'authorized' at Ak. V, 69. However, I believe that the meaning of the
two German terms, as Kant uses these, is in fact just similar enough to make using the same
English term acceptable.]
351

[Reading, with Vorländer, sie for es.]

352

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 412-14 ]

353

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 448-50, 462-64.]

354

[Cf. the Critique of Judgment, Ak. V, 269, 272, 365.]

355

[Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle (1657-1757), a man of letters, scientist, and popular
philosopher. His most famous work is Entretiens sur la pluralité des mondes {Conversations
on the Plurality of Worlds) (Paris: C. Blageart, 1686); contemporary critical edition with

CHAPTER III INCENTIVES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

101

man I bow, but my spirit does not bow" I can add this: Before a lowly, plain
common man in whom I perceive righteousness of character in a certain
measure that I am not conscious of in myself my spirit bows, whether I want
it or not and whether I hold my head ever so high to keep him from overlooking my preeminence. Why is this? His example holds before me a law
that, when I compare it with my conduct, strikes down my self-conceit, and
I see compliance with it—and hence the law's practicability—proved before me through the deed. Now, I may even be conscious of an equal degree
of righteousness in myself, and yet the respect remains. For since in human
beings any good is always deficient, the law—made intuitive by an example—still always strikes down my pride. The standard for this is provided
by the man whom I see before me; what impurity356 may still attach to him
is not so familiar to me as is my own, and he therefore appears to me in a
purer light. Respect is a tribute that, whether we want to or not, we cannot
refuse [to pay] to merit; we may perhaps hold it back outwardly, yet we
cannot help feeling it inwardly.
So little is respect a feeling of pleasure that we give way to it only reluctantly in regard to a human being. We try to discover something [in him]
that could lighten the burden of it for us, some blemish to compensate us for
the humiliation that comes upon us through such an example. Even the deceased are not always safe from this [kind of] critique. Even the moral law
itself in its solemn majesty is exposed to this endeavor to fend off respect
for it. Does one suppose that our being so ready to degrade the moral law to
[the level of] our familiar357 inclinations can be ascribed to any other
cause—or that everyone's taking such trouble to turn this law into the favored precept of our well-understood advantage is due to any other
causes—than that we wish to be rid of the intimidating respect that holds
our own unworthiness358 so sternly before us? On the other hand, there is
nonetheless so little displeasure in respect that, once we have shed our selfconceit and have permitted that respect to have practical influence, we can
in turn not take our eyes off the splendor of this law, and the soul believes

(French) introduction and notes, by Alexandre Calame (Paris: Nizet, 1984); translated by H. A.
Hargreaves, with an introduction by Nina Rattner Gelbart (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1990).]
356

[Unlauterkeit. Ordinarily, including below, I use 'purity' for Reinigkeit.]

357

[vertraulich. Ordinarily I use 'familiar' to translate bekannt.]

358

[Unwurdigkeit.]

102

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

that it elevates itself to the extent that it sees the holy law elevated359 above
itself and its frail nature. To be sure, great talents and an activity proportionate to them can also bring about respect or a feeling analogous thereto,
and it is also entirely proper to devote this feeling to them; and it then seems
as if admiration and this sensation are one and the same. But if one looks
more closely one will notice that, because it always remains uncertain what
share innate talent and what share cultivation through one's own diligence
has in the skill [that we admire], reason presents the skill to us as presumably the fruit of cultivation and hence as merit; this noticeably tones down
our self-conceit, and [reason] either reproaches us with it or enjoins us to
follow such an example in the way that is appropriate to us. Hence this respect which we show to such a person (properly, to the law that his example
holds before us) is not mere admiration, as is confirmed also by this: that
when the common horde of [a man's] fanciers believes that it has from
somewhere else discovered the bad360 in the character of such a man (as,
say, Voltaire), it abandons all respect toward him, whereas the true scholar
continues to feel it at least from the viewpoint of the man's talents, because
he is himself involved in a business and a calling that to a certain extent
makes imitation of the man a law for him.
Respect for the moral law is therefore the sole and also indubitable361
moral incentive, and this feeling is also directed to no object except on this
basis alone. First the moral law determines the will objectively and directly
in the judgment of reason; but freedom, the causality of which is determinable only through the law, consists precisely in this, that it restricts all
inclinations, and hence the esteem of the person himself, to the condition of
compliance with its pure law. This restriction now has an effect on feeling
and brings about the sensation of displeasure which can be cognized a priori from the moral law. But this effect is to this extent merely a negative one
that, as having arisen from the influence of a pure practical reason, above all
impairs the subject's activity insofar as inclinations are his determining
basis, and hence impairs362 the opinion concerning his personal worth
359

[Or 'exalted': erhaben.]

360

[das Schlechte. On schlecht, see above, Ak. V, 59 br. n. 259.]

361

[unbezweifelt. Literally, this term means 'undoubted,' but Kant uses it to mean 'indubitable'; see, e.g., the Critique of Pure Reason, B 275. The same holds for the synonymous
ungezweifelt; see ibid., B 274, also A 46/B 63, A 184/B 227, and cf. A 48/B 66, A 374,
A 498/B 526, A 634 = B 662.]
362 [Abbruch tun; likewise above. See above, Ak. V, 25 br. n. 44.]

CHAPTER III INCENTIVES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

103

(which, if there is no agreement with the moral law, is downgraded to nothing); and thus the effect of this law on feeling is merely humiliation, into
which we do therefore indeed have insight a priori, though we cannot cognize in it the force of the pure practical law as incentive but only the resistance against incentives of sensibility. However, the same law is yet
objectively, i.e., in the presentation of pure reason, a direct determining
basis of the will, and consequently this humiliation occurs only relatively to
the purity of the law; and thus the downgrading of the claims of moral selfesteem, i.e., humiliation on the sensible side, is an elevation of the moral,
i.e., practical, esteem for the law itself on the intellectual side—in a word, it
is respect for the law, and thus also a feeling that is positive in terms of its
intellectual cause and is cognized a priori. For, any diminution of obstacles363 to an activity is a furtherance of this activity itself. However, acknowledgment of the moral law is the consciousness of an activity364 of
practical reason [engaged in] from objective bases, an activity that fails to
express its effect in actions only because subjective (pathological) causes
hinder it. Therefore respect for the moral law must be regarded as also a
positive though indirect effect of the law on feeling insofar as the law weakens the hindering influence of the inclinations by humiliating [one's] selfconceit, and hence must be regarded as a subjective basis of activity, i.e., as
an incentive to comply with the law, and as a basis for maxims of a way of
life conforming to it. From the concept of an incentive arises that of an interest, which can never be attributed to a being unless the being has reason,
and which signifies an incentive of the will insofar as it is presented by reason. Since in a morally good will the law itself must be the incentive, moral
interest is a pure sense-free interest of practical reason alone. Moreover, on
the concept of an interest is based that of a maxim. Hence a maxim is
morally genuine only when it rests solely on the interest that one takes in
complying with the law. All three concepts, however—those of an incentive, of an interest, and of a maxim—can be applied only to finite beings.365
For they presuppose, one and all, a limitedness of the nature of a being inasmuch as the subjective constitution of the being's power of choice does not
by itself agree with the objective law of a practical reason: viz., they presuppose a need to be impelled to activity by something or other because the
363 [ Q r 'hindrances':
364
365

Hindernisse.]

[Tätigkeit. Below, 'action' translates Handlung.]

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 449-50, 459-60 inch esp. 459n,
462; also the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 212-13.]

104

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

activity is confronted by an internal obstacle. Hence they cannot be applied
to the divine will.366
There is something so special in the boundless esteem367 for the pure
moral law stripped of all advantage—as this law is presented to us, for compliance, by practical reason, whose voice makes even the boldest offender
tremble and compels him to hide from his [own] sight368—that one need
not be surprised to find this influence of a merely intellectual idea on feeling unfathomable for speculative reason, and to have to settle for being
capable nonetheless of this much insight a priori: that such a feeling is
inseparably linked with the presentation of the moral law in every finite
rational being. If this feeling of respect were pathological and hence a feeling of pleasure369 based on inner sense, then [trying to] discover a priori a
link of it to any idea would be futile. In fact, however, it is a feeling that applies only to the practical; moreover, it attaches to the presentation of a law
merely in terms of the law's form and not on account of any object of the
law; hence it cannot be classed either with gratification or with pain, and yet
it produces an interest in compliance with the law which we call moral interest—as, indeed, the capacity to take such an interest in the law (or respect for the moral law itself) is, properly, moral feeling.310
Now, the consciousness of zfree submission of the will to the law, yet as
linked with an unavoidable constraint inflicted—but only by one's own reason—on all inclinations, is respect for the law. The law that demands and
also inspires this respect is, as we see, none other than the moral law (for no
other law excludes all inclinations from the directness of their influence on
the will). An action that is objectively practical according to this law, with
exclusion of all determining basis from inclination, is called duty,311 which,
because of this exclusion, contains in its concept practical necessitation,
i.e., determination to actions however reluctantly they may be done. The
feeling that arises from the consciousness of this necessitation is not possi366

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 413-14, 432.]

367

[Literally, 'boundless high esteem': grenzenlosen Hochschätzung.]

368

[vor seinem Anblicke. This could also mean 'from the law's sight,' but cf. Kant's description
of someone who "does not have cause to be ashamed before himself and to dread the inner
spectacle of self-examination" at Ak. V, 87.]
369

[Emphasis added.]

370

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 442-43, 460; also the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 399-400.]
371

[Pflicht. On duty construed as an action, cf. above, Ak. V, 8 n. 83 incl. n. 83f.]

CHAPTER m INCENTIVES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

105

ble pathologically, as would be a feeling brought about by an object of the
senses, but possible only practically,372 i.e., through a preceding (objective)
determination of the will and causality of reason. Hence, as submission to a
law, i.e., as a command (proclaiming constraint for the sensibly affected
subject), this feeling contains within itself no pleasure, but rather—to this
extent—displeasure, in the action. But, on the other hand, since this constraint is exerted only by the legislation of one's own reason, it also contains
an elevation [of oneself], and the subjective effect on feeling, insofar as the
sole cause thereof is pure practical reason, can only be called self-approval
with regard to this reason.373 For one cognizes oneself as determined to this
[effect on feeling] solely by the law and without any [sensible] interest, and
now becomes conscious of an entirely different interest—produced subjectively by this [law]—which is purely practical and free. To take such an
interest in an action conforming to duty is by no means counseled by an
inclination; rather, reason through the practical law commands this absolutely and also actually produces this [interest], which therefore bears a
name entirely peculiar to it, viz., respect.
Therefore the concept of duty demands objectively—in the action—
agreement with the law, and subjectively314—in the maxim of the action—
respect for the law, as the sole way of determining the will by the law. And
thereon rests the distinction between the consciousness of having acted in
conformity with duty and from duty, i.e., from respect for the law.375 The
first of these (legality) is possible even if only inclinations were to have
been the determining bases of the will; but the second (morality), moral
worth, must be posited solely in this, that the action is done from duty,376
i.e., only on account of the law.377
372

[I follow Natorp and the Akademie edition—rather than Vorländer and the Philosophische
Bibliothek edition—in retaining the comma before möglich ('possible') at the end of Kant's
sentence. Cf. the similar sentence near the end of Ak. V, 79, above.]
373

[Or, possibly, 'with regard to this elevation' (in contrast to the submission): in Ansehung
der letzteren.]
374

[Emphasis added.]

375

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 390, 397-401,406-07,421-23,
439-440.]
376
377

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 219-220, 225-26, 392-93.]

If one examines the concept of respect for persons exactly, as it has previously
been set forth, one becomes aware that respect always rests on the consciousness of
a duty held before us by an example, and hence that it can never have any basis other

106

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

It is of the greatest importance in all moral judgments378 to attend with
the utmost exactness to the subjective principle of all maxims, so that all the
morality of actions is posited in their necessity from duty and from respect
for the law, not [in their necessity] from love and fondness379 for what the
actions are to produce. For human beings and for all created rational beings
moral necessity380 is necessitation,381 i.e., obligation, and every action
based thereon is to be conceived as duty, not as a way of proceeding that by
itself we already favor or might come to favor. As if we could ever bring it
about that without respect for the law, which is linked with fear or at least
worry about transgressing it, we on our own—like the deity exalted beyond
all dependence—could ever come into possession of a holiness of will
through a harmony of the will with the pure moral law—a harmony that
had, as it were, become our nature and could never be dislodged.
In other words, for the will of a maximally perfect382 being the moral
law is a law of holiness, but for the will of every finite rational being it is a
law of duty, of moral necessitation, and of the determination of his actions
through respect for that law and from reverence for his duty. No other subjective principle must be assumed as incentive, for otherwise the action can
indeed turn out as the law prescribes it, but since despite being in conformity with duty it is not done from duty, the attitude toward it is not moral;
yet this attitude is, in fact, what counts in this legislation.
It is very beautiful to do good to human beings from love for them and
from compassionate383 benevolence, or to be just from love of order; but
this is not yet our conduct's genuine moral maxim appropriate to our station

than a moral one; and that for knowledge 3 of human beings it is very good and, for
a psychological aim, even very useful—wherever we use this expression—to attend
to the secret and surprising while yet frequently encountered—regard that the
human being in his judgments has for the moral law.
a
[-kenntnis. In this context, my usual rendering of this term as 'acquaintance' or 'familiarity' might be misleading.]
378

[Beurteilungen; likewise in Kant's note, above. See above, Ak. V, 8 br. n. 78.]

379

[Zuneigung.]

380

[Notwendigkeit See above, Ak. V, 20 br. n. 17.]

381

[Nötigung.]

382

[allervollkommenst.]
[teilnehmend.]

CHAPTER III INCENTIVES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

107

among rational beings as human beings, when with proud conceit384 we
presume—as volunteers, as it were—to brush aside the thought of duty and,
as independent of command, to want to do merely from our own pleasure
what we would need no command to do. We are subject to a discipline of
reason, and in all our maxims must not forget to be submissive to it, not to
detract from it in any way, and not to curtail in any way—through delusion
based on self-love—the authority of the law (even though our own reason
gives it) by positing the determining basis of our will, even if in conformity
with the law, still in something other than the law itself and in respect for
this law. Duty and obligation385 are the only designations386 that we must
give to our relation to the moral law. We are indeed legislating387 members
of a kingdom of morals possible through freedom and presented to us by
practical reason for our respect; but we are at the same time subjects of this
kingdom, not its sovereign, and a failure to recognize388 our low level as
creatures—as well as self-conceit's [attitude of] refusal toward the authority of the holy law—is already a defection from the law in spirit, even if its
letter were fulfilled.389
With this, however, the possibility of such a command390 as Love God
above all and your neighbor as yourself*91 agrees quite well. For as a command it does demand respect for a law that orders love, and does not leave
it to one's discretionary392 choice to make this love one's principle. But love
for God as inclination (pathological love) is impossible; for he is not an
™ [Einbildung.]
385

{Schuldigkeit (a synonym of Verbindlichkeit and of Obliegenheit). The term is, of course,
etymologically linked to Schuld, 'debt,' just as the English terms 'ought' (to which the noun
'obligation' corresponds in meaning) and 'duty' are so linked, respectively, to 'owed' and to
'due.']
386

[Benennungen.]

387 ^or 'legislative':

gesetzgebend.]

388 [Verkennung.]
389

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics

390

[Or ' c o m m a n d m e n t ' : Gebot. Similarly hereafter.]

of Morals, Ak. IV, 4 3 3 - 3 7 . ]

391

The principle a of one's own happiness, which some want to turn into the supreme
principle of morality, gives rise to an odd contrast with this law; this principle would
say: Love yourself above all, but love God and your neighbor for your own sake.
a
392

[Prinzip here, Grundsatz

below.]

[Or 'optional,' or perhaps 'arbitrary': beliebig.]

108

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

object of the senses. The same love toward human beings is indeed possible, but cannot be commanded; for no human being has it within his power
to love someone merely on [someone's] order. Therefore it is only practical
love which is understood in that kernel of all laws. To love God, in this signification, means to fulfill his commands gladly;393 to love one's neighbor
means to perform all duty toward him gladly. The command that makes this
a rule, however, also cannot command one to have this attitude in actions
conforming to duty, but only to strive for it. For, a command to do something gladly is intrinsically contradictory, because if we already know on
our own what we are obligated to do, and if we were moreover conscious of
being glad to do it, then there would be no need at all for a command concerning it; and if we did do it, yet not gladly but only from respect for the
law, then a command that makes this very respect the incentive of the
maxim would act precisely contrary to the commanded attitude. That law of
all laws, therefore, like all moral precepts of the Gospel, exhibits the moral
attitude in its entire perfection, in the way in which, as an ideal of holiness
that is not attainable by any creature, it is yet the archetype that we ought to
strive to approach and—in an uninterrupted but infinite progression—to
become equal to.394 For if a rational creature could ever get to the point of
fulfilling all moral laws completely gladly, this would be tantamount to
meaning that there would not be in him395 even the possibility of a desire
stimulating him to deviate from them; for, overcoming such a desire always
costs the subject [some] sacrifice and hence requires self-constraint, i.e.,
inner necessitation to what one does not do entirely gladly. But to this level
of the moral attitude no creature can ever attain. For, being a creature and
hence always dependent with regard to what he requires for complete satisfaction with his state, he can never be entirely free from desires and inclinations. These, because they rest on physical causes, do not by themselves
harmonize with the moral law, which has entirely different sources. Hence
they always make it necessary [for the creature], on account of them, to
base the attitude of his maxims on moral necessitation—[i.e.,] not on willing acquiescence but on respect, which demands compliance with the law
even if this were done reluctantly396—rather than on love, which does not

393

[gerne, also rendered as 'being glad to' below.]

394

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 446-47.]

395

[See above, Ak V, 19 br. n. 6.]

396

[ungerne.]

CHAPTER ffl INCENTIVES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

109

worry about any inner refusal of the will toward the law. Yet [they also
make it necessary for the creature] to make this love—viz., mere love for
the law (since this law would then cease to be a command, and since morality, which would now subjectively pass over into holiness, would cease to
be virtue)—the constant though unattainable goal of his endeavor. For in
what we highly esteem but yet dread (because of the consciousness of our
weaknesses), the greater ease in satisfying it results in the reverential
dread's being transformed into fondness, and respect into love; at least this
would be the perfection of an attitude devoted to the law, if it were ever possible for a creature to attain it.
This consideration is aimed not so much at bringing the just cited Gospel
command to distinct concepts in order to restrain or, if possible, forestall religious fanaticism in regard to the love of God, but at accurately determining the moral attitude directly in regard to our duties toward human beings
as well, and to restrain or, if possible, forestall a merely moral fanaticism
that infects many minds. The moral level on which the human being stands
(as does, according to all the insight we have, every rational creature as
well) is respect for the moral law. The attitude that he is obligated to have in
complying with this law is to do so from duty, not from voluntary397 fondness or even perhaps from an endeavor that on his own he undertakes
gladly, without having been ordered to do so; and the moral state in which
he can be each time398 is virtue?" i.e., the moral attitude in the struggle,
and not holiness in the supposed possession of a complete purity of the
will's attitudes. By exhortation to actions as noble, sublime, and magnanimous, minds are attuned to nothing but moral fanaticism and enhancement
of self-conceit. For it leads them into the delusion [which makes it seem] as
if it were not duty—i.e., respect for the law whose yoke (which is nonetheless gentle because reason itself imposes it on us) they must bear, even if reluctantly—which amounts to the determining basis of their actions, and
which always still humbles them inasmuch as they comply with the law
(obey it), but as if these actions were expected of them not from duty but as
bare merit. For by imitating such deeds, viz., deeds performed from such a
principle, not only have they not in the least satisfied the spirit of the law—
which consists in the attitude that subjects itself to the law, not in the lawfulness of the action (whatever the principle may be)—and are positing the
397

\freiwillig.]

398

[Each time that he complies with the moral law: jedesmal]

399

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 379-81, 383, 394-95, 405-09.]

110

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

incentive pathologically (in sympathy or even in self-love400) rather than
morally (in the law), but they produce in this way a frivolous, overreaching,
fantastic way of thinking. For they flatter themselves with a voluntary good
nature401 of their mind—a mind which requires neither spur nor bridle and
for which not even a command is needed—and thereby forget their obligation, of which they should, after all, think sooner than of merit. Actions of
others which have been done with great sacrifice and, moreover, solely on account of duty, may indeed be praised under the name of noble and sublime
deeds, yet even this only insofar as there are indications suggesting that they
were done entirely from respect for one's duty, not from bursts of emotions.402 But if one wants to present these actions to someone as examples to
be followed, then what one must use throughout as the incentive is respect for
duty (the only genuine moral feeling): this serious, holy precept that does not
leave it to our vain self-love to dally with pathological impulses (insofar as
they are analogous to morality) and to credit ourselves with meritorious
worth. If only we search carefully, then for all actions that are praiseworthy
we shall surely find a law of duty which commands instead of leaving it to our
discretion [to choose] what may be to our propensity's liking. This is the only
way of exhibiting these actions that molds the soul morally, because it is the
only one capable of firm and accurately determined principles.403
If fanaticism404 in the most general meaning is an overstepping of the
bounds of human reason undertaken according to principles, then moral
fanaticism is405 such an overstepping of the bounds that practical pure reason sets for humanity. Practical pure reason thereby forbids us to posit the
subjective determining basis of actions conforming to duty—i.e., their
moral incentive—in anything other than the law itself, and to posit the attitude that is thereby brought into the maxims anywhere else than in respect
for this law; and it commands us to make the thought of duty—the thought
which strikes down all arrogance as well as vain self-love406—the supreme
life-principle of all morality in human beings.
400

[Philautie.]

401

[freiwillige Gutartigkeit]

402

[Literally, 'ebullitions of the heart': Herzensaufwallungen.]

403

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 406-12.]

404

[Schwärmerei.]

405

[I have deleted the emphasis on so ist ('then' and 'is').]

406

[Philautie here, Eigenliebe in the next paragraph.]

CHAPTER III INCENTIVES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

111

If this is so, then not only novelists and sentimental educators (even if
they are ever so zealously opposed to sentimentality) but sometimes even
philosophers—indeed, the sternest among them all, the Stoics—have introduced moral fanaticism in place of sober but wise moral discipline,407
though the fanaticism of the latter was more heroic while that of the former
was of a more insipid and tender constitution. And one can, without being
hypocritical, say quite truthfully about the moral teaching of the Gospel
that, by the purity of its moral principle but at the same time by the appropriateness of this principle to the limits of finite beings, it first subjected all
good conduct of human beings to the discipline of a duty laid before their
eyes—which does not let them rove408 among fancied moral perfections—
and set limits of humility (i.e., of self-cognition) to self-conceit as well as to
self-love, both of which readily fail to recognize their bounds.
Duty!—you sublime, grand name which encompasses nothing that is favored yet involves ingratiation, but which demands submission, yet also
does not seek to move the will by threatening anything that would arouse
natural aversion in the mind and terrify, but merely puts forth a law that on
its own finds entry into the mind and yet gains grudging veneration (even if
not always compliance), a law before which all inclinations fall silent even if
they secretly work against it: what origin is worthy of you, and where does
one find the root of your noble descent409 that proudly rejects all kinship
with inclinations, the root from which to be descended410 is the irrémissible
condition of that worth which human beings alone can give themselves?
It can be nothing less than what elevates the human being above himself
(as a part of the world of sense), what links him to an order of things that
only the understanding can think and that at the same time has under it the
entire world of sense and with it the human being's empirically determinable existence in time and the whole of all purposes411 (which whole is
alone appropriate to such unconditional practical laws as the moral law). It
is nothing other than personality,412 i.e., the freedom and independence
from the mechanism of all of nature, yet regarded at the same time as a
407

[Disziplin here, Zucht below.]

408

[schwärmen.]

409

[Abkunft.]

410

[Literally, 'to stem': abzustammen.]

411

[Zwecke. See above, Ak. V, 35 br. n. 121.]

412

[I.e., personhood: Persönlichkeit.]

112

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

power of a being subject to pure practical laws that are peculiar to it, viz.,
are given by its own reason, so that the person as belonging to the world of
sense is subject to his own personality insofar as he at the same time belongs to the intelligible world.413 Thus it is not surprising if the human
being,414 as belonging to both worlds, must regard his own being in reference to this second and highest vocation415 solely with veneration, and regard the laws of this vocation with the highest respect.
Now, this origin is the basis of many expressions that designate the
worth of objects according to moral ideas. The moral law is holy (inviolable). The human being is indeed unholy enough, but the humanity in his
person must be holy to him. In all of creation everything one wants and over
which one has any power can also be used merely as a means; only the
human being, and with him every rational creature, is a purpose in itself.416
For by virtue of the autonomy of his freedom he is the subject of the moral
law, which is holy. Precisely on account of this autonomy, every will, even
every person's own will directed to himself, is restricted to the condition of
harmony with the autonomy of a rational being, viz., the condition not to
subject such a being to any aim that is not possible in accordance with a law
that could arise from the will of the subject himself who undergoes [the action], thus never to use this subject merely as a means but [always] at the
same time as himself a purpose. This condition is rightly attributed by us
even to the divine will with regard to the rational beings in the world as its
creatures, inasmuch as the condition rests on these beings' personality, by
which alone they are purposes in themselves.
This idea of personality, which arouses respect and which the sublimity
of our nature (as regards its vocation) puts before our eyes while at the same
time drawing attention to the lack of our conduct's adequacy to this idea
and thereby striking down self-conceit, is natural and easily discernible
even to the commonest human reason. Has not every even moderately honest man sometimes found that he abstained from an otherwise harmless lie
by which he could either have extricated himself from an irksome transaction or even procured a benefit for a beloved and deserving friend, merely in
413

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 450-55.]

414

[der Mensch; 'being,'below, translates Wesen.]

415

[Bestimmung.]

416

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 429-32, 437-440; also the
Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 420, 450-51, 462-64. On my rendering of Zweck as 'purpose' rather than as 'end,' see above, Ak. V, 35 br. n. 121.]

CHAPTER III INCENTIVES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

113

order not to have to despise himself secretly in his own eyes?417 When a
righteous man is in the greatest misfortune, which he could have avoided if
only he could have brushed duty aside, is he not still sustained by the consciousness that the humanity in his person has after all been maintained and
honored by him in its dignity, that he does not have cause to be ashamed before himself and to dread the inner spectacle of self-examination? This
comfort is not happiness, not even the smallest part thereof. For, no one will
wish to have the occasion for it, perhaps not even a life in such circumstances. But he lives and cannot endure being, in his own eyes, unworthy of
life. This inner tranquility is therefore merely negative in regard to everything that may make life agreeable; viz., it is the forestalling of the danger
of sinking in personal worth after the worth of his [own] state has already
been given up by him entirely. It is the effect of a respect for something entirely different from life, something in comparison and contrast to which
life with all its agreeableness has, rather, no worth at all. He now lives only
because it is his duty, not because he has the slightest taste for living.
This is how the genuine incentive of pure practical reason is constituted.
This incentive is none other than the pure moral law itself insofar as this law
allows us to discern the sublimity of our own supranatural existence418 and
subjectively brings about, in human beings, respect for their higher vocation:
viz., in human beings who are conscious at the same time of their sensible
existence and of the dependence, linked therewith, from their—to this extent—very pathologically affected nature. Now, so many charms and agreeablenesses in life can quite readily be linked with this incentive that even
just on their account the most prudent choice of a reasonable Epicurean—
meditating on the greatest well-being of life—would declare itself for
morally good conduct. It may even be advisable to link this prospect of a
cheerful enjoyment with that supreme motivating cause which is already
sufficiently determining by itself—but only in order to maintain the counterweight to the enticements that vice does not fail to display on the opposite side, and not in order to posit in this prospect the proper motive force,
not even in the slightest part, when duty is at issue. For this would be tantamount to trying to defile the moral attitude in its source. The venerability of
duty is not concerned with the enjoyment of life; it has its own law, also its
417

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 402-03, 422,429-30, 441; also
the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 429-31; also On a Supposed Right to Lie Out of Love of
Humankind {Über ein vermeintes Recht, aus Menschenliebe zu lügen), Ak. VIII, 427-30.]
[Existenz here, Dasein below.]

114

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

own tribunal, and however much one tried to shake them together in order
to hand their mixture—as a medicine, as it were—to the sick soul, they yet
promptly separate on their own; and if they do not, then the first [ingredient] is not effective at all, and even if physical life were to gain some force
in this, yet the moral life would fade away irrecoverably.

Critical Examination of the Analytic
of Pure Practical Reason
By the critical examination of a science, or of a section thereof that by itself
amounts to a system, I mean the investigation and justification as to why it
must have precisely this and no other systematic form when it is compared
with another system that has a similar cognitive power as its basis. Now,
practical reason has as its basis one and the same cognitive power as does
speculative reason insofar as both are pure reason. Therefore the difference
in the systematic form of the one from that of the other will have to be determined by a comparison of the two, and the basis of this [difference] will
have to be indicated.
The Analytic of pure theoretical reason dealt with cognition of the objects that may be given to the understanding; it therefore had to start from
intuition and hence (since intuition is always sensible) from sensibility;419
only from there could it first advance to concepts (of this intuition's objects),420 and only after preparing the way by means of both421 was it allowed to end with principles.422 Practical reason, by contrast, deals not with
objects in order to cognize them but with its own power to make them actual
(in conformity with the cognition of them), i.e., with a will, which is a
causality insofar as reason contains the determining basis thereof; consequently it does not have to indicate an object of intuition, but (because the
concept of causality always contains the reference to a law that determines
the existence of the manifold [elements] in relation to one another) it has to
indicate, as practical reason, only a law of objects.423 Therefore a critique of
419

[See the Critique of Pure Reason, A 19-49/B 33-73.]

420

[See ibid., A 50-147/B 74-187.]

421

[Literally, 'after sending both ahead': nach beider Voranschickung.]

422

[See the Critique of Pure Reason, A 148-235/B 187-294.]

423

[derselben, which I take to refer back not to Anschauung ('intuition') but to Gegenständen
('objects') as related, by contrast, to cognition rather than actualization.]

CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THE ANALYTIC

115

the analytic of reason insofar as it is to be a practical reason (which is the
problem proper) must start from the possibility of practical a priori principles.*24 Only from there was it able to proceed to concepts of the objects of
a practical reason, viz., those of the absolutely good and evil, in order first
to give them in conformity with those principles425 (for, prior to these principles these concepts cannot possibly be given as good or evil by any cognitive
power);426 and only then could the last chapter, viz., that concerning the relation of pure practical reason to sensibility and concerning its [own] necessary
and a priori cognizable influence on it, i.e., concerning moral feeling, conclude this part.427 Thus the Analytic of practical pure reason divided the
whole range of all conditions of its use quite analogously to that of theoretical
pure reason, but in inverse order.428 The Analytic of theoretical pure reason
was divided into Transcendental Aesthetic and Transcendental Logic;429 that
of practical pure reason, inversely, into Logic and Aesthetic of pure practical
reason (if I may here be allowed, merely on account of the analogy, to use
these otherwise not at all appropriate designations). The Logic, in turn, was
there divided into Analytic of Concepts and Analytic of Principles, but is here
divided into the Analytic of principles and that of concepts. The Aesthetic
there had two parts,430 because of the two kinds431 of sensible intuition;432
here sensibility is regarded not at all as a capacity for intuition but merely as
a feeling (which can be a subjective basis of desire), and with regard to it pure
practical reason permits no further division.
That this division into two parts with their subdivisions was not actually
undertaken here (though the example of the former division might well
have misled one initially into attempting it)—for this too the reason can
424

[See above, Ak. V, 19-57.]

425

[Grundsätze here, Prinzipien below. See above, Ak. V, 7 br. n. 66.]

426

[See above, Ak. V, 57-71.]

427

[See above, Ak. V, 71-89.]

428

[Cf. above, Ak. V, 16.]

429

[Actually, it was not the Analytic but the Doctrine of Elements that was thus divided; the
Analytic, together with the Dialectic, constituted the (Transcendental) Logic. Moreover, it was
the Analytic (not the Logic, as Kant goes on to say) that was divided into that of concepts and
that of principles.]
430

[Viz., Space and Time.]

431

[Literally, 'the twofold kind': der doppelten Art.]

432

[See the Critique of Pure Reason, where space is treated at A 22-30/B 37-45, time at
A30-41/B46-58.]

116

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

quite readily be seen.433 For since it is pure reason that is here considered in
its practical use, and hence considered as commencing from a priori principles and not from empirical determining bases, the division of the Analytic
of Pure Practical Reason will have to turn out similar to that of a syllogism:434 viz., proceeding from the universal in the major premise (the moral
principle), by a subsumption—undertaken in the minor premise—of possible actions (as good or evil ones) under the major premise, to the
conclusion, viz., the subjective determination of the will (an interest in the
practically possible good and the maxim based on this interest). For someone who has been able to convince himself of the propositions occurring in
the Analytic, such comparisons will be gratifying; for they rightly prompt
the expectation of perhaps being able some day to attain insight into the
unity of the entire pure power of reason (theoretical as well as practical) and
to derive everything from one principle—this being the unavoidable need of
human reason, which finds full satisfaction only in a completely systematic
unity of its cognitions.435
But if we now consider also the content of the cognition that we can have
of a pure practical reason as well as through it, as that content is set forth by
the Analytic of this reason, we find, despite a noteworthy analogy between
this reason and the theoretical, differences that are no less noteworthy. With
regard to theoretical pure reason, one was able to prove our power of a pure
a priori rational cognition quite easily and evidently through examples
from sciences.436 (In sciences, since they put their principles to the test in
such a variety of ways by methodical use, one does not so easily as in common cognition have to worry about a secret admixture of empirical bases of
cognition.) But that pure reason without the admixture of any empirical determining basis is practical by itself alone, this [fact] one had to be able to
establish from the commonest practical use of reason, by authenticating the
supreme practical principle as a principle that every natural human reason
cognizes—as completely a priori, dependent on no sensible data—as the
supreme law of its437 will. One first had to legitimate438 and justify this
433

[einsehen.]

434

[Literally, 'inference of reason': Vernunftschluß.]

435

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 10-16/B 24-30.]

436

[Cf. ibid., B x-xiv.]

437

[Reading ihres for seines; Kant seems to have forgotten that the referent is Menschenvernunft ('human reason'), not Mensch ('human being').]

438

[Literally, 'verified': bewähren.]

CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THE ANALYTIC

117

principle as to its origin even in the judgment of this common reason, before
science could take it in hand in order to make use of it as a fact,439 as it
were, that precedes all subtle reasoning440 about its possibility and all the
inferences that could perhaps be made from it. But this circumstance too
can quite readily be explained from what was briefly set forth just now: it is
because practical pure reason must necessarily start from principles, which
must therefore be laid at the basis of all science as the first data, and cannot
first arise from science.441 There is, however, another reason why442 we
were able, quite readily and with sufficient assurance, to conduct this justification of moral principles443 as principles of a pure reason by merely appealing to the judgment of common human understanding: viz., because
anything empirical that might slip into our maxims as a determining basis
of the will becomes recognizable*** at once through the feeling of gratification or pain that necessarily attaches to it insofar as it arouses desire,
whereas pure practical reason straightforwardly opposes admitting this
feeling into its principle as a condition.445 This difference in kind between
the determining bases (empirical and rational) is made recognizable
through this resistance of a practically legislating reason against all interfering inclination [and specifically] through a peculiar kind of sensation446—
which, however, does not precede practical reason's legislation but instead
is brought about only by it, and, moreover, as a constraint. The difference in
kind is made recognizable, viz., through the feeling of a respect such as no
human being has for inclinations of whatever kind but [every human being]
does have for the law; it is made so recognizable and so salient and prominent that no one, not even the commonest human understanding, could fail
to become instantaneously aware, in an example put before him, that he can
indeed be counseled by empirical bases of volition to follow their induce439

[On the fact of reason, see above, Ak. V, 31 inch br. n. 75.]

440

[vor allem Vernünfteln.]

441

[On all this, see above, Ak. V, 19-57.]

442

[I take darum to refer forward to weil ('because,' below).]

443

[Prinzipien here, Grundsätze below as well as above.]

444

[sich . . . kenntlich macht. Below, 'is made recognizable' similarly renders wird . . .
kenntlich gemacht.]
445
446

[See above, Ak. V, 71-89.]

[In the broad meaning of the term that includes feeling: Empfindung. See above, Ak. V, 22
br. n. 31.]

118

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

merits but that he can never be required447 to obey any law other than the
pure practical law of reason.
Now, the distinction of the doctrine of happiness from the doctrine of
morals, in the first of which empirical principles amount to the whole foundation whereas in the second they amount not even to the slightest addition
to it, is the first and most important enterprise incumbent upon the Analytic
of Pure Practical Reason, in which the Analytic must proceed as meticulously and indeed, if called upon, as painstakingly as the geometrician ever
does in his occupation. The philosopher has to struggle with greater difficulties here (as always in rational cognition through mere concepts without
construction of them448), because he cannot lay any intuition at the basis (of
a pure noumenon449). However, it also stands him in good stead that, almost
like the chemist,450 he can at any time perform an experiment with any
human being's practical reason in order to distinguish the moral (pure) determining basis from the empirical—viz., when he adds the moral law (as
determining basis) to the empirically affected will (e.g., of someone who
would gladly lie because he can gain something thereby). It is as if the
chemist adds alkali to a solution of calcareous earth451 in muriatic acid:452
the muriatic acid at once abandons the lime and unites with the alkali; and
the lime is deposited at the bottom. In the same way, [take] a man who is
otherwise honest (or who even just puts himself in thought in the place of
an honest man this time) and hold before him the moral law by which he
cognizes the worthlessness of a liar: his practical reason (in judging what
ought to be done by him) at once abandons the advantage and unites with
what maintains in him the respect for his own person (truthfulness); and
now the advantage, after it has been separated and washed from any appendage of reason (which is wholly on the side of duty), is weighed by
everyone, so that perhaps it [can] still enter into combination453 with reason

447

[zumuten.]

448

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 712-738/B 740-66.]

449

[Reading, with Vorländer, einem reinen for reinem.]

450

[Kant's term here is Chemist (in place of the contemporary Chemiker); below it is Scheidekünstler, literally, 'separation artist.']
451

[Kalkerde. Below, 'lime' translates Kalk.]

452

[I.e., hydrochloric acid.]

453

[Or 'linkage': Verbindung.]

CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THE ANALYTIC

119

in other cases, only not where the advantage could be opposed to the moral
law, which reason never abandons but unites with most intimately.
But this distinction of the principle of happiness from that of morality is
not therefore at once an opposition between the two, and pure practical reason does not want us to give up our claims to happiness, but wants only that
as soon as duty is at issue we take no account of them at all. In a certain regard it can even be a duty to attend to one's happiness, partly because
happiness (to which belong skill, health, wealth) contains means to the fulfillment of one's duty, partly because the lack of it (e.g., poverty) contains
temptations to transgress one's duty. Only the furtherance of one's happiness can never directly be a duty, still less a principle of all duty. Now, since
all determining bases of the will except for the single pure practical law of
reason (the moral law) are one and all empirical and hence, as such, belong
to the principle of happiness, they must one and all be separated from the
supreme moral principle and never be incorporated in it, because this would
annul all moral worth just as much as an empirical admixture to geometric
principles would annul all mathematical [self-]evidence, which (in Plato's
judgment) is the most excellent thing454 that mathematics possesses, surpassing even all its utility.455
However, in place of [a] deduction456 of the supreme principle of pure
practical reason, i.e., explanation of the possibility of such an a priori cognition, we were able to adduce nothing more than this: that if one had insight into the possibility of the freedom of an efficient cause, then one
would also have insight not merely into the possibility but even into the necessity of the moral law as the supreme practical law of rational beings, to
whom one attributes freedom of the causality of their will. For, the two concepts are so inseparably linked that practical freedom could also be defined
as457 independence of the will from anything else except solely the moral
law. However, one cannot in any way have insight into the freedom of an efficient cause, above all in the world of sense, as regards this freedom's possibility; fortunate we are!, if we can just be sufficiently assured that there is
no proof of its impossibility, and are now—by the moral law, which postulates this freedom—compelled and precisely thereby also entitled to as454

[das Vortrefflichste.]

455

[Cf. Plato's Republic, 522-28.]

456

[See above, Ak. V, 42-50, esp. 45-48.]

457

[Kant actually says durch ('by'). He means, i.e., defined by 'independence of the will

']

120

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

sume it. However, there are still many who continue to believe that they can
explain this freedom in terms of empirical principles, like any other natural
ability.458 They regard it as a psychological property, the explanation of
which hinges459 solely on a more exact investigation into the nature of the
soul and into [an] incentive of the will, and not as a transcendental predicate of the causality of a being that belongs to the world of sense (although
this alone is actually at issue); and thus they annul the splendid disclosure
that comes upon us through pure practical reason by means of the moral
law, viz., the disclosure of an intelligible world through realization460 of the
otherwise transcendent concept of freedom, and with it they annul the
moral law itself, which throughout assumes no empirical determining basis.
Therefore it will be necessary to adduce here some further [considerations]
in order to guard against this deception461 and exhibit empiricism with its
shallowness entirely laid bare.
The concept of causality as natural necessity, as distinguished from
causality as freedom, concerns only the existence of things insofar as it is
determinable in time and consequently [of things] as appearances, in contrast to their causality as things in themselves. Now if one takes the determinations of the existence of things in time to be determinations of things
in themselves (which is the most ordinary way of conceiving462 [them]),
then the necessity in the causal relation can in no way be reconciled463 with
freedom; rather, they are contradictorily opposed to each other. For from
that necessity it follows that every event, and consequently also every action that takes place at a point of time, is necessary under the condition of
what was in the preceding time. Now, because past time is no longer under
my control,464 every action that I perform must be necessary because of determining bases that are not under my control, i.e., at the point of time in
which I act I am never free. Indeed, even if I assumed my entire existence465

458

[Or 'power': Vermögen.]

459

[ankommt, also translated as 'is . . . at issue' below.]

460

[I.e., providing with reality (applicability to objects).]

461

[Blendwerk]

462

[Or 'presenting': vorstellen.]

463

[vereinigen. Cf. above, Ak. V, 6 n. 64 inch br. n. 64a.]

464

[Or 'in my power' : in meiner Gewalt; likewise just below and later in the paragraph.]

465

[Dasein here, Existenz below.]

CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THE ANALYTIC

121

as [being] independent of any foreign466 cause (e.g., God), so that the determining bases of my causality and even of my entire existence are not outside me at all, this would still not in the least convert that natural necessity
into freedom. For at every point of time I am still always subject to the necessity of being determined to action by what is not under my control, and
the series of events—which is infinite a parte priori461 and which I can always continue only according to an already predetermined order—would
nowhere start on its own [but] would be a steady chain of nature, and therefore my causality would never be freedom.
Hence if one wants to attribute freedom to a being whose existence is determined in time, then at least to this extent one cannot exempt this being
from the law of the natural necessity of all events in its existence and hence
also of all its actions; for, this would be tantamount to handing the being
over to blind chance. However, this law unavoidably concerns all causality
of things insofar as their existence is determinable in time; hence if this
were the way in which one had to conceive also the existence of these things
in themselves, then freedom would have to be repudiated as a null and impossible concept. Consequently, if one still wants to rescue it, no other path
remains than to attribute the existence of a thing insofar as it is determinable in time, and hence also the [thing's] causality according to the law
of natural necessity, merely to appearance, but to attribute freedom to the
same being as a thing in itself This is indeed unavoidable if one wants to
maintain simultaneously both of these mutually repellent468 concepts; in
application, however, if one wants to explain them as reconciled in one and
the same action and hence explain this reconciliation itself, great difficulties
emerge that seem to make such a reconciliation unfeasible.
If concerning a human being who commits a theft I say that this deed is,
according to the natural law of causality, a necessary result of the determining bases in the preceding time, then it was impossible that the deed could
have been left undone. How, then, can the judging according to the moral
law make a change in this and presuppose that the deed surely could have
been omitted because the law says that it ought to have been omitted? That
is, how can that person be called entirely free at the same point of time at
which, and in regard to the same action regarding which, he is nonetheless
466

\fremd.]

467

[I.e., on the side of what is prior, or antecedent.]

468

[widerwärtig.]

122

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

subject to an unavoidable necessity? It is a pitiful expedient to seek to escape from this by merely adapting the kind of determining bases of this
causality according to natural law to a comparative concept of freedom.
(According to this concept, now and then something is called free action469
if its determining natural basis lies in the acting being internally. For example, [one says this of] what a projectile470 performs when it is in free motion, because while it is in flight it is not impelled by anything outside it.
Again, we also call the motion of a clock a free motion, because the clock
itself moves its hand, which therefore does not need to be pushed externally. In the same way, a human being's actions, although they are necessary through their determining bases that precede in time, are nonetheless
called by us free, because we are still dealing with471 internal presentations
produced by our own powers, desires generated thereby according to circumstances occasioning [them], and hence actions brought about at our
own discretion.) Some still let themselves be put off with this expedient;
and thus they suppose that with a little word-splitting they have found the
solution to that difficult problem on which [for] millennia [people] have
worked in vain and whose solution therefore is not likely to be found so utterly on the surface. For in the question concerning that freedom on which
we must base all moral laws and the imputation conforming to them, it does
not matter at all whether the causality determined according to a natural law
is necessary through determining bases lying within the subject or outside
him, or, in the first case, through instinct or through determining bases
thought by means of reason. If, as these same men admit, these determining
presentations themselves do have the basis of their existence in time and
moreover in the previous state, and this state in turn in a preceding one, etc.,
then by all means let them—these determinations—be internal, let them
have psychological rather than mechanical causality, i.e., produce action
through presentations rather than through bodily motion: they are always
determining bases of the causality of a being insofar as this being's existence is determinable in time and hence under necessitating conditions of
past time. Thus these determinations, if the subject is to act, are no longer
469

[Wirkung (which can also mean 'effect'). This is action in the sense applicable to things
generally (cf. above, Ak. V, 19 incl. br. n. 9), as contrasted with Handlung, which is action in
the sense applicable only to intelligent beings. Accordingly, 'actions,' below, translates Handlungen.]
470

[Literally, 'thrown body': geworfener Körper.]

471

[weil es doch . . . sind.]

CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THE ANALYTIC

123

under his control; hence they do carry with them psychological freedom (if
indeed one wants to use this term for a concatenation of the soul's presentations that is merely internal) but nonetheless natural necessity. Therefore
they leave no transcendental freedom, which must be thought as independence from everything empirical and thus from nature as such, whether this
nature is regarded as an object of inner sense merely in time, or also of
outer sense in both space and time. Without this freedom (in the latter and
proper signification), which alone is practical a priori, no moral law is possible and [also] no imputation according to it. Precisely because of this, all
necessity of events in time according to the natural law of causality can also
be called the mechanism of nature even though one does not mean by this
that things that are subject to it must be actual material machines. One is
here taking account only of the necessity of the connection of events in a
time series as it develops according to natural law, whether the subject in
whom this elapsing occurs is called automaton materiale inasmuch as the
machinery is driven by matter, or, with Leibniz, 472 [automaton] spirituale473 inasmuch as it is driven by presentations; and if the freedom of our
will were none other than the latter [kind] (say, psychological and comparative freedom, not simultaneously transcendental, i.e., absolute, freedom),
then it would basically be no better than the freedom of a turnspit, which,
once it has been wound up, also performs its motions on its own.
Now in order to annul, in the case at hand, the seeming contradiction between the mechanism of nature and freedom in one and the same action,
one must remember what was said in the Critique of Pure Reason414 or follows therefrom: viz., that the natural necessity that is not consistent with475
the subject's freedom attaches merely to the determinations of a thing

472

[Baron Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz (1646-1716), a German philosopher, mathematician, and author of numerous works. The rationalism of Leibniz is one of the two major
philosophical traditions (the other being empiricism) to which Kant's philosophy responds.
Leibniz's most important philosophical work, called the Monadology, is Principia
philosophiae, more geometrico demonstrata {The Principles of Philosophy, Demonstrated in
the Manner of Geometry), 1714; contemporary edition: Monadology, and Other Philosophical
Essays; translated by Paul Schrecker and Anne Martin Schrecker; with an Introduction and
Notes by Paul Schrecker (Indianapolis, Ind.: Bobbs-Merrill, 1965).]
473

[Respectively, 'material automaton' and 'spiritual automaton.']

474

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 444-51 = B 472-79, A 488/B 516, A 532-58 =
B 560-86.]
[Literally, 'cannot coexist with' : nicht zusammen bestehen kann.]

124

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

which falls under476 conditions of time and thus only to the determinations
of the acting subject as appearance, and that therefore—to this extent—the
determining bases of every action of the subject lie in what belongs to past
time and is no longer under his control (in this must be included also his already committed477 deeds and the character, thereby determinable for him,
that he as phenomenon has in his own eyes). But the same subject, who on
the other hand is also conscious of himself as a thing in itself, also considers his existence insofar as it does not fall under conditions of time, and
considers himself as determinable only by laws that he on his own478 gives
to himself through reason; and in this existence of his there is for him nothing antecedent to the determination of his will, but every action—and in
general every determination of his existence varying in conformity with
inner sense, even the entire sequence of his existence479 as a being of
sense480—is in the consciousness of his intelligible existence nothing but a
consequence, and is never to be viewed as a determining basis of his causality as a noumenon.m Now, in this regard the rational being can rightly say
concerning every unlawful action which he commits that he could have omitted it, even though as appearance it is sufficiently determined in the past and
is to this extent unfailingly necessary; for, this action, with everything past
that determines it, belongs to a single phenomenon of his character—the
character which he on his own imparts to himself and according to which
he on his own imputes to himself, as a cause independent of all sensibility,
the causality of those appearances.
The judicial pronouncements of that wondrous power in us that we call
conscience are also in perfect agreement with this.482 Let a human being
use what art he wants in order to paint to himself a remembered unlawful
behavior as an unintentional oversight—as a mere carelessness, which one
can never avoid entirely, and thus as something in which he was carried
away by the stream of natural necessity—and to declare himself innocent of
it; he nonetheless finds that the lawyer who speaks in his favor can in no
476

[I.e., is subject to: unter. . . steht; similarly a few lines down.]

477

[begangen,frombegehen, which has the same negative connotation as 'commit.']

478

[selbst. Likewise twice near the end of this paragraph.]

479

[Existenz here and below, Dasein (repeatedly) earlier in this paragraph.]

480

[Sinnenwesen.]

481

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 450-63.]

482

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 400-01, 437-40.]

CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THE ANALYTIC

125

way silence the prosecutor in him, if only he is conscious that at the time
when he committed the wrong he was in his senses, i.e., had the use of his
freedom. He nonetheless explains his offense to himself [as arising] from a
certain bad habit brought upon himself by a gradual neglect of attentiveness
to himself, [and he does so] to such a degree that he can regard the offense
as a natural consequence of this habit, even though this still cannot secure
him against the self-censure and the reprimand that he casts upon himself.
This is also the basis of the repentance for a deed committed long ago, at
every recollection of it. Repentance is a painful sensation483 which is
brought about by a moral attitude and which, to the extent that it cannot
serve to undo what has been done, is empty practically. Repentance would
even be absurd (indeed, Priestley,4*4 as a genuine fatalist who proceeds
consistently, declares it to be absurd, and for this candor he deserves more
applause than those who, while asserting the will's mechanism in the
deed485 but its freedom by means of words, still want to be considered as including repentance too in their syncretistic system, though without making
the possibility of such an imputation comprehensible), but as pain it is
nonetheless entirely legitimate, because reason, when the law of our intelligible existence (the moral law) is at issue, acknowledges no distinction of
time and asks only whether the event belongs to me as a deed, but then always connects the same sensation with it morally, whether the deed486 is
being done now or was done long ago. For, the life of sense has in regard to
the intelligible consciousness of one's existence (the consciousness of freedom) [the] absolute unity of a phenomenon that, insofar as it contains
merely appearances of the attitude which is of concern to the moral law
(appearances of character), must be judged not according to the natural necessity which belongs to it as appearance but according to the absolute
spontaneity of freedom. Hence one can grant that if it were possible for us
to have so deep an insight into a human being's way of thinking—as this
manifests itself through internal as well as external actions—that we would
483

[In the broad meaning of the term that includes feelings: Empfindung. See above, Ak. V, 22
br.n. 31.]
484

[See Joseph Priestley (1733-1804), The Doctrine of Philosophical Necessity Illustrated
(London: J. Johnson, 1777); contemporary edition: Disquisitions Relating to Matter and Spirit
and The Doctrine of Philosophical Necessity Illustrated (New York: Garland, 1976).]
485
486

[Tat. Cf. Kant's definition of this term as given above, Ak. V, 3 br. n. 11.]

[sie, which, at this point in the sentence, I take to refer not to Begebenheit ('event') but to
Tat.]

126

100

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

become acquainted with every incentive to actions, even with the slightest,
and likewise with all external promptings487 affecting these incentives, then
we could calculate a human being's conduct for the future with certainty,
just like any lunar or solar eclipse, and could nonetheless also488 assert that
the human being is free. For if we were capable also of another view (a
view which, to be sure, has not been bestowed upon us at all, but in place of
which we have only the rational concept), viz., an intellectual intuition489 of
the same subject, then we would nonetheless490 become aware that this entire chain of appearances depends, with regard to whatever can be of concern to the moral law, on the spontaneity of the subject as a thing in itself—
a spontaneity for the determination of which no physical explanation can be
given at all. In the absence of this intuition, the moral law assures us of this
distinction of the reference that our actions as appearances have to our subject's sensible being491 from that [reference of our actions] whereby this
sensible being is itself referred to the intelligible substrate in us. From this
point of view, which is natural though inexplicable to our reason, one can
justify even judgments492 which, though made in all conscientiousness, yet
seem at first glance to conflict thoroughly with all equity. There are cases
where human beings, even with the same upbringing that was simultaneously profitable for others, nevertheless show from childhood such early
villainy493 and increase494 it so continuously into their years of manhood
that they are considered to be born villains and entirely incapable of improvement as far as their way of thinking is concerned; yet they are just as
much tried495 for their doing and refraining,496 just as much reprimanded as
guilty of their crimes, and indeed they (the children) themselves find these
reprimands [just] as well-based, as [would be the case] if regardless of the
487
488

[Veranlassungen.]
[dabei.]

489

[See above, Ak. V, 31 br. n. 77.]

490

[I.e., in spite of what was granted in the preceding sentence.]

491

[Sinnenwesen.]

492

[Beurteilungen.

493

[Bosheit; 'villains,' below, similarly translates

494

[Reading, with Vorländer, steigern for steigen.]

495

[Figuratively speaking: richten.]

496

[Tuns und

See above, Ak. V, 8 br. n. 78.]

Lassens.]

Bösewichter.]

CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THE ANALYTIC

127

hopeless natural constitution of their minds which is attributed to them they
remained just as responsible as any other human being. This could not
occur if we did not presuppose that whatever arises from one's power of
choice (as every deliberately performed action undoubtedly does) has as its
basis a free causality, which from early youth expresses its character in its
appearances (the actions). These actions, because of the uniformity of conduct, make recognizable497 a natural connection;498 this connection, however, does not render the malicious499 constitution of the will necessary, but
is rather the consequence of the voluntarily500 assumed and immutable evil
principles, which only make the will all the more reprehensible and deserving of punishment.
However, freedom still faces a difficulty insofar as it is to be reconciled
with the mechanism of nature in a being that belongs to the world of sense,
a difficulty which, even after all the foregoing has been consented to,
nonetheless threatens freedom with its utter demise. But, in this danger, one
circumstance nonetheless also gives us hope for an outcome still favorable
to affirming501 freedom, namely that the same difficulty weighs much more
heavily (indeed, as we shall soon see, weighs only) upon the system in
which the existence determinable in time and space is considered to be the
existence of things in themselves; that the difficulty therefore does not compel us to give up 502 our foremost presupposition of the ideality of time as a
mere form of sensible intuition and thus as merely a way of presenting
which is peculiar to the subject as belonging to the world of sense; and that
the difficulty therefore requires only that we reconcile this presupposition
with the idea of freedom.
For even if it is conceded to us that the intelligible subject can still be
free with regard to a given action even though, as a subject who also belongs to the world of sense, he is mechanically conditioned with regard to
this action, it nonetheless seems that as soon as one assumes that God as
universal original being is the cause also of the existence of substance (a
proposition that can never be given up without simultaneously also giving
497
498

[kenntlich.]
[Naturzusammenhang.]

499

[arg.]

500

[freiwillig.]

501

[behaupten.]

502

[Reading, with Hartenstein, aufzugeben for abzugehen.]

128

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

up the concept of God as the being of all beings and therewith his all-sufficiency, on which everything in theology hinges), one must then also concede that a human being's actions have their determining basis in what is
entirely beyond his503 control, viz., in the causality of a supreme being
which is distinct from him and on which the human being's existence and
the entire determination of his causality depends utterly.504 Indeed, if a
human being's actions, as far as they belong to his determinations in time,
were determinations of him not merely as appearance but as a thing in itself, then freedom could not be rescued. A human being would be a puppet,505 or a Vaucansonian automaton506 built and wound up by the supreme
master of all artificial devices;507 and although self-consciousness would
turn the automaton into a thinking one, yet the automaton's consciousness
of its spontaneity, if regarded as freedom, would be mere delusion, because
this spontaneity deserves to be called freedom only comparatively. For although the proximate determining causes of the automaton's motion—and
a long series of these [determining] causes [extending] upward to their
[own] determining causes—are internal, the last and highest one is still
found entirely in a foreign508 hand. Therefore I do not see how those who
persist in regarding time and space as determinations belonging to the existence of things in themselves are to avoid here the fatalism of actions. Or, if
(like the otherwise acute Mendelssohn)509 they straightforwardly admit
503

[Reading seiner for ihrer ('their'). Kant seems to have thought that he had said 'human beings/]
504

[ganz und gar.]

505

[Marionette, in the older and broader sense still in use in French. Cf. below, Ak. V, 147.]

506

[Jacques de Vaucanson (1709-82), a French engineer from Grenoble, completed his sophisticated and celebrated life-size automaton flute-player in 1736 (or, according to some
sources, in 1737); it was followed by even more ingenious automata, including a tambourineplayer and a duck that could imitate eating, drinking, and quacking. These automata were first
exhibited in Paris in 1738. Some materialists pointed to them to support their view that human
beings are machines.]
507

[Kunstwerke.]

508

[fremd.]

509

[Moses Mendelssohn, Morgenstunden, oder Vorlesungen über das Dasein Gottes (Morning
Hours, or Lectures on the Existence of God) (Berlin: C. F. Voss & Sohn, 1785); recent edition:
including the Briefwechsel (Correspondence) Mendelssohn-Kant, edited by Dominique
Bourel (Stuttgart: Reclam, 1979); Section 11. In the controversy over the Spinozism (see
below, Ak. V, 102 incl. br. n. 512) of the German writer and dramatist Gotthold Ephraim Lessing (1729-81), Mendelssohn defended Lessing against the German philosopher Friedrich

CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THE ANALYTIC

129

time and space to be conditions necessarily belonging only to the existence510 of finite and derivative beings but not to that of the infinite original
being, I do not see how they are to justify whence they get this authority for
making such a distinction. I do not even see how they are to evade the contradiction that they perpetrate when they regard existence in time as a determination attaching necessarily to finite things in themselves, while God is
the cause of this existence: for he still cannot be the cause of time (or of
space) itself (because time must be presupposed as a necessary a priori condition of the existence of things), and consequently his causality in regard
to the existence of these things must itself be conditioned in terms of time;
and thus511 all the contradictions against the concepts of his infinity and independence must unavoidably arise. For us, on the other hand, it is quite
easy to make the distinction between the determination of divine existence
as independent of all conditions of time and [the determination of] the existence of a being of the world of sense, viz., as that between the existence of
a being in itself and that of a thing in appearance. Hence if that ideality of
space and time is not assumed, solely Spinozism512 remains, in which space
and time are essential determinations of the original being itself, while the
things dependent upon it (hence also we ourselves) are not substances but
merely accidents inhering in it; for if these things exist merely as its effects
in time, which would be the condition of their existence in themselves, then
the actions of these beings would also have to be merely his actions performed by him513 somewhere and sometime.514 Hence Spinozism, despite
Heinrich Jacobi (1743-1819), who found Spinoza's rationalism repellent. Kant, in suggesting
that Mendelssohn's view on space and time is less than acute, may be implying that
Mendelssohn's failure to espouse transcendental idealism commits him to Spinozism.]
510

[Existenz here, Dasein above and below; similarly in the remainder of this paragraph.]

511

[wobei]

512

[The view of Baruch (Benedict) Spinoza (1632-77), rationalist philosopher of Portuguese
extraction who lived as a refugee in Holland. His most important work is Ethica ordine geometrico demonstrata {Ethics Demonstrated in Geometric Order), part of the Opera posthuma
{Posthumous Works) (Amsterdam: Rievwertsz, 1677); contemporary edition of the Ethica:
edited by J. van Vloten and J. P. N. Land (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1914); English translation: The
Ethics; Treatise on the Emendation of the Intellect; Selected Letters, 2nd ed., translated by
Samuel Shirley, edited, with an introduction, by Seymour Feldman (Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett, 1992).]
513

[er; Kant has just switched from the neuter gender appropriate for Urwesen ('original
being') to the masculine gender appropriate for Gott ('God').]
514

[irgendwo und irgendwann.]

102

130

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

the absurdity of its basic idea, does [thereafter] infer far more cogently than
can be done on the creation theory when the beings assumed to be substances and in themselves existing in time are regarded as effects of a
supreme cause and yet not also as belonging to him and his action but as
substances by themselves.
The difficulty mentioned above is resolved briefly and plausibly in the
following manner. If existence in time is merely a sensible way of presenting on the part of thinking beings in the world and consequently does not
pertain to them as things in themselves, then the creation of these beings is
a creation of things in themselves, because the concept of creation does not
belong to the sensible way of presenting existence and to causality but can
be referred only to noumena. Consequently, if I say concerning beings in
the world of sense that they are created, then I regard them to that extent as
noumena. Just as it would thus be a contradiction to say that God is a creator of appearances, so it is also a contradiction to say that as creator he is
the cause of the actions in the world of sense and hence [of these actions] as
appearances, even though he is the cause of the existence of the acting beings (as noumena). If, now, it is possible (provided only that we assume existence in time to be something that holds merely of appearances, not of
things in themselves) to affirm freedom without detriment to the natural
mechanism of actions as appearances, then [the fact] that the acting beings
are creatures cannot make the slightest change in this, because creation
concerns their intelligible but not their sensible existence and therefore cannot be regarded as determining basis of appearances; but this would turn out
quite differently if the beings of the world existed as things in themselves in
time, since the creator of substance would then also be the originator of the
entire machinery515 in this substance.
Of such great importance is the separation—performed in the critique of
pure speculative reason—of time (as well as space) from the existence of
things in themselves.516
But, it will be said, the difficulty's solution that has been set forth here
does have much difficult [material] in it and is hardly susceptible of a clear
exhibition. However, is any other solution that has been attempted, or that
may be attempted, indeed easier and more graspable? One might rather say
that the dogmatic teachers of metaphysics have shown more shrewdness on
their part than sincerity in moving this difficult point as far as possible out
515

[Or 'mechanism': Maschinenwesen.]

516

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 22-49/B 37-73.]

CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THE ANALYTIC

131

of sight, in the hope that if they did not speak of it at all then presumably no
one would readily think of it either. If a science is to be promoted, all difficulties must be uncovered, and those that may still lie hidden in its way
must even be sought out; for, every difficulty calls forth a remedy that cannot be found without providing the science with an increase either in range
or in determinateness, and thus even obstacles become means for furthering
the thoroughness of the science. By contrast, if the difficulties are intentionally covered up, or removed merely through palliatives, then sooner or later
they break out in incurable bad [consequences] that bring the science to
ruin in a complete skepticism.
Since it is, properly, the concept of freedom which, among all the ideas of
pure speculative reason, alone provides such great expansion in the realm
of the suprasensible, even if only in regard to practical cognition, I ask myself whence such great fruitfulness has been imparted to it exclusively,
whereas the other ideas can indeed designate the empty place for possible
pure beings of the understanding, but cannot,determine the concept of them
by anything. I soon comprehend that, since I cannot think anything without
a category, I must also first seek out the category in reason's idea of freedom, with which I am now dealing, and here this is the category of causality; and I comprehend that, even though one cannot base the rational
concept of freedom, which is a transcendent concept, on any corresponding
intuition, nonetheless a sensible intuition must first be given to the concept
of understanding (that of causality)—for the synthesis of which the rational concept of freedom demands the unconditioned—and thereby objective
reality is first secured to the concept. Now, all the categories are divided
into two classes: the mathematical which aim merely at the unity of synthesis in the presentation of objects, and the dynamical, which aim at the
unity of synthesis in the presentation of the existence of objects.517 The former categories (those of magnitude518 and quality) always contain a synthesis of the homogeneous, and in this synthesis the unconditioned for the
conditioned in space and time given in intuition cannot be found at all,
since it itself would in turn have to belong to space and time and thus would
in turn always have to be conditioned. Hence, by the same token, in the
dialectic of pure theoretical reason the two opposed ways of finding the un-

517

[Cf. ibid, B 110, A 160-62/B 199-202, A 523-32 = B 551-60.]

518

[I.e., quantity: Größe.]

132

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

conditioned and the totality of conditions for it were both false.519 The categories of the second class (those of causality and of the necessity of a
thing) did not at all require this homogeneity (of the conditioned and the
conditioned in the synthesis), because here the intuition was to be presented
not as it is assembled520 from a manifold in it, but only [insofar] as the
existence of the conditioned object corresponding to it is added to the existence of the condition (added, as connected with this existence, in the understanding); and there it was permitted to posit, for the thoroughly521
determined in the world of sense, the unconditioned—although otherwise
undetermined—in the intelligible world (in regard to the causality as well
as the contingent existence522 of the things themselves) and to make the
synthesis transcendent. Hence, by the same token, in the dialectic of pure
speculative reason it was indeed found that the two seemingly opposed
ways of finding the unconditioned for the conditioned—e.g., in the synthesis of causality, to think, for the conditioned in the series523 of causes and
effects in the world of sense, of the causality that is not further sensibly
conditioned—do not in fact contradict each other; and that the same action
which, as belonging to the world of sense, is always sensibly conditioned—
i.e., mechanically necessary—can yet at the same time, as [belonging] to
the causality of the acting being insofar as this being belongs to the intelligible world, also be based on a sensibly unconditioned causality and therefore be thought as free.524 The only issue now was to convert this can into
an is, i.e., to be able to prove in an actual case—through a fact,525 as it
were—that certain actions presuppose such a causality (the intellectual,
sensibly unconditioned causality), whether these actions are actual or, for
that matter, only commanded, i.e., objectively practically necessary. In actions actually given in experience, which are events in the world of sense,
we could not hope to encounter this connection, because the causality
through freedom must always be sought outside the world of sense in the
519

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 531-32 = B 559-60.]

520

[zusammengesetzt.]

521

[durchgängig.]

522

[Dasein here, Existenz repeatedly earlier in this paragraph.]

523

[Here again the term is singular: Reihe.]

524

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 444-51 = B 472-79, A 488/B 516, A 532-58 =
B 560-86.]
525

[On the fact of reason, see above, Ak. V, 31 incl. br. n. 75.]

CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THE ANALYTIC

133

intelligible. However, other things apart from beings of sense are not given
to us for perception and observation. Hence nothing remained but that there
might be found an incontestable and, moreover, objective principle of
causality that excludes from its determination any sensible condition, i.e., a
principle in which reason does not further appeal to anything else as determining basis regarding causality but rather itself already contains this determining basis through that principle, and where it is therefore itself practical as pure reason. This principle, however, does not need to be searched
for or invented; it has all along been in the reason of all human beings and
incorporated in their essence,526 and is the principle of morality. Therefore
that unconditioned causality as well as [our] power thereof, freedom, and
with it a being (I myself) that belongs to the world of sense, has not merely
indeterminately and problematically been thought as nonetheless also belonging to the intelligible world (this even speculative reason was able to
ascertain as feasible), but has with regard to the law of its causality even
been determinately and assertorically cognized as also belonging to that
world;527 and thus the actuality of the intelligible world has been given to
us, and given to us determinately in a practical respect,528 and this determination, which for a theoretical aim would be transcendent (extravagant),529
is for a practical aim immanent Such a step, however, we were unable to
take with regard to the second dynamical idea, viz., that of a necessary
being.530 We were unable, without the mediation of the first dynamical
idea,531 to ascend to it from the world of sense. For, had we wanted to attempt this, we would have had to venture a leap: we would have had to
leave all that is given to us and soar to that of which again nothing is given
to us whereby we could mediate the connection of such an intelligible being
with the world of sense (because the necessary being was to be cognized as

526 [ o r « m m e j r b e i n g ' : in ihrem Wesen. This could also mean 'in its [i.e., reason's] essence,'
in line with Kant's earlier statement (above, Ak. V, 32) that " . . . this principle of morality
does not restrict itself to human beings only but applies to all finite beings having reason and
w i l l , . . . ." The present context, however, does suggest the reading adopted here.]
527

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 450-63.]

528

[Rücksicht]

529

[überschwenglich.]

530

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 452-61 = B 480-89, A 488/B 516, A 559-65 =
B 587-93.]
531

[The idea of freedom.]

134

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK I ANALYTIC

given outside us). By contrast, this [sort of mediation] is entirely possible,
as is now obvious, with regard to our own subject insofar as on the one
hand this subject through the moral law (by virtue of freedom) determines
[and thus cognizes] himself as an intelligible being and on the other hand
he cognizes himself as active in accordance with this determination in the
world of sense. Solely the concept of freedom permits us to find the unconditioned and intelligible for the conditioned and sensible without needing to
go outside ourselves. For it is our reason itself which cognizes itself
through the supreme and unconditioned practical law and cognizes the
being—the being which is conscious of this law (our own person)—as belonging to the pure world of understanding, and in so doing even determines the way in which, as such, this being can be active. Thus one can
comprehend why in the entire power of reason it can be only the practical
that helps us [proceed] beyond the world of sense and that provides us with
cognitions of a suprasensible order and connection—cognitions, however,
which precisely therefore can indeed only be extended just as far as is necessary for our pure practical aim.
Permit me to take this opportunity to call attention to just one more
thing, namely, that every step which one takes with pure reason, even in the
practical realm, where subtle speculation is not taken into account at all,
nonetheless meshes with all the moments532 of the critique of theoretical
reason so precisely, and indeed on its own, as if each step had been thought
out with deliberate foresight merely in order to provide theoretical reason
with confirmation. Such a precise concurrence—in no way sought but turning up on its own (as anyone can convince himself on his own if only he
will pursue moral investigations up to their principles)—of the most important propositions of practical reason with the comments of the critique of
speculative reason, which often seemed too subtle and unnecessary, occasions surprise and amazement and reinforces the maxim already cognized
and praised by others, that in every scientific investigation one should with
all possible exactness and frankness pursue one's course undisturbed, without being concerned about what the investigation might perhaps offend
against outside its realm, carrying it out by itself truly and completely as
much as one can. Repeated observation has convinced me that when this
[kind of] business has been brought to an end, what halfway through it
seemed to me at times very precarious in view of extraneous other doctrines

[I.e., key elements: Momente.]

CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THE ANALYTIC

135

was, in the end, in an unexpected way perfectly harmonious with what,
without the slightest regard for those doctrines and without any partiality
and predilection for them, had turned up on its own—provided only that I
left this precariousness out of sight and attended merely to my business
until it was completed. Writers would save themselves many errors and
much wasted effort (because it was aimed at illusion), if only they could resolve to go to work with somewhat more frankness.

BOOK II
DIALECTIC OF
PURE PRACTICAL REASON
Chapter I
On a Dialectic of
Pure Practical Reason as Such1
Pure reason, whether considered in its speculative or in its practical use, always has its dialectic;2 for it demands the absolute totality of conditions
for a given conditioned, and this totality absolutely3 cannot be found except in things in themselves. However, all concepts of things must be referred to intuitions, which for us human beings can never be other than
sensible4 and which therefore allow us to cognize objects not as things in
themselves but merely as appearances; and in the appearances' series5 of
the conditioned and the conditions [thereof] the unconditioned can never be
found. Thus an unavoidable illusion6 arises from the application of this rational idea of the totality of conditions (and hence rational idea of the unconditioned) to appearances as if they were things in themselves (for in the
absence of a warning critique they are always considered to be that). But
this illusion would never be noticed as deceptive if it did not betray itself on
its own through a conflict that reason has with itself in applying to appear1

[Or 'in general': überhaupt. See above, Ak. V, 3 br. n. 3.]

2

[See the Critique of Pure Reason, A 293-341/B 349-99.]

3

[Or 'simply': schlechterdings. Cf. above, Ak. V, 3 br. n. 2. Above, 'absolute' translates
absolut.]
4

[I.e., they cannot be intellectual and thus pertain to things in themselves. Cf. above, Ak. V, 45
incl. br. n. 187 and 31 br. n. 77.]
5

[Here again the term is singular: Reihe.]

6

[Schein.]

137

138

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

ances its principle of presupposing the unconditioned for everything conditioned. Through this [conflict], however, reason is compelled to explore this
illusion—from what it arises and how it can be removed—and this cannot
be done except through a complete critique of the entire pure power7 of reason. Thus the antinomy of pure reason,8 which becomes manifest in pure
reason's dialectic, is in fact the most beneficial straying into which human
reason could ever have fallen, because it ultimately impels us to seek the key
to get out of this labyrinth—the key which, when found, also uncovers what
one did not seek and yet requires, namely an outlook into a higher, unchangeable order of things; we already are in this order of things now, and
from now on we can be instructed by determinate precepts to pursue9 our
existence in it in conformity with the highest vocation10 of reason.
How that natural dialectic is to be resolved and the error arising from an
otherwise natural illusion is to be prevented in the speculative use of pure
reason can be found in detail in the Critique ofthat power.11 But reason in
its practical use fares not a whit better. As pure practical reason it seeks for
the practically conditioned (which rests on inclinations and natural need)
likewise the unconditioned; moreover, it does not seek this unconditioned
as determining basis of the will, but, even when this determining basis has
been given (in the moral law), it seeks the unconditioned totality of the object of pure practical reason, under the name of the highest good.12
To determine this idea practically—i.e., sufficiently for the maxim of our
rational conduct—is [the task of] the doctrine of wisdom,13 and this in turn
as science is philosophy in the meaning in which the word was understood
by the ancients, for whom philosophy was an instruction [directed] to the
concept wherein the highest good is to be posited and to the conduct
whereby this good is to be acquired. We would do well to leave this word in
its ancient meaning, as [signifying] a doctrine of the highest good insofar as
reason endeavors therein to attain to science. For, on the one hand, the attached restricting condition would be appropriate to the Greek expression
7

[-vermögen. See above, Ak. V, 3 br. n. 7.]

8

[See the Critique of Pure Reason, A 405-567/B 432-595.]

9

[Or 'continue'-.fortsetzen.]

10

[-bestimmung.]

11

[See the Critique of Pure Reason, A 293-704/B 349-732, esp. A 669-704/B 697-732.]

12

[See above, Ak. V, 57-67.]

13

[Weisheitslehre.]

CHAPTER I PURE PRACTICAL REASON AS SUCH

139

(which means love of wisdom)14 while yet at the same time sufficing to
comprise under the name of philosophy also the love of science and thus of
all of reason's speculative cognition insofar as it is useful to reason for
that concept15 as well as for the practical determining basis,16 and would
nonetheless keep us from losing sight of the main purpose on account of
which alone it can be called doctrine of wisdom. On the other hand, it
would also not be bad if, to deter the self-conceit of someone who ventured
to lay claim to the title of philosopher, one held before him, through the
very definition, the standard of self-estimation that would very much tone
down his pretensions. For to be a teacher of wisdom11 would surely mean
something more than [to be] a pupil, who still has not got far enough to
guide himself, and still less to guide others, with secure expectation of so
high a purpose; it would mean a master in acquaintance with wisdom,™
which says more than a modest man will himself claim. Philosophy would,
like wisdom itself, still remain an ideal, which objectively is presented
completely in reason alone, but subjectively, for the person, is only the goal
of his unceasing endeavor; and no one would be entitled to profess to be in
possession of it, under the claimed name of philosopher, unless he could
also adduce its unfailing effects in his own person as an example (in selfcontrol and the indubitable interest that he preeminently takes in the general
good), which the ancients also demanded in order that [someone] could deserve that name of honor.
Just one further preliminary reminder is needed regarding pure practical
reason's dialectic in point of the determination of the concept of the highest
good (a dialectic which, if its resolution is successful, allows us to expect—
like that of theoretical reason—the most beneficial effect, because the sincerely performed and unconcealed contradictions of pure practical reason
with itself compel us to undertake a complete critique of that reason's own
ability19).
14

[I.e., reason's attempt to proceed scientifically is appropriate to philosophy as a doctrine of
the highest good.]
15

[The concept wherein the highest good is to be posited.]

16

[Of the will.]

17

[Or, 'doctor of wisdom,' in the original sense of 'doctor,' which goes with 'doctrine':
Weisheitslehrer]
18

[Meister in Kenntnis der Weisheit]

19

[Or 'power': Vermögen.]

140

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

The moral law is the sole determining basis of the pure will. However,
this law is merely formal (viz., it demands only the form of the maxim to be
universally legislative), and thus as determining basis it abstracts from all
matter and hence from any object of volition.20 Hence although the highest
good may indeed be the entire object of a pure practical reason, i.e., of a
pure will, yet it is not on that account to be considered the determining
basis of that will, and the moral law alone must be regarded as the basis for
making the highest good and the effectuation or furtherance thereof one's
object. This reminder, in so delicate a case as the determination of moral
principles, where even the slightest misinterpretation corrupts attitudes, is
of significance. For it will have been seen from the Analytic that if we [were
to] assume, prior to the moral law, any object—under the name of a good—
as determining basis of the will and then [to] derive the supreme practical
principle from it, this would always bring about heteronomy and displace
the moral principle.21
It goes without saying, however, that if in the concept of the highest
good the moral law as supreme condition is already likewise included,22
then not only is the highest good [the] object of the pure will, but the concept of this good and the presentation of its existence as possible through
our practical reason are also at the same time the determining basis of the
pure will; for then it is in fact the moral law, already included and likewise
thought in this concept, and not any other object, which determines the will
in accordance with the principle of autonomy. This order of concepts of the
determination of the will must not be lost sight of; for otherwise we misunderstand ourselves and believe that we contradict ourselves even though
everything stands side by side in the most perfect harmony.

20

[See above, Ak. V, 19-57 ]

21

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 396, 399, 444-58.]

22

[mit eingeschlossen. Below, 'likewise thought' similarly translates mitgedacht.]

Chapter II
On a Dialectic of Pure Reason in
Determining the Concept
of the Highest Good
The concept of the highest already contains an ambiguity that, if one pays
no attention to it, can occasion needless controversies. The highest can
mean either the supreme23 (supremum) or the complete24 (consummatum).25 The first is that condition which is itself unconditioned, i.e., not
subordinate to any other condition (originarium)'26 the second is that
whole which is not a part of a still greater whole of the same kind (perfectissimum).21 [The fact] that virtue (as the worthiness to be happy) is the
supreme condition of whatever may seem to us desirable, and hence also of
all our pursuit of happiness, and that it is therefore the supreme good has
been proved in the Analytic. But virtue is not yet, on that account, the whole
and complete good as the object of the power of desire of rational finite beings. For, in order to be that, happiness too is required in addition [to
virtue], and this not merely in the partial eyes of a person who makes himself a purpose28 but even in the judgment of an impartial reason, which regards a person as such in the world as a purpose in itself. For, to be in need
of happiness, and also worthy of it, but nonetheless not to partake of it is not
at all consistent with29 the perfect30 volition of a rational being that also had
all power,31 even if we only think such a being by way of experiment. Now,
inasmuch as virtue and happiness together amount to possession of the
23

[das Oberste.]

24

[das Vollendete, which can also mean 'the perfect' (cf. the etymology of 'perfect').]

25

['The consummate.']

26

['The original.']

27

['The most perfect.']

28

[Or 'end': Zweck. See above, Ak. V, 35 br. n. 121.]

29

[Literally, 'cannot coexist with' : kann mit...
incl. br. n. 475.]
30

[vollkommen.]

31

[Gewalt.]

nicht zusammen bestehen. Cf. above, Ak. V, 97

141

142

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

highest good in a person, and thereby happiness distributed [to persons]
quite exactly in proportion to [their] morality (as a person's worth and his
worthiness to be happy) amounts also to the highest good of a possible
world, the highest good means the whole, [i.e., it means] the complete
good.32 In this complete good, however, virtue as the condition is always
the supreme good, because it has no further condition above it, whereas
happiness is something that, although always agreeable to him who possesses it, is not by itself alone good absolutely and in every respect but always presupposes morally lawful conduct as [its] condition.33
Two determinations necessarily linked34 in one concept must be connected as basis35 and consequence, and so connected, moreover, that this
unity is regarded either as analytic (logical connection) or as synthetic (real
connection), the former according to the law of identity, the latter according
to the law of causality. Therefore the connection of virtue with happiness
can either be understood in such a way that the endeavor to be virtuous and
the rational pursuit of happiness would be not two different but [instead]
entirely identical actions, in which case one would not have to base the former [action] on any other maxim than the latter; or this connection is
posited in such a way that virtue produces happiness as something distinct
from the consciousness of virtue, as a cause produces an effect.
Of the ancient Greek schools there were in fact only two that [dealt with
this issue]. In determining the concept of the highest good, they did indeed
follow one and the same method insofar as they did not accept36 virtue and
happiness as two different elements of the highest good, and hence sought
the unity of principle according to the rule of identity; but they separated, in
turn, inasmuch as between the two [elements] they selected the basic concept differently. The Epicurean said, to be conscious of one's maxim leading to happiness—that is virtue; the Stoic, to be conscious of one's virtue is
happiness. To the former, prudence was tantamount to morality; to the latter, who selected a higher designation for virtue, morality alone was true
wisdom.

32

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 812-14 = B 840-42.]

33

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 377-78.]

34

[Or 'combined': verbunden.]

35

[Or 'ground': Grund. See above, Ak. V, 49 incl. br. n. 196, cf. 4 br. n. 36.]

36

[gelten lassen.]

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

143

One must regret that the acuteness of these men (whom one must yet at
the same time admire for having in such early times already tried all conceivable paths of philosophical conquest) was applied infelicitously in
excogitating identity between extremely heterogeneous concepts, that of
happiness and that of virtue. However, it was commensurate with the spirit
of their times—and sometimes misleads subtle minds even now—to annul
essential and utterly irreconcilable37 differences in principle by trying to
convert them into a dispute about words, and thus seemingly to contrive
unity of the concept merely under different designations; and this commonly applies to cases where the unification38 of heterogeneous bases lies
so deep or so high, or would require so complete a transformation of the
doctrines otherwise assumed in the philosophical system, that people dread
to enter deeply into the real difference and prefer to treat it as a disunity in
mere formalities.
While the two schools tried to excogitate the sameness of the practical
principles of virtue and happiness, they did not on that account agree with
each other as to how they were to force out this identity; rather, they separated to an infinite distance from each other inasmuch as the one posited the
principle thereof on the aesthetic39 side and the other on the logical side, the
former in the consciousness of sensible need, the other in the independence
of practical reason from all sensible determining bases. According to the
Epicurean, the concept of virtue already resided in the maxim [whereby
one is] to further one's own happiness; according to the Stoic, on the other
hand, the feeling of happiness was already contained in the consciousness
of one's virtue. What is contained in another concept, however, is indeed
the same as a part of the containing [concept] but not the same as the whole;
moreover, two wholes can be different from each other in kind even though
they consist of the same material, viz., if the parts in each are being combined into a whole in an entirely different manner. The Stoic asserted that
virtue is the whole highest good and happiness is only the consciousness of
the possession of this virtue as belonging to the subject's state. The Epicurean asserted that happiness is the whole highest good and virtue is only
37

[Literally, 'never to be united*: nie zu vereinigende.]

38

[Vereinigung.]

39

[I.e., sensible. See the Critique of Pure Reason, A xvii-xviii (also A 21n/B 35n and
A 57/B 81); the Critique of Judgment, Ak. V, 188-89 (also 226); the First Introduction to that
work, Ak. XX, 221-22 (also 226n); and cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 399-400 (also
471).]

112

144

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

the form of the maxim [whereby one is] to pursue this happiness, [consisting,] viz., in the rational use of means to it.
However, it is clear from the Analytic that the maxims of virtue and
those of one's own happiness are entirely heterogeneous with regard to
their supreme practical principle,40 and that, far from being accordant, even
though they belong to a highest good, they very much restrict and impair41
each other in the same subject in order to make this good possible. Hence
the question, How is the highest good practically possible? still remains an
unsolved problem, despite all attempts at coalition made thus far. But what
makes this problem difficult to solve is given in the Analytic: viz., that happiness and morality are two elements of the highest good which are entirely
different in kind, and that therefore one cannot cognize their linkage42 analytically (that, say, someone who seeks his happiness will in this [very] conduct of his find himself virtuous by merely resolving his concepts; or that
someone who follows virtue will in the very consciousness of such conduct
ipso facto find himself happy); rather, this linkage is a synthesis of concepts. But because this linkage is cognized as a priori and hence as practically necessary, and consequently not as derived from experience, and
because this possibility of the highest good therefore does not rest on any
empirical principles, the deduction of this concept will have to be transcendental. It is a priori (morally) necessary to produce the highest good
through freedom of the will; therefore the condition for the possibility of
this good must also rest solely on a priori bases of cognition.

I
THE ANTINOMY OF PRACTICAL REASON
In the highest good that is practical for us, i.e., to be made actual through
our will, virtue and happiness are thought as necessarily linked, so that the
one cannot be assumed by pure practical reason without the other's belonging to it also. Now, this linkage (like any linkage as such) is either analytic
or synthetic. But since, as has just previously been shown, the given linkage
cannot be analytic, it must be thought synthetically and, specifically, as a
40

[See above, Ak. V, 34-41.]

41

[Abbruch tun. See above, Ak. V, 25 br. n. 44.]

42

[Or 'combination': Verbindung.]

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

145

connection of the cause with the effect, because it concerns a practical
good, i.e., one that is possible through action. Therefore either the desire for
happiness must be the motivating cause for maxims of virtue, or the maxim
of virtue must be the efficient cause of happiness. The first is impossible absolutely, because (as has been proved in the Analytic) maxims that posit the
determining basis of the will in the longing for happiness are not moral at
all and cannot be the basis of any virtue. But the second is impossible also,
because any practical connection of causes and effects in the world, as a result of the determination of the will, conforms not to moral attitudes of the
will but to acquaintance43 with the laws of nature and to the physical ability
to use them for one's aims, and because consequently no necessary connection, sufficient for the highest good, of happiness with virtue in the world
can be expected [to come about] through the most meticulous observance
of moral laws. Now, since the furtherance of the highest good, the good
which contains this connection in its concept, is an a priori necessary object
of our will and is inseparably linked with the moral law, the impossibility of
the highest good must also prove the falsity of the moral law. If, therefore,
the highest good is impossible according to practical rules, then the moral
law which commands us to further this good must also be fantastic and
aimed at empty imaginary purposes, and hence in itself false.

II
CRITICAL ANNULMENT OF THE ANTINOMY
OF PRACTICAL REASON
In the antinomy of pure speculative reason we find a similar conflict between natural necessity and freedom in the causality of events in the
world.44 It was annulled by proving that the conflict is not a true one if the
events and even the world in which they occur are regarded (as indeed they
ought to be) only as appearances. For, one and the same acting being as appearance (even to his own inner sense) has a causality in the world of sense
which always conforms to the mechanism of nature; but, with regard to the
same event, insofar as the acting person regards himself simultaneously as
noumenon (as pure intelligence, in his existence that is not determinable in
43

[Or 'familiarity' : Kenntnis. See above, Ak. V, 35 br. n. 120, and 4 br. n. 31.]

44

[See the Critique of Pure Reason, A 444-51 = B 472-79.]

114

146

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

terms of time), he can contain a determining basis—of that causality according to natural laws—which is itself free from any natural law.45
Now, the same applies to the antinomy of pure practical reason, which is
at issue here. The first of the two propositions, that the striving for happiness produces a basis for a virtuous attitude, is false absolutely; but the
second, that a virtuous attitude necessarily produces happiness, is false not
absolutely but only insofar as this attitude is regarded as the form of causality in the world of sense, and hence only if I assume the existence in that
world to be the only kind of existence46 of a rational being, and therefore is
false only conditionally. However, since I not only am authorized to think my
existence also as [that of a] noumenon in a world of understanding but even
have in the moral law a purely intellectual determining basis of my causality
(in the world of sense), it is not impossible that the morality of [one's] attitude should have a connection, and moreover a necessary one, as cause with
happiness as effect in the world of sense, if not a direct connection then still
an indirect one (by means of an intelligible originator of nature), a linkage
which in a nature that is merely an object of the senses can never take place
except contingently and cannot be sufficient for the highest good.
Hence despite this seeming conflict of a practical reason with itself, the
highest good is the necessary highest purpose of a morally determined
will—a true object of practical reason;47 for, this good is practically possible, and the maxims of such a will, which refer to this good in terms of their
matter, have objective reality.48 At first this objective reality was affected by
that antinomy in linking morality with happiness according to a universal
law, but only through a misunderstanding, because the relation among appearances was regarded as a relation of things in themselves to these
appearances.
When we find ourselves compelled49 to seek the possibility of the highest good—which reason marks out for all rational beings as the goal of all
their moral wishes—at such distance, namely in the connection with an intelligible world, it must seem strange that philosophers of ancient as well as
modern times could nonetheless have found—or have persuaded them45

[See ibid., A 532-58 = B 560-86.]

46

[Existenz here, Dasein above and below.]

47

[derselben. Cf. above, Ak. V, 57 and 108-09.]

48

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 806-14 = B 834-42.]

49

[nötigen. See above, Ak. V, 20 br. n. 17.]

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

147

selves of being conscious of—happiness in very fitting proportion to virtue
already in this life (in the world of sense). For, the happiness that arises
from the consciousness of virtue in life was elevated above everything by
Epicurus as well as the Stoics; and Epicurus was not so low-minded in his
practical precepts as one might infer from the principles of his theory,
which he used for explanation and not for action, or as the precepts were
interpreted by many who were misled by [his use of] the expression lust50
for satisfaction.51 Rather, he included the least self-interested52 performance of the good among the ways of savoring53 the most intimate joy,54
and whatever tempering and restraining of the inclinations may be demanded by the strictest moral philosopher belonged likewise to his scheme
of gratification55 (by which he meant a constantly cheerful heart);56 in this
he deviated from the Stoics primarily only in positing the motive in this
gratification, which the Stoics refused [to do], and rightly so. For, on the
one hand, the virtuous Epicurus—like many men even now who are
morally well-meaning,57 although they do not meditate deeply enough on
their principles—committed the mistake of already presupposing the virtuous attitude in the persons for whom he wanted first of all to indicate the incentive to virtue (and in fact a righteous person cannot think himself happy
if he is not first conscious of his righteousness; for, with that [virtuous] attitude, the reprimands—which his own way of thinking would compel him to
cast upon himself in the case of transgressions—and the moral self-condemnation would rob him of all enjoyment of the agreeableness that his
state might otherwise contain). However, the question is, through what does
such an attitude and way of thinking in estimating the worth of one's existence become possible in the first place, since before it no feeling at all for
a moral worth as such would be found yet in the subject? To be sure, if a
human being is virtuous he will indeed not find joy in life unless in every
50

[I.e., carnal pleasure (Fleischlust); see the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 424, and cf.
above, Ak. V, 30.]

51

[Zufriedenheit.]

52

[uneigennützigste.]

53

[Or 'ways of enjoying': Genußarten.]

54

[Freude.]

55

[Vergnügen.]

56

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 485.

57

[wohlgesinnt.]

148

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

action he is conscious of his righteousness, however much fortune may
favor him in the physical state of life; but in order to make him virtuous in
the first place, and hence even before he assesses the moral worth of his existence [as being] so high, can one then indeed extol to him the tranquility
of soul that will arise from the consciousness of a righteousness for which,
after all, he has [as yet] no mind?
But, on the other hand, here the basis for an error of subreption58 (vitium subreptionis)59 and, as it were, for an optical illusion always lies in the
self-consciousness of what one does, as distinguished from what one
senses,6® an illusion that even the most tested person cannot completely
avoid. The moral attitude is linked necessarily with a consciousness of the
will's being determined directly by the law. Now, the consciousness of a determination of our power of desire is always the basis of a liking61 for the
action produced by this [determination]. But this pleasure, this liking in itself, is not the determining basis of the action; rather, the will's being determined directly, by reason alone, is the basis of the feeling of pleasure, and
this determination remains a purely practical, not aesthetic,62 determination
of the power of desire.63 Now, since this determination has inwardly precisely the same effect—that of an impulse to activity—which a feeling of
agreeableness expected from the desired action would have had, we easily
look upon what we ourselves do as something that we merely passively
feel, and take the moral incentive for a sensible impulse, just as always happens in the so-called illusion64 of the senses (here, of the inner sense). It is
something very sublime in human nature to be determined to actions directly by a pure law of reason, and so is even the illusion of regarding the
subjective [element] of this intellectual determinability of the will as something aesthetic and as an effect of a special sensible feeling (for an intellectual feeling would be a contradiction). It is also of great importance to call

58

[Fehler des Er schleichens.]

59

[Fallacy of subreption.]

60

[In the broad meaning of the term that includes feeling.]

61

[Wohlgefallen.]

62

[Le., sensible; cf. Ak. V, 112 incl. br. n. 39.]

63

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 212-13.]

64

[Täuschung, which in most contexts—but not here (likewise below)—is best translated as
'delusion.']

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

149

attention to this property of our personality65 and to cultivate as best we can
the effect of reason on this feeling. But one must also be on guard against
degrading and disfiguring the proper and genuine incentive, the law itself,
through spurious laudations of this moral determining basis as incentive, by
founding it on feelings of special joys as its bases (although they are only
consequences)—by means of a false foil, as it were. Respect, and not the
gratification and enjoyment of happiness, as 66 something for which no antecedent feeling laid at the basis of reason is possible (because such a feeling would always be aesthetic and pathological), and as consciousness of
the direct necessitation67 of the will by the68 law, is hardly an analogue of
the feeling of pleasure, although in relation to the power of desire it does
exactly the same, but from different sources.69 Only through this way of
conceiving [respect], however, can one attain what one seeks, viz., that actions be done not merely in conformity with duty (as a consequence of
agreeable feelings) but from duty, which must be the true purpose of all
moral molding.
But do we not have a word that, without designating an enjoyment, as
the word happiness does, indicates nonetheless a liking for one's existence,
an analogue of the happiness that must necessarily accompany the consciousness of virtue? Yes! This word is self-satisfaction,10 which in its
proper meaning always implies only a negative liking for one's existence, a
liking in which one is conscious of needing nothing. Freedom, and the consciousness of it as a power to comply with the moral law with an overweighing attitude, is independence from inclinations—independence from
them at least as motivating causes determining (even if not as affecting) our
desire—and insofar as I am conscious of this freedom in complying with
my moral maxims, it is the sole source of an unchangeable satisfaction
linked necessarily with it and resting on no special feeling, and this satisfaction can be called intellectual. Aesthetic71 satisfaction (improperly so

65

[I.e., personhood: Persönlichkeit.]

66

[I follow Natorp's suggestion to read als for ist also.]

67

[Nötigung. See above, Ak. V, 20 br. n. 17.]

68

[Reading, with Vorländer, durchs for durch.]

69

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 812-15 = B 840-42.]

70
71

[Selbstzufriedenheit.]
[I.e., sensible; cf. Ak. V, 112 incl. br. n 39.]

150

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

called72), which rests on gratifying the inclinations, however delicately
these may be excogitated, can never be adequate to what one thinks concerning it. For, the inclinations vary, grow with the indulgence that one allows them, and always leave behind an even greater void than one had
meant to fill. Hence to a rational being they are always burdensome, and
even if the being cannot easily shed them, they nonetheless force from
him73 the wish to be rid of them. Even an inclination to what conforms to
duty (e.g., to beneficence) can indeed greatly facilitate the effectiveness of
moral maxims, but it cannot produce any. For in such a maxim everything
must be aimed at the conception of the law as determining basis, if the action is to contain not merely legality but also morality. Inclination, whether
it be good-natured74 or not, is blind and servile; and reason, where morality
is at issue, must not merely represent the guardian of inclination but must,
without taking account of inclination and as pure practical reason, attend all
by itself to its own interest. Even that feeling of sympathy75 and softhearted
compassion,76 if it precedes deliberation as to what [one's] duty is77 and becomes a determining basis, is itself burdensome to right-minded78 persons,
brings their deliberate maxims into confusion, and gives rise to the wish to
be rid of them and subject solely to legislative79 reason.
From this one can understand how the consciousness of this power of a
pure practical reason through [the] deed80 (virtue81) can produce a con72

[I.e., improperly called 'satisfaction.']

73

[See above, Ak. V, 19 br. n. 6.]

74

[gutartig.]

75

[Mitleid]

76

[Teilnehmung.]

77

[See above, Ak. V, 8 n. 83 incl. n. 83f.]

78

[wohldenkend]

79

[Or 'legislating': gesetzgebend]

80

[durch Tat. See above, Ak. V, 3 br. n. 11.]

81

[die Tugend. Kant here seems to equate virtue with the consciousness that the power of a
pure practical reason has through the deed. This is compatible with his characterization of
virtue as one's morality, moral attitude, or moral state (above, Ak. V, 84). It is also compatible
with the fact that Kant often—in particular, at the start of this very discussion of self-satisfaction at Ak. V, 117—speaks of the consciousness of virtue, provided that we then construe the
'of as a limiting genitive (see above, Ak. V, 33 br. n. 94). It is true that Kant sometimes calls
virtue a power (Vermögen)—see, e.g., above, Ak. V, 33, and cf. the Metaphysics of Morals,

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

151

sciousness of supremacy over one's inclinations, and hence also from the
dissatisfaction that always accompanies them, and therefore can produce
a negative liking for one's state, i.e., satisfaction, which in its source is satisfaction with one's person. Freedom itself becomes in this way (viz.,
indirectly) capable of an enjoyment. This enjoyment cannot be called
happiness, because it does not depend on the positive participation82 of a
feeling; nor, strictly speaking, bliss, because it does not contain complete
independence from inclinations and needs. But it is still similar to bliss,
viz., insofar as one's determination of the will can at least keep itself free
from the influence of inclinations and needs and this enjoyment is thus
analogous, at least in its origin, to the self-sufficiency that can be ascribed
only to the supreme being.
From this resolution of the antinomy of practical pure reason it follows
that in practical principles one can at least think as possible (although, to be
sure, not yet therefore cognize and have insight into) a natural and necessary linkage between the consciousness of morality and, as a consequence
of this morality, the expectation of a happiness proportionate to it; that, on
the other hand, principles of the pursuit of happiness cannot possibly produce morality; and that, therefore, the supreme good (as the primary condition of the highest good) consists in morality, whereas happiness amounts
indeed to the second element of the highest good, but in such a way that it
is only the morally conditioned but yet necessary consequence of morality.
Only in this subordination is the highest good the entire object of pure practical reason, which must necessarily present this good as possible, because
to contribute everything possible to its production is a command of this reason.83 However, the possibility of such a linkage of the conditioned with its
condition belongs entirely to the suprasensible relation of things and cannot
be given at all according to the laws of the world of sense, although the
practical consequence of this idea, viz., the actions that aim at making the
highest good actual, do belong to the world of sense. We shall, therefore,

Ak. VI, 394; but if he were doing so in the present context, he would say not die Tugend but
der Tugend, to match the genitive in dieses Vermögens. Finally, Kant is surely not equating
virtue with the deed; for not only would he then presumably say durch Tugend, but equating
these two would create serious conflicts with many other contexts in this work and, especially,
in the Metaphysics of Morals.]
82

[Beitritt]

83

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 806-14 = B 834-42.]

152

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

seek to exhibit the bases of that possibility, first84 with regard to what is directly under our control,85 and then, second,86 in that which reason (necessarily, according to practical principles) offers us, to compensate87 for our
inability, for the possibility of the highest good and which is not under our
control.

Ill
ON THE PRIMACY OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON
IN ITS LINKAGE WITH SPECULATIVE REASON88

120

By primacy among two or more things linked by reason I mean the preeminence of one thing [insofar as] it is the first determining basis of the linkage with all the rest. In a narrower, practical signification it signifies the
preeminence of the interest of one thing insofar as to this [interest] (which
cannot be put second89 to any others) the interest of the others is subordinate. To every power of the mind90 one can attribute an interest, i.e., a principle that contains the condition under which alone the power's exercise is
furthered.91 Reason, as the power of principles, determines the interest of
all the mental powers,92 but its own interest it determines for itself. The interest of its speculative use consists in the cognition of the object up to the
highest a priori principles; that of its practical use, in the determination of
the will with regard to the ultimate and complete purpose.93 What is required
84

[See below, Ak. V, 122-23.]

85

[Or 'directly in our power': unmittelbar in unserer Gewalt.]

86

[See below, Ak. V, 124-31.]

87

[als Ergänzung.]

88

[See above, Ak. V, 55-57; also below, Ak. V, 134-36.]

89

[nach-.]

90

[Vermögen des Gemüts. On Vermögen, see above, Ak. V, 3 br. n. 7.]

91

[See above, Ak. V, 7 9 - 8 1 ; cf. also the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV,
413n, 432, 448-50, 460n.]
92
93

[Gemütskräfte. Kraft, in the sense applicable here, is synonymous with Vermögen.]

[des letzten und vollständigen Zwecks; cf. below, Ak. V, 130. Above, at Ak. V, 115, Kant
called it the highest purpose {höchster Zweck); below, at Ak. V, 129, he calls it the final purpose (Endzweck). In the Critique of Judgment (1790), where he calls it the final purpose, he
distinguishes between this and the ultimate purpose, there characterized as the last natural

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

153

for the possibility of a use of reason as such,94 viz., that its principles and assertions must not contradict one another, does not amount to a part of its interest but is the condition of having reason at all;95 only reason's expansion,
not its mere agreement with itself, is classed with its interest.
If practical reason may assume and think as given nothing further than
what speculative reason by itself has been able to offer it from its [own] insight, then the latter has primacy. But supposing that practical reason on its
own had original a priori principles with which certain theoretical positions
were inseparably linked but which nonetheless eluded all possible insight
of speculative reason (although they also must not contradict that insight),
then the question is which interest is supreme (not which interest must
yield, for one does not necessarily conflict with the other). [I.e., the question then is] whether speculative reason, which knows nothing of all that
which practical reason offers to it [as something] to assume, must admit96
these propositions and, although they are extravagant97 for it, seek to reconcile98 them with its concepts, as a foreign possession transferred to it; or
whether speculative reason is entitled to follow obstinately its own separate
interest and, in accordance with the canon of Epicurus, reject as empty subtle reasoning99 everything that cannot authenticate its objective reality by
obvious examples to be adduced in experience, however much it were interwoven with the interest of the practical (pure) use of reason, and were also
not in itself contradictory to theoretical reason, merely because it actually
impairs the interest of speculative100 reason insofar as it annuls the bounds
that the latter has set itself and surrenders it to every nonsense or madness101 of the imagination.

member in the chain of purposes leading to the final purpose, which itself lies beyond nature;
see Ak. V, 425-45. On my rendering of Zweck as 'purpose' rather than as 'end,' see above, Ak.
V, 35 br. n. 121.]
94

[Or 'in general': überhaupt. See above, Ak. V, 3 br. n. 3.]

95

[überhaupt]

96

[aufnehmen.]

97

[I.e., transcendent: überschwenglich.]

98

[vereinigen. Cf. above, Ak. V, 6 n. 64 incl. br. n. 64a.]

99

[leere Vernünftelei.]

100

[On theoretical and speculative reason, see above, Ak. V, 3 br. n. 4.]

101

[Unsinn oder Wahnsinn.]

154

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

In fact, in case practical reason were presupposed as pathologically conditioned, i.e., as merely administering the interest of the inclinations under
the sensible principle of happiness, this demand102 could not be made on
speculative reason at all. Mohammed's paradise or the theosophists' and
mystics' fusion103 with the deity, each [thinker] after his own mind, would
thrust their monstrosities upon reason, and it would be just as well to have
no reason at all as to surrender it in this way to all sorts of dreams.104 But if
pure reason by itself can be practical and actually is, as is evinced by the
consciousness of the moral law, it is yet always only one and the same reason which, whether for a theoretical or a practical aim, judges according to
a priori principles. Thus it is clear that, even if for a theoretical aim reason's
ability is not sufficient to establish certain propositions affirmatively, while
indeed they also do not contradict reason, as soon as these same propositions belong inseparably to the practical interest of pure reason, it must
assume them—although as a foreign offering not grown on its soil but yet
sufficiently authenticated—and seek to compare and connect them with
everything that it has within its power105 as speculative reason. It must be
content, however, that these are not its insights but are yet expansions of its
use for some other, namely a practical, aim—this being not at all contrary to
its interest, which consists in the restriction of speculative outrage.
Thus in the linkage of pure speculative with pure practical reason for a
cognition the latter has primacy—supposing, i.e., that this linkage is by no
means contingent and discretionary106 but based a priori on reason itself
and hence necessary. For without this subordination a conflict of reason
with itself would arise, because if pure speculative and pure practical reason were merely adjoined (coordinate),107 the former would by itself tightly
close up its boundary and admit nothing from the latter into its domain,
while pure practical reason would nonetheless extend its boundaries over
everything and, where its need requires, would seek to encompass pure
speculative reason too within them. But one cannot at all require pure practical reason to be subordinate to speculative reason and thus reverse the
102

[To adopt the mentioned propositions and seek to reconcile them with its own concepts.]

103

[Literally, 'melting union': schmelzende Vereinigung.]

104

[allen Träumereien.]

105

[Macht]

106

[Or 'optional': beliebig.]

107

[beigeordnet (koordiniert).]

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

155

order, because all interest is ultimately practical and even the interest of
speculative reason is only conditional and is complete in practical use alone.

IV
THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL,
AS A POSTULATE OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON
To bring about the highest good in the world is the necessary object of a
will determinable by the moral law. In such a will, however, the complete
adequacy™ of attitudes to the moral law is the supreme condition of the
highest good. This adequacy must therefore be just as possible as its object,
because it is contained in the same command to further this object. Complete adequacy of the will to the moral law, however, is holiness,109 a perfection of which no rational being in the world of sense is capable at any
point of time in his existence.110 Since this adequacy is nonetheless demanded as practically necessary, it can be encountered only in a progression111 proceeding ad infinitum toward that complete adequacy; and
according to principles of pure practical reason it is necessary to assume
such a practical advance112 as the real object of our will.
This infinite progression, however, is possible only on the presupposition
of an existence113 and personality—of the same rational being—continuing
ad infinitum (which is called the immortality of the soul).114 Therefore the
highest good is practically possible only on the presupposition of the immortality of the soul, and hence this immortality, as linked inseparably with the
moral law, is a postulate of pure practical reason (by which I mean a theoretical proposition, though one not provable as such,115 insofar as it attaches
inseparably to a practical law that holds a priori [and] unconditionally).
108

[Or 'commensurateness': Angemessenheit.]

109

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 414.]

110

[Dasein.]

111

[Progressifs.]

112

[Fortschreitung.]

113

[Existenz.]

114

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 810-11 = B 838-39.]

115

[Cf. ibid, B 429-32, A 682-84 = B 710-12; also the Prolegomena, Ak. IV, 333-37.]

122

156

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

The proposition concerning the moral vocation of our nature, that we
can reach complete adequacy to the moral law116 solely in an advance proceeding ad infinitum, is of the greatest benefit, not merely on account of the
present compensation for the inability of speculative reason, but also with
regard to religion.117 In the absence of it, one either degrades the moral law
completely from its holiness by misconstruing118 it to oneself as forbearing
(indulgent) and thus adequate119 to our comfortableness, or else one
stretches one's calling as well as expectation to an unattainable vocation,
viz., a hoped-for complete acquisition of holiness of will, and loses oneself
in roving theosophical dreams that quite contradict self-cognition—both of
which [consequences] only prevent the unceasing striving toward meticulous and thoroughgoing compliance with a strict and unforbearing but
nonetheless true rather than ideal command of reason. For a rational but finite being only the progression ad infinitum from lower to the higher levels
of moral perfection is possible. The infinite one,120 to whom the time condition is nothing, sees in this series—which for us is endless—the whole of
adequacy to the moral law; and the holiness, which his command unremittingly demands in order [for one] to conform to his justice in the share that
he determines for each in the highest good, is to be found whole in a single
intellectual intuition121 of the existence of rational beings. All that can belong to a creature with regard to hope for this share would be the consciousness of his tested attitude, so that, on the basis of the progress that he
has thus far made from the worse to the morally better, and of the immutable resolve which has thereby become familiar122 to him, he [may]
hope for a further uninterrupted continuation123 of this progress, however
far his existence124 may extend, even beyond this life;125 and thus he can
116

[Sittengesetz here, moralisches Gesetz repeatedly above.]

117

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 486-91.]

118

[verkünsteln.]

119

[Or 'commensurate': angemessen.]

120

[I.e., the infinite being: der Unendliche.]

121

[See above, Ak. V, 31 br. n. 77.]

122

[bekannt. See above, Ak. V, 35 br. n. 120.]

123

[Fortsetzung.]

124

[Existenz here, Dasein above and below.]

125

Conviction of the immutability of his attitude in the progress toward the good
seems, nonetheless, to be impossible for a creature [to attain] on its own. Because of

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

157

never hope to be fully adequate 126 to God's will (without forbearance or remission, which do not agree with justice) either here or at any foreseeable
future point of time in his existence, but can hope to be so only in the infinity of his continuance 127 (which God alone can survey).

V
THE EXISTENCE OF GOD,
AS A POSTULATE OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON
The moral law led, in the preceding dissection, to a practical problem 128
prescribed by pure reason alone, without any participation 129 of sensible incentives, viz., that of [bringing about] the necessary completeness of the
first and foremost part of the highest good, morality; and since this problem can be solved fully only in an eternity, it led to the postulate of immorthis, moreoever, the Christian religious doctrine allows it to stem solely from the
same spirit that brings about sanctification,3 i.e., brings about this firm resolve and
with it the consciousness of perseverance5 in moral progress. But by nature, too,
someone who is conscious of having for a long part of his life until its end persisted
in progress for the better, and this moreover from genuine moral motives, may0 indeed have the comforting hope, although not the certainty, that he will persevere in
these principles even in an existence continued beyond this life; and although in his
own eyes he is never justified here—nor, [even] in view of the hoped-for future increase of his natural perfection but therewith also [the increase] of his duties, may
ever hope for this [justification]—nonetheless in this progress which, while concerning a goal moved outward ad infinitum, yet counts for God as possession, he
may have an outlook into a blessed future. For, this is the term that reason employs
to designate a complete well-being independent of all contingent causes in the
world, a well-being that, like holiness, is an idea that can be contained only in an infinite progression and its totality and hence is never fully attained by the creature.
a
b
c

[Heiligung.]
[Beharrlichkeit.]
[dürfen.]

126

[adäquat.]

127

[Fortdauer.]

128 [QT '^5^». Aufgabe; likewise below and in the next paragraph. The adopted rendering
agrees better with 'can be solved,' below (and cf. Ak. V, 112), and with most of Kant's uses of
Aufgabe. See above, Ak. V, 5 and esp. 25 (cf. 126 below), where Kant even uses Aufgabe interchangeably with Problem ]
129

[Beitritt.]

124

158

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

tality. The same law must also lead to the possibility of the second element
of the highest good, viz., to the happiness commensurate to that morality,
and must do so with just as little self-interest130 as before, solely from impartial reason. In other words, it must lead to the presupposition of the
existence131 of a cause adequate to this effect; i.e., it must postulate the existence of God, as belonging necessarily to the possibility of the highest
good (the object of our will which is linked necessarily with the moral legislation of pure reason).132 We shall exhibit this connection133 convincingly.
Happiness is the state of a rational being in the world for whom in the
whole of his existence everything proceeds according to his wish and will;
it therefore rests on the harmony134 of nature with his whole purpose135 as
well as with the essential determining basis of his will. Now, the moral law
as a law of freedom commands through determining bases that are to 136 be
wholly independent of nature and of its harmony with our power of desire
(as incentives); but the acting rational being in the world is, after all, not
also the cause of the world and of nature itself. Hence there is in the moral
law not the slightest basis for a necessary connection between morality and
the happiness, proportionate thereto, of a being belonging to the world as a
part [thereof] and thus dependent on it, who precisely therefore cannot
through his will be the cause of this nature and, as far as his happiness is
concerned, cannot by his own powers make it harmonize137 throughout
with his practical principles. Nonetheless, in the practical problem138 of
pure reason, i.e., [that of] working necessarily for the highest good, such a
connection is postulated as necessary: we ought139 to seek to further the
highest good (hence this good must, after all, be possible). Therefore the
existence of a cause of nature as a whole, distinct from nature, which con130

[ebenso uneigennützig.]

131

[Dasein here and (twice) in the next paragraph; Existenz in the heading above, and below.]

132

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 809-14 = B 837-42.]

133

[Zusammenhang; likewise in the next paragraph.]

134

[Übereinstimmung.]

135

[Zweck. See above, Ak. V, 35 br. n. 121.]

136

[Or 'ought to': sollen.]

137

[einstimmig.]

138

[Or

139

[sollen.]

'tusk'.Aufgabe.]

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

159

tains the basis of this connection, namely the basis of the exact harmony of
[one's] happiness with [one's] morality, is also postulated. This supreme
cause, however, is to contain the basis of nature's harmony not merely with
a law of the will of rational beings, but also with the presentation of this law
insofar as they posit this law to themselves as the supreme determining
basis of the will, and hence not merely with morals140 according to their
form but also with their morality as their motive, i.e., with their moral attitude. Therefore the highest good in the world is possible only insofar as one
assumes a supreme cause of nature that has a causality conforming to the
moral attitude. Now, a being capable of [performing] actions according to
the presentation of laws is an intelligence (a rational being), and such a
being's causality according to this presentation of laws is a will of this
being. Therefore the supreme cause of nature, insofar as it must be presupposed for the highest good, is a being that is the cause of nature through understanding and will (and hence is its originator), i.e., God. Consequently
the postulate of the possibility of the highest derivative good (the best
world) is simultaneously the postulate of the actuality of a highest original
good, viz., [the postulate] of the existence of God. Now, it was a duty for us
to further the highest good; and hence [we have] not only the authority, but
also the necessity linked as a need with duty, to presuppose the possibility
of this highest good, which, since it has [its] place only under the condition
of the existence of God, links the presupposition of God inseparably with
duty; i.e., it is morally necessary to assume the existence of God.
Now, it must be noted carefully here that this moral necessity is subjective, i.e., a need, and not objective, i.e., itself a duty; for there can be no duty
whatever to assume the existence141 of a thing (because doing so concerns
only the theoretical use of reason). I also do not mean by this that it is necessary to assume the existence of God as a basis of all obligation as such
(for this basis rests, as has been proved sufficiently, solely on the autonomy
of reason itself). What belongs to duty here is only this: to work for the production and furtherance of the highest good in the world; the possibility of
this good can therefore be postulated.142 Our reason, however, finds this
possibility thinkable solely on the presupposition of a highest intelligence;
to assume the existence of this intelligence is therefore linked with the con140

[I.e., one's habitual ways of acting: Sitten. Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 216.]

141

[Existenz here, Dasein just below and later in the paragraph.]

142

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 814-19 = B 842-47.]

126

160

127

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

sciousness of our duty, although this assumption itself belongs to theoretical reason. In regard to theoretical reason alone, considered as a basis of
explanation, it can be called a hypothesis. But in reference to the understandability of an object (the highest good) assigned143 to us, after all, by
the moral law, and hence of a need with a practical aim, it can be called
faith,144 specifically pure rational faith, because pure reason alone (in its
theoretical as well as in its practical use) is the source from which it springs.
From this deduction it now becomes comprehensible why the Greek
schools could never succeed in solving their problem of the practical possibility of the highest good. It was because they always made only the rule of
the use that the human will makes of its freedom the sole and by itself sufficient basis of this possibility, without needing for this, as it seemed to
them, the existence of God. They were indeed right in establishing the principle of morals by itself, independently of this postulate and solely from the
relation of reason to the will, thus making it the supreme practical condition
of the highest good; but this principle was not, on that account, the entire
condition for the possibility of this good.145 The Epicureans had, to be sure,
assumed an entirely false principle of morals as the supreme one, namely
that of happiness, and had substituted for a law a maxim of discretionary
choice146 according to the inclination of each. But they proceeded consistently enough inasmuch as they degraded their highest good in the same
way, viz., in proportion to the lowliness of their principle, and expected no
greater happiness than can be acquired through human prudence (to which
temperance and moderation of the inclinations belong as well), which, as
we know, must [be] paltry enough and turn out very differently according to
circumstances, not even counting the exceptions that their maxims had to
admit incessantly and that made them unsuitable for laws. The Stoics, by
contrast, had chosen their supreme practical principle quite correctly, viz.,
virtue, as condition of the highest good. But inasmuch as they presented the
degree of virtue that is required for its pure law as fully attainable in this
life, they had not only stretched the moral ability of the human being, under
the name of a sage, high above all the limits of his nature and assumed
143

[As a problem (or task): aufgegeben.]

144

[Glaube. On faith, see the Critique of Pure Reason, A 820-31 = B 848-59; and the Critique of Judgment, Ak. V, 471-72 incl. 471n, and cf. 475.]
145

[See above, Ak. V, 39-41.]

146 [Qr 'optional choice': beliebigen

Wahl.]

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

161

something that contradicts all [our] knowledge 147 of the human being, but
above all they had also refused to accept 148 the second component belonging to the highest good, viz., happiness, as a special object of the human
power of desire. Instead they had made their sage, like a deity in the consciousness of the excellence of his person, entirely independent of nature
(with regard to his satisfaction), exposing him indeed to [the] bad things 149
of life but not subjecting him to them (simultaneously depicting 150 him as
also free from evil). Thus they actually omitted the second element of the
highest good, [one's] own happiness, by positing it merely in acting and in
satisfaction with one's personal worth and thus including it too in the consciousness of one's moral way of thinking—though in this they could have
been sufficiently refuted by the voice of their own nature.
The doctrine of Christianity, 151 even when not yet regarded as religious
doctrine, provides on this point a concept of the highest good (the kingdom
147

[-kenntnis.]

148

[gelten lassen.]

149

[Übeln; 'evil,' below, translates Bösen. See Ak. V, 59 br. n. 259.]

150

[darstellen.]

151

It is commonly supposed that the Christian precept of morals has no advantage,
as regards its purity, over the moral concepts of the Stoics; but the difference between the two is nonetheless quite manifest.3 The Stoic system made consciousness
of fortitude of soul the pivot around which all moral attitudes were to turn; and although its adherents talked about duties and even determined them quite well, they
nonetheless posited the incentive and proper determining basis of the will in an elevation of the way of thinking above the lowly incentives of the senses, which have
powerb only through weakness of soul. Hence virtue was for them a certain heroism
of the sagec who, elevatingd himself above the animal nature of the human being, is
sufficient to himself, and although he propounds duties to others he is himself exalted6 above them and not subject to any temptation to transgress the moral law. All
this, however, they could not have done if they had conceived this law in the [same]
purity and strictness as does the precept of the Gospel. If by an idea I mean a perfection to which nothing can be given adequately in experience, then the moral ideas
are not therefore—like the ideas of speculative reason—something extravagant/
i.e., something of which we cannot even sufficiently determine the concept, or concerning which it is uncertain whether an object corresponds to it at all; rather, the
moral ideas, as archetypes of practical perfection, serve as [the] indispensable
guideline^ of moral conduct and simultaneously as standard^ of comparison. If I
now consider Christian morality* from its philosophical side, then, compared with
the ideas of the Greek schools, it would appear as follows: The ideas of the Cynics,

162

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

of God) which alone is adequate to the strictest demand of practical reason.
The moral law is holy (unforbearing) and demands holiness of morals,152
although any moral perfection that a human being can reach is always only
virtue. Virtue is a lawful153 attitude based on respect for the law, and hence
is a consciousness of a continual propensity to transgression or at least to
impurity,154 i.e., to an admixture of many spurious (not moral) motives for
complying with the law. Hence virtue is a self-esteem combined with humility. Therefore, with regard to the holiness that the Christian law demands, the moral law leaves the creature with nothing but progress ad
infinitum, but precisely therefore also entitles the creature to hope for his
continuance [as] proceeding ad infinitum. The worth of an attitude fully ad-

the Epicureans, the Stoics, and the Christians are [respectively] natural simplicity,
prudence, wisdom,* and holiness. With regard to the path for arriving at them, the
Greek philosophers differed from one another inasmuch as the Cynics found the
common human understanding sufficient for this, the others only the path of science, [but] thus both, after all, the mere use of [our] natural powers^ Christian
morality, because it sets up its precept (as must indeed be done) [as] so pure and unforbearing, deprives the human being of the confidence of being fully adequate to it,
at least here in life,1 but yet also uplifts it again by [the prospect] that if we act as
well as is within our power,™ we can hope that what is not within our power will be
accorded to us from elsewhere, whether or not we know in what way. Aristotle and
Plato differed only with regard to the origin of our moral concepts.
a
[See above, Ak. V, 86.]
b
[macht-.]
c
[der Weise.]
d
[erheben.]
e
[erhaben, which also means 'sublime.' The first edition had erhoben, 'elevated.']
f
[I.e., transcendent: überschwenglich.]
s [Or 'standard': Richtschnur.]
h
[Maßstab.]
• [Moral. Likewise later in this note.]
J [Weisheit.]
k
[Kräfte.]
1
[I follow Vorländer and the Philosophische Bibliothek edition in dropping the comma after
Leben. With the comma present, the sentence reads, ' . . . deprives the human being of the confidence, at least here in life, of being fully adequate to it. .. .']
m
[Or 'ability': Vermögen; likewise below.]
152

[Cf the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 487; also the Grounding for the Metaphysics of
Morals, Ak. IV, 408-09.]
153

[I.e., law-conforming: gesetzmäßig.]

154

[Unlauterkeit. Ordinarily, I use 'purity' for Reinigkeit, and 'pure' for rein.]

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

163

equate155 to the moral law is infinite, because all possible happiness, in the
judgment of a wise and all-powerful distributor of it, has no restriction
other than the lack of adequacy of rational beings to their duty. Yet the
moral law by itself does not promise any happiness; for happiness is not,
according to concepts of a natural order as such, linked necessarily to compliance with that law. Now, Christian morality compensates for that lack (of
the second indispensable component of the highest good) by depicting156
the world in which rational beings dedicate themselves with their whole
soul to the moral law as a kingdom of God, in which nature and morals
come into a harmony, foreign to each by itself, through a holy originator
who makes the derivative highest good157 possible. The holiness of morals
is assigned to rational beings as a standard already in this life; but the wellbeing proportionate to it, i.e., bliss, is conceived as attainable only in an
eternity. For, the former must always be the archetype of their conduct in
any station, and the advance toward it is possible and necessary already in
this life; but the latter, under the name of happiness, cannot (insofar as our
own ability is at issue) be attained in this life at all and hence is made solely
an object of hope. In spite of this, the Christian principle of morality15* is
yet itself not theological (and hence heteronomy); rather, it is autonomy of
pure practical reason by itself, because it makes the cognition of God and of
his will the basis not of these laws but only of [one's] reaching the highest
good under the condition of compliance with these laws, and because it
posits even the proper incentive for compliance with them not in the
wished-for consequences of this compliance but in the conception159 of
duty alone; [for,] the worthiness to acquire those consequences consists
solely in the faithful160 observance of duty.
In this way the moral law, through the concept of the highest good as the
object and the final purpose161 of pure practical reason, leads to religion,

[Or 'commensurate': angemessen.]
[darstellen.]
[See above, Ak. V, 125.]
[Moral]
[Or 'presentation': Vorstellung.]
[treu.]
[Endzweck. See above, Ak. V, 120 br. n. 93.]

129

164

130

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

i.e., to the cognition162 of all duties as divine commands,163 not as sanctions—i.e., chosen164 and by themselves contingent ordinances of another's165 will—but as essential laws of every free will by itself.166 [Even as
such,] these laws must nonetheless be regarded as commands of the
supreme167 being, because we can hope to reach the highest good, which
the moral law makes it our duty to posit as the object of our endeavor, only
through168 a will that is morally perfect (holy and benign) and simultaneously also all-powerful, and thus through harmony with this will. Hence
here, too, everything remains devoid of self-interest169 and based only on
duty, and does not have to170 be based on fear or hope, which, when they
become principles, annihilate the whole moral worth of actions. The moral
law commands me to make the highest possible good in a world the ultimate object of all my conduct. But I cannot hope to bring this good about
except through the harmony of my will with that of a holy and benign originator of the world; and although the concept of the highest good, as that of
a whole in which the greatest happiness is presented as linked in the most
exact proportion with the greatest degree of moral perfection (possible in
creatures), includes also my own happiness, yet the determining basis of the
will that is instructed to further the highest good is not this happiness but
the moral law (which, on the contrary, severely171 restricts my unbounded
longing for happiness to conditions).
Hence, by the same token, morality is properly the doctrine not of how
we are to make ourselves happy but of how we are to 172 become worthy of
162 [ Q r 'recognition': Erkenntnis.

See above, Ak. V, 4 bi\ n. 31.]

163

[Cf. the Critique of Judgment, Ak. V, 481; the Critique of Pure Reason, A 818-19 =
B 846-47; Religion within the Bounds of Reason Alone, Ak. VI, 153; and the Dispute among
the [University's] Schools [Fakultäten], Ak. VII, 36.]
164
165

[willkürlich.]
[fremd.]

166

[Cf. the Metaphysics

167

[höchst, translated as 'highest' in other expressions.]

168

[Kant actually says 'from' (von).]

169

of Morals, Ak. VI, 487.]

[uneigennützig.]

170

[nicht dürfen, which in contemporary German—and sometimes already in Kant as well
(see, e.g., Ak. V, 142 incl. br. n. 280)—means 'must n o t ' C f . above, Ak. V, 30.]
171

[Or 'strictly': streng.]

172

[Or 'ought t o ' : sollen.]

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

165

happiness. Only if religion is added to it does there also enter the hope of
some day coming to partake of happiness to the degree to which we have
taken care not to be unworthy of it.
Someone is worthy of possessing a thing or state when his being in this
possession harmonizes with the highest good. One can readily see now that
all worthiness hinges on moral conduct, because in the concept of the highest good this conduct amounts to the condition of the rest (which pertains to
one's state), viz., one's share in happiness. Now, from this it follows that
morality113 in itself must never be treated as a doctrine of happiness, i.e., as
an instruction for coming to partake of happiness; for it deals solely with the
rational condition (conditio sine qua non)174 of happiness and not with the
means of acquiring it. But when morality (which merely imposes duties and
does not provide us with guidelines for self-interested wishes), has been set
forth completely, then—after the moral wish, based on a law, to further the
highest good (to bring the kingdom of God to us), which could not previously have sprung up in any self-interested soul, has been awakened and for
the sake of this wish the step to religion has been taken—then for the first
time can this doctrine of morals175 also be called a doctrine of happiness, because only with religion does the hope for happiness first arise.
One can also see from this that if one inquires about God's ultimate purpose in creating the world, one must mention not the happiness of rational
beings in the world but the highest good, which adds to that wish of these
beings a condition as well, namely the condition of being worthy of happiness, i.e., the morality of these same rational beings; [for] only this [condition] contains the standard by which alone they can hope to come to partake
of happiness at the hand of a wise originator. For, since wisdom considered
theoretically means the cognition of the highest good, and considered practically it means the adequacy of the will to the highest good, one cannot attribute to a highest self-dependent176 wisdom a purpose that would be based
merely on benignity.117 For, one cannot think the effect of this benignity
(with regard to the happiness of rational beings) as adequate to the highest
original good except under the restricting conditions of harmony with the
173

[Moral; likewise below.]

174

[Indispensable (or necessary) condition.]

175

[Sittenlehre.]

176

[selbständig.]

177

[Gütigkeit.]

166

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

holiness of his will.178 Hence those who have posited the purpose of creation in the glory of God—supposing that this is not thought anthropomorphically, as inclination to be praised—may have found the best expression.
For, nothing glorifies179 God more than what is the most estimable thing180
in the world, viz., respect for his command, observance of the holy181 duty
that his law imposes on us, when this is supplemented by his splendid provision to crown such a beautiful order with commensurate happiness. If the
latter (to speak in the human manner) makes him worthy of love, then he is
by the former an object of worship (adoration). Even human beings can
through beneficence182 indeed acquire love, but through it alone they can
never acquire respect, so that the greatest beneficence does them honor183
only by being exercised in accordance with worthiness.

178

At this point, and in order to make recognizable what is peculiar to these concepts, I add only the following comment. Although one attributes to God various
properties whose quality is found appropriate21 also to creatures except that in God
they are raised to the highest degree—e.g., might, knowledge, presence, benignity,b
etc. under the designations of omnipotence, omniscience, omnipresence, omnibenevolence,c etc.—still there are three that are attributed to God exclusively, yet
without the addition of magnitude, 0 and that are one and all moral: he is the alone
holy one, the alone blessed one, the alone wise one, because these concepts already
carry the unlimitedness with them. According to the order of these properties, he is
thus also the holy legislator* (and creator), the benign governorf (and preserver),
and the just judge—three properties that contain within themselves everything by
which God becomes the object of religion, and commensurately with which the
metaphysical perfections add themselves on their own in reason.
a
[angemessen.]
b
[Respectively, Macht (also translatable as 'power'), Wissenschaft (which also means 'science'), Gegenwart, Güte (which literally means 'goodness' but here connotes moral goodness
and is being used synonymously with Gütigkeit).]
c
[Respectively, Allmacht, Allwissenheit, Allgegenwart, Allgütigkeit (literally, 'omnibenignity').]
d
[Größe.]
e
[Or 'lawgiver' : Cf. above, Ak. V, 20 br. n. 23.]
f
[Or 'ruler': Regierer.]
179

[Or 'honors': ehren. Similarly, 'glory,' above, also means 'honor.']

180

[das Schätzbarste.]

181

[Or 'sacred': heilig. Likewise in the next paragraph.]

182

[Wohltun here, Wohltätigkeit below.]

183

[Ehre.]

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

167

It now follows on its own that in the order of purposes the human being
(and with him every rational being) is a purpose in itself,1*4 i.e., he can
never be used merely as a means by anyone (not even by God) without
being in this at the same time a purpose himself, and that therefore the humanity in our person must be holy to ourselves. For he is the subject1*5 of
the moral law and hence of that which is holy in itself [and] on account of
which and in agreement with which alone anything can indeed be called
holy at all. For, this moral law is based on the autonomy of his will, as a free
will which, according to its universal laws, must necessarily be able at the
same time to agree with that to which it is to subject1*6 itself.

VI
O N THE POSTULATES OF
PURE PRACTICAL REASON AS SUCH
All of these postulates commence from the principle of morality, which is
not a postulate but a law187 by which reason determines the will directly;188
and this will, precisely by being so determined, as a pure will, demands189
these necessary conditions190 of observance of its precept. These postulates
are not theoretical dogmas but presuppositions from a necessarily practical
point of view; hence, although they do not expand theoretical cognition, they
do give objective reality to the ideas of speculative reason in general (by
means of their reference to the practical [sphere]) and entitle it to concepts of
which it could not otherwise presume to assert even the possibility.191

184

[Or 'end in itself : Zweck an sich selbst. For my rendering of Zweck as 'purpose,' see above,
Ak.V,35br. n. 121.]
185

[Subjekt]

186

[unterwerfen.]

187

[See above, Ak.V, 31.]

188

[unmittelbar.]

189

[I.e., postulates, in the original sense of this term. Seethe Critique of Judgment, Ak.V, 468;
and cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 220/B 267 and A 225/B 272.]
190 j-T*he three mentioned in the next paragraph.]
191

[I.e., real, not merely logical, possibility For this distinction, see the Critique of Pure Reason, B xxvi n., A 240-42 incl. 242n, A 596/B 624n.]

168

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

These postulates are those of immortality, of freedom considered positively (as the causality of a being insofar as this being belongs to the intelligible world),192 and of the existence of God. The, first flows from the
practically necessary condition of adequacy of [one's] duration to the complete fulfillment of the moral law; the second, from the necessary presupposition of independence from the world of sense and of the ability to
determine one's will according to the law of an intelligible world, i.e., the
law of freedom;193 the third, from the necessity of the condition for such an
intelligible world, in order for it to be the highest good, through the presupposition of the highest self-dependent194 good, i.e., the existence of God.
The aim at the highest good—an aim necessary because of respect for
the moral law—along with the presupposition, flowing from it, of the objective reality of this good, thus leads through postulates of practical reason
to concepts that speculative reason could indeed set forth as problems but
that it could not solve. Thus, first,195 it leads to the problem in the solution
of which speculative reason could do nothing but commit paralogisms196
(viz., the problem of immortality), because it lacked the characteristic of
permanence by which to supplement the psychological concept of an ultimate subject—a concept that is necessarily ascribed to the soul in self-consciousness—to [yield] a real presentation of a substance. Practical reason
accomplishes this [supplementation] by the postulate of [the] duration required for adequacy to the moral law, [this adequacy being one element] in
the highest good as the whole purpose of practical reason. Second, it197
leads to something of which speculative reason contained nothing but [an]
antinomy19*—whose resolution it could base only on a concept that, although problematically thinkable, was for it not provable and determinable

192

[On freedom in the negative and positive meanings, seeAk. V, 33, cf. 29, 31,42-43,47-48,
133. See also the Critique of Pure Reason, A 553-44, B 581-82; the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 446-47, 452-53, 454-55, 457-58; and the Metaphysics of Morals,
Ak. VI, 213-14, 221, 226.]
193

[See above, Ak. V, 29-30.]

194

[selbständig.]

195

[L, i.e., literally, '1st.' Similarly for 'Second' and 'Third,' below.]

196

[See the Paralogisms of Pure Reason, Critique of Pure Reason, A 341-405/B 399-432.]

197

[I.e., the aim at the highest good: sie.]

198

[See the Antinomy of Pure Reason, Critique of Pure Reason, A 405-567/B 432-595.]

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

169

as regards its objective reality199—viz., [to] the cosmological idea of an intelligible world and the consciousness of our existence therein. It leads to
this by means of the postulate of freedom (the reality of which it200 displays201 through the moral law, and with this law also the law of an intelligible world, [a world] to which speculative reason could only point but the
concept of which it could not determine). Third, it provides with signification what speculative reason could indeed think but had to leave undetermined as a mere transcendental ideal,202 viz. the theological concept of the
original being. It provides this concept with signification (for a practical
aim, i.e., as a condition for the possibility of the object of a will determined
by that law) as the supreme principle of the highest good in an intelligible
world through authoritative203 moral legislation204 therein.
However, is our cognition actually expanded in this way by pure practical reason, and is that which was transcendent for speculative reason immanent in practical reason? Of course, but only for a practical aim.205 For,
indeed, we thereby cognize neither the nature of our soul, nor the intelligible world, nor the supreme206 being as to what they are in themselves, but
have only united the concepts of them in the practical concept of the highest good as the object of our will; and we have done so completely a priori
through pure reason, but only by means of the moral law and also merely in
reference to it, with regard to the object it commands. But how freedom is
even possible and how we are to present this kind of causality theoretically
and positively—into this we do not thereby have insight; rather, that there is
such freedom207 is only being postulated through the moral law and for its
sake.208 The situation is the same with the other ideas: no human under199

[I.e., the applicability of the concept to objects.]

200

[sie. Although grammatically this still refers to the aim at the highest good, Kant may actually be thinking of practical reason itself. Similarly for the 'it' in the sentence beginning
'Third,' below.]
201

[darlegen.]

202

[See the Ideal of Pure Reason, Critique of Pure Reason, A 567-642/B 595-670.]

203

[Literally, 'power-having': gewalthabend.]

204

[Or 'lawgiving': Gesetzgebung. Cf. above, Ak. V, 20 br. n. 23.]

205

[nur in praktischer Absicht.]

206

[höchst, translated as 'highest' in other expressions.]

207

[Or perhaps 'such a causality': eine solche.]

208

[See the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 446-53.]

170

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

standing will ever fathom them as regards their possibility; nor, however,
will any sophistry ever wrest from the conviction of even the commonest
human being that they are not true concepts.

VII
How IT IS POSSIBLE TO THINK AN EXPANSION OF
PURE REASON FOR A PRACTICAL AIM WITHOUT
THEREBY ALSO EXPANDING ITS
COGNITION AS SPECULATIVE209
In order not to get too abstract, we shall answer this question at once as it
applies to the case before us. In order to expand a pure cognition practically, an aim2}0 must be given a priori, i.e., a purpose211 as an object (of the
will) that, independently of all theoretical principles, is presented as practically necessary through an imperative determining the will directly212 (a
categorical imperative); and here this is the highest good. This [good], however, is not possible unless three theoretical concepts are presupposed (for
which, because they are merefly] pure rational concepts, no corresponding
intuition can be found, and hence, by the theoretical path, no objective reality): viz., freedom, immortality, and God. Hence through the practical law,
which commands the existence of the highest good possible in a world, the
possibility213 of those objects of pure speculative reason—the objective reality214 which speculative reason could not secure to them—is postulated.
By this, then, the theoretical cognition of pure reason does of course acquire an increase, which however consists merely in this: that those
concepts, which are otherwise problematic (merely thinkable), are now assertorically declared215 to be concepts to which objects actually belong, because practical reason unavoidably requires the existence of these for the
209

[See above, Ak. V, 55-57 and 119-21.]

210

[Or 'intention': Absicht]

211

[Zweck. See above, Ak. V, 35 br. n. 121.

212

[unmittelbar ]

213

[The real, not just logical, possibility. Cf. above, Ak. V, 132 br. n. 191.]

214

[Of the three concepts.]

2,5

[erklären, which can also mean 'to explicate.']

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

171

possibility of its object, the highest good, which moreover is absolutely
necessary practically, and theoretical reason is thereby entitled to presuppose them. However, this expansion of theoretical reason is not an
expansion of speculation, i.e., no positive use can now be made of it for a
theoretical aim. For since nothing more has been accomplished in this by
practical reason than that those concepts are real and [thus] actually have
their (possible) objects, but nothing is thereby given to us by way of intuition of them (nor, indeed, can be demanded), no synthetic proposition is
possible through this granted reality. Consequently this disclosure does not
help us in the least to expand this cognition of ours for a speculative aim,
but it does indeed do so with regard to the practical use of pure reason.216
The above three ideas of speculative reason are in themselves not yet cognitions; nonetheless, they are (transcendent) thoughts in which there is
nothing impossible. Now, through an apodeictic practical law, as necessary
conditions of the possibility of what this law commands one to make one 's
object,111 they acquire objective reality; i.e., we are instructed by this law
that they have objects, yet without being able to indicate how their concept218 refers to an object. By the same token, this is not yet cognition of
these objects; for, nothing at all concerning them can thereby be judged
synthetically, nor can their application be determined theoretically, and
hence no theoretical use of reason can be made of them at all, [while yet] all
speculative cognition of reason properly consists in such use. Nonetheless,
theoretical cognition, not indeed of these objects but of reason as such, has
thereby been expanded insofar as through the practical postulates those
ideas have after all been given objects, because a merely problematic
thought has thereby for the first time acquired objective reality. This was,
therefore, no expansion of the cognition of given suprasensible objects,219
but still an expansion of theoretical reason and of its cognition with regard
to the suprasensible as such,220 insofar as theoretical reason was compelled
to grant that there are such objects, even though it could not determine
them more closely and hence could not itself expand this cognition of the
216

[Cf. the beginning of the last paragraph at Ak. V, 133.]

217

[sich zum Objekte zu machen.]

218

[Actually, the concept of each of the objects of the three ideas.]

219

[Gegenstände here and below, Objekte (or, in the singular, Objekt) earlier and later in this
paragraph. Kant uses Gegenstand and Objekt interchangeably ]
220

[Or 'in general': überhaupt. See above, Ak. V, 3 br n. 3.]

172

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

objects (which have now been given to it on a practical basis and also only
for practical use). Hence for this increase221 pure theoretical reason, for
which all those ideas are transcendent and without an object, is indebted
solely to its222 pure practical ability. Here these ideas become immanent
and constitutive inasmuch as they are bases for the possibility of making actual the necessary object of pure practical reason (the highest good), while
otherwise they are transcendent and are merely regulative principles of
speculative reason,223 which do not enjoin it to assume a new object beyond
experience but enjoin it only to bring its use in experience closer to completeness. However, once reason is in possession of this increase, it will as
speculative reason (and, in fact, only to secure its practical use) proceed
negatively with these ideas, i.e., not expanding but purifying,224 in order to
forestall on the one hand anthropomorphism as the source of superstition,
or the seeming expansion of those concepts through supposed experience,
and on the other hand fanaticism,225 which promises such expansion
through suprasensible intuition226 or through feelings of that sort.227 All of
these are obstacles to the practical use of pure reason; hence fending them
off does indeed belong to the expansion of our cognition for a practical aim,
while there is no contradiction in simultaneously admitting that for a speculative aim reason has gained nothing whatever by this.
For every use of reason in regard to an object, pure concepts of understanding (categories) are required; without them no object can be thought.
These concepts can be applied to the theoretical use of reason, i.e., to cognition of that sort, only insofar as they are at the same time being based on
intuition (which is always sensible), and hence merely in order to present
through them an object of possible experience. Here, however, ideas of reason, which cannot be given in any experience at all, are what I would have
to think through categories in order to cognize the object. On the other
hand, the concern here is not with theoretical cognition of the objects of

221

[In theoretical cognition.]

222

[Actually, pure reason's.]

223

[See the Critique of Pure Reason, A 642-68/B 670-96.]

224

[läuternd.]

225

[Fanatizismus.]

226

[I.e., intellectual intuition. See above, Ak. V, 31 br. n. 77.]

227

[Cf. the Prolegomena, Ak. IV, 363.]

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

173

these ideas, but only with these ideas' having objects at all. This reality228 is
provided by pure practical reason, and theoretical reason has nothing further to do in this than merely to think those objects through categories; this,
as we have shown distinctly elsewhere, is entirely feasible without need of
intuition (whether sensible or suprasensible), because the categories have
their seat and origin, independently and prior to any intuition, in pure understanding solely as the power229 to think, and they always signify only an
object as such, in whatever way it may be given to us. Now insofar as the
categories are to be applied to those ideas, it is indeed not possible to give
to them an object in intuition. However, that such an object is actual—and
that hence the category as a mere form of thought is here not empty but has
signification—is sufficiently assured to them through an object that practical reason indubitably offers in the concept of the highest good, [viz.,] the
reality of the concepts that are required for the possibility of the highest
good, without however bringing about through this increase the slightest
expansion of cognition according to theoretical principles.
If thereupon these ideas of God, of an intelligible world (the kingdom of
God), and of immortality are determined through predicates taken from our
own nature, then this determination must be regarded neither as a making
sensible™ of those pure ideas of reason ([i.e., as] anthropomorphisms) nor
as an extravagant231 cognition of suprasensible objects. For, these properties are no others than understanding and will, considered moreover as so
related toward232 each other as they must be thought in the moral law, hence
only insofar as a pure practical use is made of them. One is then abstracting
from everything else that attaches to these concepts psychologically, i.e.,
insofar as we observe these powers of ours empirically in their exercise
(e.g., that the human being's understanding is discursive, that his presentations are therefore thoughts rather than intuitions, that these follow one another in time, that his will is always encumbered by a dependence of [its]
satisfaction on the existence of its object, etc.—which cannot be so in the
supreme being). Thus what remains of the concepts through which we
228

[I.e., the applicability of the ideas to objects.]

229

[Or 'ability': Vermögen.]

230
231
232

[Versinnlichung.]

[I.e., transcendent: überschwenglich.]
[gegen.]

174

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

[then] think a pure being of the understanding 233 is nothing more than
exactly what is required for the possibility of thinking a moral law. Hence
there remains indeed a cognition of God, but only in a practical reference, so
that, if we attempt to expand it to a theoretical cognition, we get an understanding of his that does not think but intuits,234 a will that is directed to objects on whose existence its satisfaction does not in the least depend (I shall
not even mention the transcendental predicates, such as, e.g., a magnitude of
existence, i.e., duration, which however does not occur in time, although
time is for us the only possible means of presenting existence as magnitude).
All of these are properties of which we can frame no concept at all that
would be suitable for cognition of the object; and this teaches us that they
can never be used for a theory of suprasensible beings, and that hence on this
[theoretical] side they cannot at all be the basis of a speculative cognition 235
but rather restrict their use solely to the carrying out of the moral law.
This latter [point] 236 is so obvious and can be proved so clearly through
the deed, 237 that one can confidently challenge all supposed natural theologians23* (an odd name) 2 3 9 to mention (beyond the merely ontological pred233

[I.e., a noumenon: Verstandeswesen. See the Critique of Pure Reason, B 306-07, and cf
A 562-63 = B 590-91.]
234

[On an intuitive understanding (whose intuitions are thus intellectual), see above, Ak. 31 br.
n. 77.]
235

[See the Critique of Pure Reason, A 631-42 = B 659-70, A 685-702 = B 713-30.]

236

[That the previously mentioned properties are not suitable for cognition of the object, thus
can never be used for a theory of suprasensible beings, and hence cannot on the theoretical side
be the basis of a speculative cognition.]
237

[Or 'through action' (such as the action that Kant goes on to mention): durch die Tat. See
above, Ak. V, 3 br. n. 11.]
238

239

[Literally, 'scholars of God': Gottesgelehrte.]

Scholarship* is, properly, only the sumb of historical sciences. Consequently
only the teacher0 of revealed theologyd can be called a [scholar of God or] theologian? But if one wanted to call even someone who is in possession of rational sciences (mathematics and philosophy) a scholar/ although this would conflict with
the word's very meaning (which classes with scholarship only what one must definitely be taughtë and hence cannot discover on one's own, through reason), then the
philosopher with his cognition of God as positive science might indeed cut too poor
a figure to allow himself to be called a scholar on that account.
a
[In the basic sense, as meaning 'learning': Gelehrsamkeit.]
b [Inbegriff.]
c
[Lehrer.]

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

175

icates) even one property determining this object of theirs—say, that of the
understanding or the will—of which one could not incontestably establish
that, if everything anthropomorphic is separated from it, we are left only
with the mere word, without being able to link therewith the least concept
by which we might hope for an expansion of theoretical cognition. With regard to the practical, however, there nonetheless still remains to us, of the
properties of understanding and will, the concept of a relation that the practical law (which a priori determines precisely this relation of the understanding to the will) provides with objective reality. Now, once this has
occurred, reality is also given to the concept of the object of a morally
determined will (to the concept of the highest good) and with it to the conditions of its240 possibility, [i.e.,] to the ideas of God, freedom, and immortality, but always only in reference to the carrying out of the moral law (not
on any speculative behalf).
After these reminders it is now also easy to find the answer to this important question: whether the concept of God is one belonging to physics
(hence also to metaphysics, which only contains the pure a priori principles
of physics in their universal signification) or one belonging to morality.1AX
To explain arrangements of nature or the change in them, if in doing so242
one resorts to God as the originator of all things, is at any rate not a physical explanation, and is definitely a confession that one has come to the end
of one's philosophy, because one is compelled to assume something of
which by itself one otherwise has no concept, in order to be able to frame a
concept of the possibility of what one sees before one's eyes.243 But to get,
by means of metaphysics, from acquaintance with this world to the concept
of God and to the proof of his existence by safe inferences is impossible; for

d

[Theologie.]
[Gottesgelehrter.]
f
[I.e., 'learned person': Gelehrter.]
g
[gelehrt.]
e

240

[I.e., this object's.]

241

[Moral.]

242

[Here 'in doing so' translates da.]

243

[For Kant's refutation of the teleological (physicotheological) proof (i.e., the argument
from design), see the Critique of Pure Reason, A 620-30 = B 648-58, and above all the Critique of Judgment, Ak. V, 385-485, esp. 436-42, 461-66, and 476-85. See also The Only
Possible Basis of Proof for Demonstrating the Existence of God, Ak. II, 116-37, and cf.
160-62.]

176

139

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

in order to say that this world was possible only through a God (as we must
think this concept), we would have to cognize it as the most perfect whole
possible and hence—in order to do so—cognize all possible worlds (so as
to be able to compare them with this one), and hence would have to be omniscient.244 However, to cognize the existence of this being altogether from
mere concepts is absolutely impossible. For, any existential proposition—
i.e., one that says, concerning a being of which I frame a concept, that it exists—is a synthetic proposition, i.e., one by which I go beyond that concept
and say more concerning it than was thought in the concept: viz., that for
this concept in the understanding there is posited correspondingly also an
object outside the understanding, which it is manifestly impossible to make
out245 through any inference.246 Thus there remains for reason only one single procedure by which to arrive at this cognition, viz., where as pure reason, starting from the supreme principle of its pure practical use (inasmuch
as this principle is directed anyway merely to the existence of something as
a consequence of reason), it determines its object. And there, in its unavoidable problem, namely that of the necessary directing of the will to the highest good, there manifests itself not only the necessity of assuming such an
original being in reference to the possibility of this good in the world, but—
what is most noteworthy—something that the advance of reason on the path
of nature lacked entirely, viz., a precisely determined concept of this original being. Since we can be acquainted with this world only in small part,
still less can compare it with all possible worlds, we can indeed from its
order, purposiveness, and magnitude infer a wise, benign, powerful,247 etc.
originator of it, but not his omniscience, omnibenevolence, omnipotence,14*
and so on. It may also quite readily be granted that one is authorized249 to
compensate for that unavoidable lack by a permitted, entirely reasonable
hypothesis, viz., that if in as many items250 as offer themselves to our closer
244 [ p o r K a n t ' s refutation of the cosmological proof, see the Critique of Pure
A 6 0 3 - 1 4 = B 6 3 1 - 4 2 ; also the Critique of Judgment, 4 7 5 - 4 7 6 , and cf. 473.]
245

Reason,

[herausbringen.]

246 | p o r Kant's refutation of the ontological proof, see the Critique of Pure Reason, A 5 9 2 - 6 0 2

= B 620-30; also the Critique of Judgment, 475-476, and cf. 473.]
247

[Respectively, weise, gütig, mächtig (literally, 'mighty').]

248

[Respectively, Allwissenheit, Allgütigkeit (literally, 'omnibenignity'), Allmacht.]

™ [befugt]
250

[Or 'components' : Stücke.]

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

177

acquaintance [we find] wisdom, benignity, etc., shining forth, it will be the
same in all the others, and that it is therefore reasonable to attribute all possible perfection to the originator of the world. However, these are not inferences through which we can pride251 ourselves on our insight, but only
authorized moves252 that may be overlooked but that still require recommendation from elsewhere in order for us to use them. Therefore on the empirical path (of physics) the concept of God remains always a concept—of
the perfection of the primary253 being—not determined precisely [enough]
to be considered adequate to the concept of a deity. (With metaphysics in its
transcendental part, however, nothing at all can be accomplished.)
I now attempt to hold this concept up to the object of practical reason,
and I then find that the moral principle admits this concept as possible only
on the presupposition of an originator of the world who has the highest perfection. He must be omniscient, in order to cognize my conduct even to my
innermost attitudes in all possible cases and throughout the future; omnipotent, in order to assign to this conduct the appropriate consequences; likewise omnipresent, eternal, etc. Hence the moral law, through the concept
of the highest254 good, determines the concept of the original being as
supreme being; the physical (and, pursued higher, the metaphysical) and
thus the entire speculative course of reason was unable to bring this about.
Therefore the concept of God is one belonging originally not to physics,
i.e., to speculative reason, but to morality,255 and the same can also be said
of the other concepts of reason with which we earlier dealt as postulates of
reason in its practical use.
If in the history of Greek philosophy we find no distinct traces of a pure
rational theology before256 Anaxagoras, the reason257 for this is not that the
more ancient philosophers lacked the understanding and the insight to raise
themselves to it by the path of speculation, at least with the aid of an entirely reasonable hypothesis; [for,] what could have been easier, what more
natural, than the thought offering itself on its own to everyone, to assume—
251

[dünken.]

252

[Befugnisse.]

253

[Or 'first': erste.]

254

[höchst, translated as 'supreme' below.]

255

[Moral]

256

[Literally, 'beyond': über. . . hinaus.]

257

[Grund.]

140

178

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

instead of indeterminate degrees of perfection of various causes of the
world—a single rational one having all perfection? But the bad things258 in
the world seemed to them to be objections far too important to consider
themselves entitled to such a hypothesis. Hence those philosophers showed
understanding and insight precisely in not permitting themselves this hypothesis and instead searching around among the natural causes [to see] if
they could not find among them the characteristic259 and abilities required
for original beings. But once this acute people had advanced in its investigations so far as to treat philosophically even moral objects, about which
other peoples had never done more than chatter, they first discovered a new
need, namely a practical one, which did not fail to indicate to them determinately the concept of the original being.260 In this, speculative reason
could only look on; at most it still had the merit of adorning a concept not
grown on its soil and of furthering—with a retinue of confirmations from
the contemplation of nature that now for the first time came to the fore—not
indeed the concept's authority261 (which was already established), but instead only the pageantry of supposed theoretical insight of reason.
By these reminders the reader of the critique of pure speculative reason will
completely convince himself how extremely necessary, how profitable for
theology and morality, was that laborious deduction of the categories.262
For if one posits the categories in pure understanding, only that deduction
can keep one from considering them, with Plato,263 to be innate and from
basing on them extravagant pretensions of theories of the suprasensible—
[theories] of which there is no end in sight—thus turning theology into a
magic lantern of chimeras; or, on the other hand, if one considers the categories to be acquired, only the deduction can keep one from restricting,
with Epicurus,264 each and every use of them, even that for a practical aim,
merely to objects and determining bases of the senses. As it is,265 however,
258
259

[Übel. See above, Ak. V, 59 br. n. 259.]
[Beschaffenheit]

260

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 452-53 = B 880-81.]

261

[Ansehen.]

262

[See the Critique of Pure Reason, A 95-130/B 124-69.]

263

[Cf. ibid., A 313-20/B 370-77, A 853-54 = B 881-82.]

264

[Cf ibid, A 471-72 = B 500, A 853-54 = B 881-82 ]

265

[Nun.]

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

179

in that deduction the Critique proved, first, that the categories are not of empirical origin but have their seat and source a priori in pure understanding;
and also, second, that since they are referred to objects as such,266 independently of the intuition thereof, they indeed bring about theoretical cognition
only when applied to empirical objects. But yet [we now see, this having
been proved,] that when they are applied to an object given through pure
practical reason, they also serve for [our] determinate thinking of the
suprasensible, although only insofar as this [suprasensible] is being determined merely through such predicates as belong necessarily to the pure
[and] a priori given practical aim and to the possibility thereof. Pure reason's speculative restriction and its practical expansion first bring reason
into that relation261 of equality in which reason can be used purposively at
all;268 and this example proves better than any other that the path to wisdom,
if it is to become safe and not impassable or misleading, must for us human
beings unavoidably pass through science; but that science leads to this
goal—of this we can become convinced only after it is completed.

VIII
ON ASSENT

269

FROM A NEED OF PURE REASON

A need of pure reason in its speculative use leads only to hypotheses; but
that of pure practical reason, to postulates. For in the first case I ascend
from the derivative as high up in the series of bases as I will,210 and need an
original basis not in order to provide the derivative (e.g., the causal linkage
of things and [of] changes in the world) with objective reality but only in
order to satisfy my investigating reason completely with regard to it. Thus I
see before me order and purposiveness in nature, and I do not need to proceed to speculation in order to assure myself of their actuality, but need
only, in order to explain them, to presuppose a deity as their cause; and

266 [Or ' j n general': überhaupt.
267

See above, Ak. V, 3 br. n. 3.]

[Or 'proportion' : Verhältnis.]

268

[Or, possibly, 'in which reason as such can be used purposively': worin Vernunft überhaupt
zweckmäßig gebraucht werden kann.]
269

[Literally, 'considering-true': Fürwahrhalten. On this section, cf. On Opinion, Knowledge,
and Faith, Critique of Pure Reason, A 820-31 = B 848-59.]
270

[wie ich will (which can also mean 'as I want to'); cf. below, near the end of the paragraph.]

180

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

thus, because an inference from an effect to a determinate cause—above all
to so precisely and so completely determined a cause as we have to think in
[the case of] God—is always unsafe and precarious, such a presupposition
cannot be brought further than to the degree of [being] for us human beings
the most reasonable opinion of all.271 By contrast, a need of pure practical
reason is based on a duty to make something (the highest good) the object
of my will in order to further it with all my powers; in doing so, however, I
must presuppose the possibility of this [highest good], and hence also the
conditions for this, viz., God, freedom, and immortality, because I cannot
prove these—although also not refute them—by my speculative reason.
This duty is based on a law that is indeed independent of these latter presuppositions and apodeictically certain, namely the moral law, and is to this
extent not in need of any further support by a theoretical opinion concerning the intrinsic character272 of things, the secret aim273 of the world order,
or a governor274 presiding over it, in order to obligate us most perfectly to
unconditionally lawful275 actions.276 But the subjective effect of this law,
viz., the attitude, adequate to it and also necessary through it, to further the
practically possible highest good, nonetheless presupposes at least that this
good is possible; otherwise striving for the object277—of a concept that
basically would be empty and without an object—would be impossible
practically. Now, the above postulates pertain only to the physical or metaphysical conditions—in a word, those lying in the nature of things—for the
271

But even here we could not plead a need of reason* if there did not lie before us
a problematic but yet unavoidable concept of reason, viz., that of an absolutely necessary being. Now, this concept requiresb to be determined, and this, when the urge
toward expansion [of cognition] is added, is the objective basis of a need of speculative reason, viz., to determine more closely the concept of a necessary being that is
to serve others as original basis, and thus to make this being recognizable through
something. Without such prior necessary problems there are no needs, at least not of
pure reason, the others being needs of inclination.
a
b

[Bedürfnis der Vernunft.']
[Literally, 'wants*: will.]

272

[Beschaffenheit.]

273

[Abzweckung.]

274

[Or 'ruler': Regierer.]

275

[I.e., law-conforming: gesetzmäßig.]

276

[See the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 486-91.]

277

[The object of the will, i.e., the highest good.]

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

181

possibility of the highest good, but for the sake not of a discretionary speculative aim but of a practically necessary purpose of the pure rational will.
Here this will does not choose™ but rather obeys an unremitting command
of reason. This command has its basis objectively in the character of things
as these must be judged279 universally by pure reason, and is by no means
based on inclination, which is in no way entitled immediately to assume,
for the sake of what we wish on merely subjective bases, that the means to
it are possible, or perhaps even that the object is actual. This is, therefore, a
need for an absolutely necessary aim, and it justifies its presupposition not
merely as a permitted hypothesis, but as a postulate for a practical aim; and,
granted that the pure moral law unremittingly obligates everyone as a command (not as a rule of prudence), the righteous person may indeed say: I
will that there be a God, that my existence in this world be even apart from
the natural connection also an existence in a pure world of understanding,
and finally that my duration be endless; I abide by this, and shall not let this
faith be taken from me; for, this is the only [case] where my interest, because I must not280 remit anything of it, unavoidably determines my judgment, without paying attention to subtle reasonings,281 however little I may
be able to answer them or oppose them with more plausible ones.282

278

[wählen.]

279

[beurteilt. See above, Ak. V, 8 br. n. 78.]

280

[nicht. . . darf]

281

[Vernünfteleien.]

282

In the Deutsches Museum, February 1787, there is a treatise by a very fine and
bright mind,a the late Wizenmann,h whose early death is to be lamented, in which he
disputes [our] authority to make an inference from a need to the objective reality of
its object; and he elucidates his pointc by the example of a man in love, who, having
become infatuated with an idea of beauty that is merely his [own] chimera, wanted
to infer that such an object actually exists somewhere. I grant that he is perfectly
right on this in all cases where the need is based on inclination, which cannot, even
for the one assailed by it, postulate necessarily the existence of its object, much less
contains a demand valid for everyone, and hence is a merely subjective basis of
wishes. Here, on the other hand, a rational need0 arising from an objective determining basis of the will, namely from the moral law, is what necessarily obligates
every rational being and therefore entitles [us] a priori to presuppose the conditions
adequate to it in nature and makes these inseparable from the complete practical use
of reason. It is a duty to make the highest good actual to the utmost of our ability;
thus this good must, after all, also be possible, and hence for every rational being in

182

144

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

In order to prevent misinterpretation in the use of a concept still so unaccustomed as is that of a pure practical rational faith, I may be permitted to
add a further comment. It might almost seem as if this rational faith is here
itself proclaimed to be a command, viz., to assume the highest good to be
possible. But a faith that is commanded is an absurdity. One must remember, however, the above discussion of what is required to be assumed in the
concept of the highest good, and one will then become aware that assuming
this possibility does not need283 to be commanded at all and demands no
practical attitudes to grant this possibility, but that practical reason must
admit it without solicitation; for, surely no one can wish to maintain that a
worthiness—commensurate to the moral law—of rational beings in the
world to be happy, as combined with a possession of happiness proportionate to this worthiness, is in itself impossible. Now with regard to the first
component284 of the highest good, viz., as far as morality is concerned, the
moral law gives us merely a command, and to doubt the possibility of this
constituent285 would be tantamount to casting doubt on the moral law itself.
But as far as the second component of that object286 is concerned, viz., the
the world it is also unavoidable to presuppose what is necessary for the objective
possibility of this good. This presupposition is as necessary as the moral law, and is
moreover valid only in reference to it.
a
[Kopf.]
b
[Thomas Wizenmann (1759-87), a close friend and ally of Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi in
the latter's dispute with Mendelssohn (see above, Ak. V, 101 br. n. 509), joined the controversy
with his Die Resultate der Jacobi'sehen und Mendelssohn'sehen Philosophie, kritisch untersucht von einem Freywilligen {The Results of Jacobi's and Mendelssohn's Philosophy, Critically Investigated by a Volunteer), published anonymously in Leipzig in 1786; reprinted, with
an epilogue by Rainer Wild (Hildesheim: Gerstenberg, 1984). Kant, in commenting on the
controversy in his treatise {Berliner Monatsschrift, in October 1786; and see Ak. VIII,
140-47) Was heißt: Sich im Denken orientieren? {What Does It Mean: to Orient Oneself in
[One 's] Thought? ), referred to Wizenmann as the "acute author of the Resultate." Wizenmann
then responded in turn with the treatise {Deutsches Museum, February 1787) to which Kant
here refers, viz., An den Herrn Professor Kant von dem Verfasser der Resultate Jacobi 'scher
und Mendelssohn'scher Philosophie {To Professor Kant, from the Author of the Results of Jacobi's and Mendelssohn's Philosophy).]
c
[Gegenstand.]
d
[Vernunftbedürfnis.]
283

[nicht. . . dürfe. Cf. 'not in need' later in this paragraph; and see above, Ak. V, 129 br. n.
170.]

284

[Stück.]

285

[Of the highest good: Bestandstück.]

286

[I.e., of the highest good.]

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

183

happiness commensurate to that worthiness, the granting of its possibility
as such is indeed not in need of a command at all, since theoretical reason
itself has nothing against it; only the manner in which we are to think such
a harmony of the laws of nature with those of freedom has something about
it in regard to which a choice287 belongs to us, because concerning it theoretical reason decides nothing with apodeictic certainty, and with regard to
this manner there can be a moral interest that turns the scale.
I had said above that according to a mere course of nature in the world
[a] happiness precisely commensurate to the moral worth is not to be expected288 and is to be considered impossible, and that therefore from this
standpoint the possibility of the highest good can be granted only on the
presupposition of a moral originator of the world. I deliberately delayed restricting this judgment to the subjective conditions of our reason so as first
to make use of this [restriction] only when the manner of [reason's] assent289 was to be determined more closely. In fact, the mentioned impossibility is merely subjective, i.e., our reason finds it impossible for it to make
comprehensible to itself, according to a mere course of nature, a connection290 so precisely commensurate and thoroughly purposive between two
events of the world that occur according to such different laws, even
though—as with everything else in nature that is purposive—it yet also cannot prove, i.e., establish sufficiently from objective bases, that this connection is impossible according to universal laws of nature.
Now, however, a basis of decision291 of a different kind292 comes into
play in order to turn the scale in speculative reason's wavering. The command to further the highest good has an objective basis (in practical
reason); this good's possibility as such likewise has an objective basis (in
theoretical reason, which has nothing against it). But as to the manner in
which we are to conceive this possibility, whether according to natural laws
without a wise originator presiding over nature or only on the presupposition of such an originator, reason cannot decide this objectively. Now, here
287

[Wahl]

288

[See above, Ak. V, 22-26, and cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV,
395-96.]

289

[Literally, 'considering-true': Fürwahrhalten.]

290

[Or 'coherence': Zusammenhang.]

291
292

[Entscheidungsgrund.]
[Art, also translated as 'manner' above and below.]

184

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

a subjective condition of reason enters, [viz.,] the only manner theoretically
possible for reason, and at the same time conducive to morality (which is
subject to an objective law of reason), of thinking the precise harmony of
the kingdom293 of nature with the kingdom of morals, as condition for the
possibility of the highest good. Now, the furtherance of this good and therefore the presupposition of its possibility are objectively necessary (though
only as a consequence of practical reason); but the manner as to how294 we
want to think it as possible rests within our choice, in which however a free
interest of pure practical reason decides for the assumption of a wise originator of the world. [Therefore] the principle which determines our judgment in this is the basis—subjectively indeed as a need, but simultaneously
also as a means of furthering what is objectively (practically) necessary—
of a maxim of assent for a moral aim, i.e., a pure practical rational faith.
This faith, therefore, is not commanded; rather, as a voluntary295 determination of our judgment, conducive to the moral (commanded) aim and also
accordant with the theoretical need of reason to assume that existence296
and to base thereon the further use of reason, it has itself arisen from the
moral attitude. Thus [we find] repeatedly [that] even in well-meaning297
people this faith can sometimes fall into wavering, but never into lack of faith.298

IX
ON THE WISELY COMMENSURATE PROPORTION299
OF THE HUMAN BEING'S COGNITIVE POWERS
TO HIS PRACTICAL VOCATION
If human nature's vocation is 300 to strive toward the highest good, then the
measure of its cognitive powers, above all their proportion301 to one an293

[Or 'realm': Reich. Likewise below.]

294

[die Art, aufweiche

295
296
297

Weise.]

[freiwillig.]
[Of a wise originator of the world.]
[wohlgesinnt.]

298

[Unglaube.]

299

[Proportion.]

300 [ Q r 'determination is': bestimmt ist.]
30i [Qj. 'relation': Verhältnis.]

CHAPTER II CONCEPT OF THE HIGHEST GOOD

185

other, must also be assumed to be fitting for this purpose. However, the critique of pure speculative reason proves this power's utmost inadequacy for
solving, commensurately302 with this purpose, the most important problems
put before it. Even so, that critique does not fail to recognize this same reason's natural hints—not to be overlooked—as well as the great steps that
this power can take in order to approach this great goal that is marked out
for it. However, speculative reason can never reach this goal by itself, even
with the aid of the greatest cognition of nature. Thus nature here seems to
have provided for us only in a stepmotherly way with a power required for
our purpose.
Supposing now that nature had here been compliant to our wish and had
conferred on us that capacity for insight or that illumination303 which we
would like to possess or which some perhaps even fancy themselves actually possessing, what, presumably, would be the consequence of this, as far
as one can tell? Unless our entire nature were at the same time transformed,
the inclinations, which, after all, always have the first word, would first demand their satisfaction and, combined with reasonable deliberation, their
greatest possible and lasting satisfaction under the name of happiness;
thereafter the moral law would speak, in order to keep the inclinations
within their fitting limits and even to subject them, one and all, to a higher
purpose that takes no account of any inclination.304 But instead of the conflict that the moral attitude now has to carry on with the inclinations, in
which—after some defeats—moral fortitude of soul is yet gradually to be
acquired, God and eternity with their dreadful majesty would lie unceasingly before our eyes (for, as regards certainty, what we can perfectly
prove305 counts306 as much for us as what we assure ourselves of as manifest to the eye). Transgression of the law would indeed be avoided; what is
commanded would be done.307 However, the attitude from which actions
ought to be done cannot likewise be instilled by any command, and the spur
to activity is in this [case] immediately at hand and external, and thus reason does not first need to work itself up in order to gather strength to resist

[Or 'adequately': angemessen.]
[Or 'enlightenment' (the standard rendering for Aufklarung)'. Erleuchtung.]
[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 395-96.]
[Viz., God and (our) eternity.]
[gelten ]
[getan here, geschehen above.]

186

148

PART I ELEMENTS

BOOK II DIALECTIC

inclinations by vividly presenting the dignity of the law. Therefore most
lawful308 actions would be done from fear, only a few from hope, and none
at all from duty; and a moral worth of actions—on which alone, after all,
the worth of the person and even that of the world hinges in the eyes of the
highest wisdom—would not exist at all. The conduct of human beings, as
long as their nature remained as it is, would thus be converted into a mere
mechanism, where, as in a puppet show,309 everything would gesticulate
well but there would still be no life in the figures. However,310 it is311 quite
different with us. With all the endeavor of our reason we have only a very
obscure and ambiguous outlook into the future; the governor of the world
allows us only to conjecture his existence and splendor, not to behold them
or clearly prove them. On the other hand, the moral law in us, without
promising us anything with assurance, or threatening us,312 demands of us
respect devoid of self-interest;313 but otherwise, when this respect has become active and prevalent,314 only then and only thereby does this law grant
us outlooks into the kingdom315 of the suprasensible, and even this only
with feeble glances. Thus there can be a truly moral attitude, dedicated directly to the moral law, and a rational creature can become worthy of that
share in the highest good which is commensurate with the moral worth of
his person and not merely with his actions. Thus what the study of nature
and of the human being teaches us sufficiently elsewhere may well be correct here also, viz., that the inscrutable316 wisdom through which we exist is
not less worthy of veneration in what it has refused us than in what it has allotted us.

308

[I.e., law-conforming: gesetzmäßig.]

309

{Marionettenspiel. Cf. above, Ak. V, 101.]

310

[Nun.]

311

[beschaffen ist.]

312

[I follow Natorp and the Akademie edition—rather than Vorländer and the Philosophische
Bibliothek edition—in retaining the comma before ohne zu drohen. I do so in part because drohen, like 'threaten,' is intransitive, so that 'anything,' the object of verheißen ('promising'),
cannot also be its object.]
313

[uneigennützige.]

314

[herrschend.]

315

[Or 'realm': Reich.]

316

[unerjcorschlich.]

CRITIQUE OF PRACTICAL REASON
PART II
DOCTRINE OF THE METHOD
OF
PURE PRACTICAL REASON

149

METHOD OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

189

By the doctrine of the method of pure practical reason one cannot mean the
way of proceeding (in meditation1 as well as in exposition2) with pure practical principles with a view to a scientific cognition of them; ordinarily this
alone is properly called method in the theoretical [sphere] (for, popular
cognition requires a manner? but science requires a method, i.e., a procedure according to principles of reason, through which alone the manifold of
a cognition can become a system).4 Rather, by this doctrine of method is
meant the way in which one can impart to the laws of pure practical reason
admittance to the human mind and influence on that mind's maxims, i.e.,
the way in which one can make objectively practical reason subjectively
practical as well.
Now, it is indeed clear that those determining bases of the will which
alone make maxims properly moral5 and give them a moral worth—viz.,
direct6 presentation of the law, and objectively necessary compliance with it
as duty—must be presented as the proper incentives to action, because
otherwise legality of actions would indeed be brought about, but not morality of attitudes.7 But not so clear, and instead at first glance quite improbable, must it seem to everyone that subjectively too this exhibition of pure
virtue can have more power over the human mind, and can provide a far
stronger incentive—to bring about even that legality of actions and to give
rise to more forceful decisions to prefer the law, from pure respect for it, to
any other concern8—than can ever be produced9 by any enticements,10
those [arising] from pretenses of gratification and in general from every1

[Nachdenken.]

2

[Vortrag.]

3

[Manier.]

4

[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 707-08 = B 735-36.]

5

[moralisch here, sittlich below.]

6

[unmittelbar.]

7

[See above, Ak. V, 72; cf. also the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 411-12,
and the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 219.]
8

[Rücksicht.]

9

[wirken.]

10

[Cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 394-96.]

190

PART II METHOD

thing that may be classed with happiness, or for that matter produced by
any threats of pain and bad things.11 Yet this is actually the case, and if
human nature were not so constituted, then no way of presenting the law
through circuities12 and commending means would ever give rise to morality of attitude either. Everything would be sheer hypocrisy; the law would
be hated or perhaps even despised, although still complied with for the sake
of one's own advantage. The letter of the law (legality) could be found in
our actions, but the spirit of the law could not be found at all in our attitudes
(morality); and since with all our endeavor we still could not entirely detach
ourselves from reason in our judgment, we would unavoidably have to appear in our own eyes as worthless, depraved human beings. [We would so
appear to ourselves] even if we sought to compensate ourselves for this
mortification [suffered] before the inner tribunal by taking delight in the
gratifications that, according to our delusion, a supposed natural or divine
law had linked with the machinery13 of its police—a police that is guided
merely by what one does, without worrying about the motives from which
one does it.
To be sure, it cannot be denied that in order to bring either a still unmolded14 or a brutified15 mind onto the track of the morally good in the first
place, some preparatory guidance16 is needed to entice it with its own advantage or scare it with harm. But as soon as this machinery, these leading
strings, have had even some effect, the pure moral motive must definitely be
applied to17 the soul. This motive—not just because it is the only one that
can be the basis of a character (a consistent practical way of thinking according to unchangeable maxims), but also because it teaches the human
being to feel his own dignity—gives to his mind a power,18 unexpected
even by himself, to tear himself away from all sensible attachment insofar
as this attachment wants to become dominant, and to find rich compensation for the sacrifices that he makes in the independence of his intelligible
11

[Übel. See above, Ak. V, 59 br. n. 259.]

12

[Umschweife.]

13

[Maschinenwesen here, Maschinenwerk below.]

14

[ungebildet.]

15

[More literally, 'turned wild': verwildert.]

16

[Anleitungen.]

17

[an . . . bringen; likewise below.]

18

[Kraft, also translated as 'force' below.]

METHOD OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

191

nature and the greatness of soul to which he sees himself destined.19 We
shall therefore prove, by observations that anyone can perform, that this
property of our mind, this receptivity to a pure moral interest and hence the
motive force of the pure presentation of virtue, when it is duly applied to
the human heart, is the most powerful20 and—when a lasting and meticulous compliance with moral maxims is at issue—the only incentive to the
good.21 It must also be remembered here, however, that if these observations prove only the actuality of such a feeling but not any moral improvement brought about by it, this does not impair22 the only method of making
the objectively practical laws of pure reason subjectively practical merely
through [one's] pure presentation of duty, just as if this method were an
empty fantasy. For since this method has never yet been initiated,23 experience also cannot yet show anything of its result; rather, one can demand
only documentation24 of the receptivity to such incentives; this I shall now
briefly put forth, and shall then outline in a few words the method of founding and cultivating genuine moral attitudes.
If one attends to the course of conversations in mixed companies25 that
consist not merely of scholars and subtle reasoners26 but also of business
people or women, one notices that besides recounting27 and jesting, another entertainment has its place in them, namely arguing;28 for recounting,
if it is to have novelty and with it interest, is soon exhausted, and jesting
easily becomes insipid. Among all [kinds of] arguing, however, there is
none that more arouses the participation29 of persons who are otherwise
soon bored with all subtle reasoning, and brings a certain liveliness into the
company, than that about the moral worth of this or that action, by which
19

[bestimmen.]

20

[Or 'the mightiest': die mächtigste.]

21

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 377-78.]

22

[Abbruch tun. See above, Ak. V, 25 br. n. 44.]

23

[More literally, 'set in motion': in Gang gebracht.]

24

[Beweistümer.]

25

[Or 'parties': Gesellschaften.]

26

[Vernünftler. Below, 'subtle reasoning' similarly renders Vernünfteln.]

27

[Erzählen.]

28

[Literally, 'reasoning': Räsonnieren.]

29

[Beitritt.]

192

PART II METHOD

the character of some person is to be established. Those to whom otherwise
everything subtle and meditative30 in theoretical questions is dry and irksome will soon participate31 when the issue is to establish the moral import32 of a good or evil action that has been recounted; and they are then so
precise, so meditative, so subtle in excogitating everything that could diminish or even just make suspect the purity of the intention—and hence the
degree of virtue in it—as one does not otherwise expect of them in the case
of any object of speculation. In these judgments33 the character of the person himself who is judging others can often be seen shining forth. Some
seem especially inclined, since they exercise their judicial office above all
upon deceased persons, to defend the good that is recounted concerning this
or that deed of the deceased persons against any mortifying objections of
impurity,34 and ultimately to defend the entire moral worth of the person
against the reproach of dissimulation and secret malice.35 Others, on the
contrary, [incline] more to thinking up charges and accusations to challenge
that worth. Yet one cannot always attribute to the latter the intention of trying to subtly reason virtue away entirely from all examples36 of human beings in order thereby to turn virtue into an empty name. Rather, it is often
only a well-meant strictness in determining genuine moral import according to an unforbearing law—[a law]37 through comparison with which,
instead of with examples, self-conceit in the moral [sphere] sinks greatly
and humility is by no means only taught but is, upon keen self-examination,
felt by everyone. Nonetheless, one can usually see by the look38 of those
who defend the purity39 of intention in given examples, that, where this purity has the presumption of righteousness on its side, they would like to
30

[alles Subtile und Grüblerische.]

31

[Or 'join in': beitreten.]

32

[Gehalt.]

33

[Beurteilungen. See above, Ak. V, 8 br. n. 78.]

34

[Unlauterkeit. Ordinarily, including both earlier and later in this paragraph, I use 'purity' for
Reinigkeit.]
35

[Bösartigkeit.]

36

[I.e., models: Beispiele.]

37

[Cf. above, Ak. V, 37, 74, 78.]

38

[man kann es .. . ansehend]

39

[Reinigkeit here, Lauterkeit below.]

METHOD OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

193

wipe off it even the slightest blemish40—from the motive lest, if the truthfulness of all examples were disputed and the purity of all human virtue
denied, this virtue be in the end considered a mere chimera and thus all
endeavor [directed] toward it be disdained as idle affectation and deceptive
self-conceit.
I do not know why educators of the youth have not long since made use
of this propensity of reason to enter with gratification upon even the subtlest examination when practical questions are raised; and why, after laying
a solely moral catechism at the basis, they have not searched through the biographies of ancient and modern times with the aim of having at hand, for
the duties put forth, supporting instances41 by42 which to activate, above all
through comparison of similar actions under different circumstances, their
pupils' judgment43 in noting the lesser or greater moral import of such actions. [For] they will soon find even the early youth, which is otherwise not
yet mature enough for any speculation, to be very sharp-sighted in this and
also44 not a little interested, because it feels the progress of its power of
judgment; but, what is primary, they will be able to hope with assurance
that repeated practice45 in knowing46 good conduct in all its purity and giving it approbation while noting even the slightest deviation from it with regret or contempt—even though thus far this is carried on only as a game of
the power of judgment in which children can compete with one another—
will nonetheless leave behind a lasting impression of high esteem on the
one side and of loathing on the other, which through a mere habit of repeatedly looking upon such actions as worthy of approbation or censure would
amount to a good foundation for righteousness in the future way of life. I
only wish [educators] to spare the youth47 examples of so-called noble
(suprameritorious48) actions, which our sentimental writings bandy about
40

[Literally, 'spot': Fleck.]

41

['supporting instances' translates Belege.]

42

[an.]

43

[Beurteilung. See above, Ak. V, 8 br. n. 78.]

44

[dabei]

45

[Übung.]

46

[kennen.]

47

[Or perhaps 'the pupils': sie.]

48

[überverdienstlich.]

194

PART II METHOD

so much, and to stake everything merely on duty and on the worth that a
human being can and must give himself in his own eyes through the consciousness of not having transgressed it; for, what amounts to empty wishes
and longings for unattainable49 perfection produces nothing but heroes of
novels who, while crediting themselves very much with their feeling for the
extravagantly50 great, absolve themselves in return from observing the
common and prevalent obligation,51 which then seems to them insignificantly small.52
But if one asks, what, then, properly, is pure morality,53 by which as
touchstone54 one must test the moral 55 import of every action, then I
must admit that only philosophers can make the decision of this question
doubtful; for in common human reason this question is long since decided,
not indeed by abstract general formulas, but yet by habitual56 use—like the
difference, as it were, between the right and the left hand. We shall, therefore, first show by an example the test mark57 of pure virtue; and, conceiving it as having been put before, say, a ten-year-old boy for his judgment,
49

[More literally, 'unscalable': unersteiglich.]

50

[überschwenglich.]

51

[Schuldigkeit. See above, Ak. V, 82 br. n. 385.]

52

It is entirely advisable to praise actions from which a great, not self-interested,a
compassionate attitude shines forth. However, one must here call attention not so
much to the elevation of the soul, which is very fleeting and transitory, as rather to
the submission of the heart to duty, from which a more lasting impression can be expected, because it carries principles with it (but the former, only bursts [of emotion]). One need reflect only a little, and one will always find some guiltb—with
which one has burdened oneself by something or other in regard to humankind
(even if it were only the guilt that, through the inequality of human beings in the
civil constitution, one enjoys advantages on account of which others must all the
more do without)—to keep the self-lovingc imagining of the meritorious from displacing the thought of duty.
a
b
c
53

[uneigennützig.]
[eine Schuld.]
[eigenliebig.]

[Sittlichkeit]

54

[Literally, 'proof metal': Probemetall.]

55

[moralisch.]

56

[Or 'ordinary': gewöhnlich.]

57

[Or 'test characteristic': Prüfungsmerkmal.]

METHOD OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

195

we shall see whether he must necessarily judge thus on his own as well,
without having been instructed to do so by his teacher. Recount the story of
an upright man whom some people58 want to induce to join the defamers of
an innocent but otherwise powerless person (such as, say, Anne Boleyn
upon having been accused by Henry VIII of England). These people offer
him gains, i.e., large gifts or high rank; he rejects them. This will effect
mere approbation and approval59 in the soul of the listener, because it is
gain. Now they start to threaten him with loss. Among these defamers are
his best friends, who now renounce their friendship; close relatives, who
threaten to disinherit him (who has no assets); powerful people, who can
pursue and hurt him in every place and situation; a prince, who threatens
him with loss of freedom and indeed of life itself. But in order to make him
feel, so that the measure of suffering may be full, even the pain that only a
morally good heart can feel quite intimately, one may conceive his family,
threatened by extreme plight and neediness, as imploring him to yield, and
himself—although righteous, yet of course60 not made of61 solid organs of
feeling that are insensitive to sympathy as well as to his own plight62—at a
moment when he wishes that he had never seen the day that exposed him to
such unspeakable pain, as nonetheless remaining faithful, without wavering
or even doubting, to his resolve of uprightness. Then my youthful listener
will be elevated gradually from mere approval to admiration, from there to
amazement, and finally to the greatest veneration and a lively wish to be
able himself to be such a man (although not, to be sure, in his situation);
and yet virtue is here worth so much only because it costs so much, not because it yields a return.63 The entire amazement and even striving toward
similarity with this character here rests entirely on the moral principle's
purity, which can be presented as quite obvious only by removing from the
incentives of the action everything that human beings might class with happiness. Therefore morality must have the more power over64 the human
58

[man; similarly for 'These people,' below ]

59

[Beifall und Billigung.]

60

[eben.]

61

['made of translates von.]

62

[Literally, Kant says 'solid, insensitive organs of the feeling for sympathy as well as [the
feeling] of his own plight.']
63

[etwas einbringen.]

64

[Literally, 'upon': auf.]

196

PART II METHOD

heart the more purely it is presented.65 From this, then, it follows that if the
law of morals, and [with it] the image of holiness and virtue, is to exert any
influence at all on our soul, it66 can do so only insofar as it is—as incentive—laid to heart pure, unmingled with intentions [directed] at one's wellbeing,67 and this because it shows itself most splendidly in suffering. That,
however, whose removal strengthens the effect of a motive force must have
been an obstacle. Consequently any admixture of incentives that are taken
from one's own happiness is an obstacle to providing the moral law with influence on the human heart. I maintain further that, even in that admired action, if the motive from which it was done was high esteem for one's duty,
then it is precisely this respect for the law—and by no means a claim to the
inner opinion68 of [possessing] magnanimity and a noble, meritorious way
of thinking—which has the greatest force directly on the spectator's mind;
and that consequently duty, not merit, must have not only the most determinate but, when conceived69 in the proper light of its inviolability, also the
most penetrating influence on the mind.70
In our times, when people hope to accomplish more with tender, softhearted feelings or with highflying, puffed-up pretensions concerning the
mind that sooner wither than strengthen the heart, than by the dry and
earnest71 presentation72 of duty, which is more appropriate to human imperfection and to progress in [regard to] the good, we need to point to this
method more than ever. To adduce—as a model—actions to children as
being noble, magnanimous, meritorious, with the intent73 of prepossessing
the children in their favor by instilling an enthusiasm, is altogether contrapurposive. For since children are still so far behind in the observance of the

65

[Or 'conceived': vorgestellt; likewise above.]

66

[Reading, as Vorländer suggests, es for (the singular) sie; Kant may still have had in mind
Sittlichkeit ('morality') from the preceding sentence.]
67

[Wohlbefinden.]

68

[Meinung.]

69

[Or 'presented': vorgestellt.]

70

[See above, Ak. V, 71-82.]

71

[ernsthaft.]

72

[Or 'conception': Vorstellung.]

73

[Meinung.]

METHOD OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

197

commonest duty and even in the correct judging74 of it, this is tantamount to
soon turning them into fantasists. But even with the more informed and experienced part of humankind, this supposed incentive has, if not a detrimental, then at least no genuine moral effect on the heart—which was, after
all, what one wanted to bring about by means of it.
All feelings, above all those that are to give rise to unaccustomed endeavor, must produce75 their effect at the moment of their intensity and
before they subside; otherwise they do nothing, since the heart by nature
returns to its natural, moderate vital motion and accordingly lapses into the
languor that belonged to it before, because there was indeed applied to76 it
something that stimulated it, but nothing that strengthened it. Principles
must be built on concepts; on any other foundation there can arise only
bursts that can impart to the person no moral worth and indeed not even
confidence in himself; yet without these the consciousness of one's moral
attitude and of a character of that kind, the highest good in a human being,
cannot occur at all. Now, these concepts, if they are to become subjectively
practical, must not stay with the objective laws of morality, in order to admire these and highly esteem them in reference to humanity; rather, they
must consider the presentation of these laws in relation to the human being
and to the individual in him; and thus that law77 appears in a guise that, although indeed supremely worthy of respect, is not so likable78 as if the law
belonged to the element to which he is naturally accustomed,79 but [the law
appears], rather, as it compels him to leave this element, often not without
self-denial, and to betake himself into a higher element in which he can
maintain himself only with effort and with unceasing worry about relapsing. In a word, the moral law demands compliance from duty, not from
predilection, which one cannot and ought not to presuppose at all.80
Let us now see in an example whether the presentation of an action as a
noble and magnanimous one contains more [of the] subjectively motive
74

[Beurteilung. See above, Ak. V, 8 br. n. 78.]

75

[Literally, 'do': tun, translated as 'do' below.]

76

{an . . . gebracht.]

77

[I.e., the moral law.]

78

[gefällig.]

79

[I.e., the element of feeling.]

80

[See above, Ak. V, 80-88; and cf. the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV,
397-403.]

198

PART II METHOD

force of an incentive than if the action is presented merely as duty in relation to the serious81 moral law. The action where someone tries, at the
greatest danger to his life, to rescue people from a shipwreck, if in doing so
he himself ultimately loses his life, is indeed on the one hand credited to
duty, but is on the other hand and for the most part also credited as a meritorious action;82 but our high esteem for it is weakened very much by the
concept of duty toward oneself*3 a duty that here seems to suffer some impairment. More decisive is the magnanimous sacrifice of one's life for the
preservation of one's country; and yet there remains some scruple as to
whether it is indeed so perfectly a duty to dedicate oneself to this aim on
one's own and without having been ordered to do so, and the action does
not contain the full force of a model and impulse for imitation. But if something84 is an irrémissible duty, transgression of which violates the moral
law in itself and without regard for human well-being and, as it were, tramples on this law's holiness (duties of this sort are usually called duties toward God,85 because in him we think the ideal of holiness in substance86),
then we dedicate to the compliance with it—compliance at the sacrifice of
everything that might have any value87 for the most fervent of all our inclinations—the maximally perfect deep respect, and we find our soul
strengthened and elevated by such an example if we can convince ourselves through88 it that human nature is capable of so great an elevation
over everything that nature might, by way of incentives, bring forth as an
opposite. Juvenal presents such an example in a climax that lets the reader
vividly feel the force of the incentive hidden in the pure law of duty as
duty:
Esto bonus miles, tutor bonus, arbiter idem
Integer; ambiguae si quando citabere testis
81

[ernst.]

82

[Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 390-91.]

83

[Cf. ibid., Ak. VI, 417-18.]

84

[es.]

85

[See above, Ak. V, 83-85.]

86

[Cf. above, Ak. V, 4L]

87

[Wert.]

88

[an.]

METHOD OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

199

Incertaeque rei, Phalaris licet imperet, ut sis
Falsus, et admoto dictet periuria tauro,
Summum crede nefas animam praeferre pudori
Et propter vitam vivendi perdere causas.89
If we can bring into our action anything flattering concerning the meritorious, then the incentive is already somewhat mixed with love for oneself and
therefore has some assistance from the side of sensibility. But to put everything second to the holiness of duty alone and to become conscious that one
can do this because our own reason acknowledges it as its command and
says that one ought to do it—this is, as it were, to elevate oneself entirely
above the world of sense, and is linked, as also an incentive of a power that
rules over sensibility, with90 that same consciousness of the law inseparably, even if not always with effect; yet this effect does also, through repeated occupation with this incentive and the initially slighter attempts at
using it, give hope of being brought about [more frequently], so as to produce in us little by little the greatest but pure moral interest91 therein.
The method therefore takes the following course. At first the concern is
only to make the judging92 according to moral laws a natural occupation
accompanying all our own free actions as well as our observation of those
of other people,93 and to make it, as it were, a habit,94 and to sharpen it
by first asking whether the action objectively conforms to the moral law,
and to which one; in doing this, one distinguishes attention to that law
89

[The quote is from Juvenal, Satires, VIII, 79-84, and says: "Be a good soldier, a good
guardian, or an impartial judge; if ever you are summoned as a witness in a dubious and uncertain case, though Phalaris himself should command you to be deceitful and, having brought
his bull, should dictate perjury, count it the highest crime to prefer life to honor and to lose, for
the sake of living, all that makes life worth living." (Cf., for parts of the same quote, the Religion within the Bounds of Reason Alone, Ak. VI, 49n, and the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI,
334.) Phalaris (d. 554 B.C.), a tyrant of the Greek colony of Akragas (Roman Agngentum, now
Agrigento) in southwestern Sicily, is said to have had his enemies killed in a brass bull by having a fire lit under it.]
90

[Reading mit for in. This slight adjustment seems preferable to Natorp's and Vorlander's
proposals for dealing with this passage.]
91

[See the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV, 401n, 413n, 448-50, 460n,
461-63; also above, Ak. V, 7 9 - 8 1 ; and the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 212-13.]
92

[Beurteilung. See above, Ak. V, 8 br. n. 78.]

93

[See On Pedagogy {Über Pädagogik), Ak. IX, 486-99.]

94

[See the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 479-80.]

200

PART H METHOD

which provides merely a basis for obligation95 from the law which is in
fact obligatory96 {leges obligandi a legibus obligantibus)91 (e.g., the law of
what the need of human beings requires of me from what their right requires of me, the latter of which prescribes essential but the former only
nonessential98 duties), and thus one teaches how to distinguish different
duties that come together in an action. The other point to which attention
must be directed is the question as to whether the action was also done
(subjectively) for the sake of the moral law and therefore has not only
moral99 correctness as a deed but also, according to its maxim, moral
worth100 as an attitude. Now, there is no doubt that this exercise101 and the
consciousness of a cultivation of our reason, arising therefrom, in making
judgments merely about the practical must little by little produce a certain
interest even in reason's law and hence in moral actions. For wefinallybecome fond of that whose contemplation lets us feel the expanded use of our
cognitive powers, a use that is furthered above all by that wherein we find
moral correctness, because only in such an order of things can reason, with
its ability to determine a priori according to principles what ought to occur,
find itself good. After all, an observer of nature finally becomes fond of objects that initially offend his senses, when he discovers in them the great
purposiveness of their organization102 and thus feasts his reason on his
contemplation of them; and Leibniz put an insect, which he had carefully
examined through the microscope, gently back again onto its leaf, because
he had found himself instructed by the sight of it and had, as it were, received from it a benefaction.
But this occupation of the power of judgment, which lets us feel our own
cognitive powers, is not yet interest in the actions and in their morality itself. It merely brings about [the fact] that one gladly entertains oneself with
95

[Verbindlichkeit.]

96

[I.e., obligating: verbindend.]

97

[Laws of obligation from obligating (or obligatory) laws. Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak.
VI, 224.]
98

[außerwesentlich.]

99

[sittlich here; moralisch above.]

100

[Wert.]

101

[Übung.]

102

[On organization and organized beings, cf. the Critique of Judgment, Ak. V, 193, 349,
375-76, 384, 420, and 426.]

METHOD OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON

201

such judging, and it gives to virtue or the way of thinking according to
moral laws a form of beauty that is admired but not yet therefore sought (laudator et alget),103 [just] as everything the contemplation of which brings
about subjectively a consciousness of the harmony of our powers of presentation,104 and in which we feel our entire cognitive power105 (understanding
and imagination) strengthened, produces a liking106 that can also be communicated to other people107—the existence of the object remaining
nonetheless indifferent to us, inasmuch as it is regarded only as the prompting whereby we become aware of the predisposition of the talents in us,
which is elevated above animality.108 Now, however, the second exercise
enters upon its task, namely to make the purity of the will discernible in the
vivid exhibition of the moral attitude in examples, at first only as a negative
perfection of the will insofar as in an action done from duty no incentives
whatever of the inclinations influence the action as determining bases. By
this the learner is at least kept attentive to the consciousness of his freedom,109 and although this renunciation110 arouses an initial sensation of
pain, yet, because it withdraws that learner from the constraint of even true
needs, there is proclaimed to him at the same time a liberation111 from the
manifold dissatisfaction in which all these needs entangle him, and the
mind is made receptive to satisfaction from other sources. The heart is, after
all, freed112 and relieved of a burden—which always secretly weighs upon
it—when in pure moral decisions, of which examples are put forth, there is
uncovered to the human being an inner ability not quite familiar otherwise
even to him, the inner freedom to detach himself from the vehement obtrusiveness of the inclinations to such an extent that none at all, not even the
103

[probitas laudator
Satires, I, 74.
104
105

et alget:

'Uprightness is praised and [shivers with] cold.' Juvenal,

[Vorstellungskräfte.]
[Erkenntnisvermögen.]

106

[Wohlgefallen. On this kind of liking (a feeling of pleasure), cf. the Critique of
Ak V, 190, 191, 197, 2 1 6 - 1 9 , 244, 289, 292, and 306.]
107

[Cf. ibid., 217, 218, 2 2 1 , 2 3 1 , 2 3 8 - 3 9 , 275, 293, 295, 306, and 433.]

108

[See On Pedagogy, Ak. IX, 4 6 6 - 8 5 . ]

109
110
111
112

[Freiheit.]
[Of influence from incentives of the inclinations.]
[Befreiung.]
[Or 'liberated': befreit.]

Judgment,

202

PART II METHOD

one that we care about most, shall have113 an influence on a decision for
which we are now to employ our reason.114 Consider a case where only I
alone know that the wrong is on my side and where—although a free confession of this wrong and an offer of satisfaction find themselves strongly
contradicted by vanity, self-interest,115 and even an otherwise not illegitimate aversion to him whose right I have encroached upon—I can nonetheless brush aside all these qualms: such a case does, after all, contain a
consciousness of an independence—from inclinations and from fortunate
circumstances—and of the possibility of being sufficient to oneself, a consciousness that is salutary to me throughout for other aims as well. And now
the law of duty, through the positive worth that compliance with this law
lets us feel, finds readier admittance [to the human mind]116 through the respect for ourselves in the consciousness of our freedom. On this respect, if
it is well-founded—if the human being dreads nothing more intensely than
to find himself, in inner self-examination, inferior117 and reprehensible in
his own eyes—every good moral attitude can now be grafted, because
this118 is the best and indeed the only guard to prevent ignoble and corrupting impulses from penetrating into the mind.
With this [discussion] I wanted only to point to the most general119 maxims of the doctrine of method for moral molding and exercise.120 Since the
manifoldness of duties would require, for each kind of duty, also particular
determinations and would thus amount to a lengthy task, 121 1 shall be considered excused if in a work like this, which is only a preparation, I settle
for these basic features.

113

['shall have' translates (the subjunctive) habe.]

1M

[See above, Ak. V, 78-79.]

115

[Eigennutz*]

116

[Cf. above, Ak.V, 151.]

117

[geringschätzig]

118

[One's self-respect's being thus well-founded: dieses.]

119

[allgemeinst.]

120

[Bildung und Übung.]

121

[Kant undertook this task in the Metaphysics of Morals, which appeared in 1797, some nine
years after the Critique of Practical Reason.]

CONCLUSION

203

Conclusion
Two things fill the mind with ever new and increasing admiration and reverence, the more frequently and persistently one's meditation deals with
them: the starry sky above me and the moral law within me. Neither of them
do I need to seek or merely suspect outside my purview, as veiled in obscurities or [as lying] in the extravagant:122 I see them before me and connect
them directly with the consciousness of my existence. The first thing starts
from the place that I occupy in the external world of sense and expands the
connection in which I stand into the immensely large, with worlds upon
worlds and systems of systems, and also into boundless times of their periodic motion, the beginning123 and continuance thereof. The second thing
starts from my invisible self, my personality,124 and exhibits me in a world
that has true infinity but that is discernible125 only to the understanding, and
with that world (but thereby simultaneously also with all those visible
worlds) I cognize myself not, as in the first case, in a merely contingent
connection, but in a universal126 and necessary one. The first sight,127 of a
countless multitude of worlds, annihilates, as it were, my importance as an
animal creature that, after having for a short time been provided (one
knows not how) with vital force, must give back again to the planet (a mere
dot in the universe) the matter from which it came. The second sight, on the
contrary, elevates infinitely my worth as that of an intelligence by my personality, in which the moral law reveals to me a life independent of animality and even of the entire world of sense, at least as far as can be gleaned
from the purposive determination128 of my existence by this law, a determination that is not restricted to conditions and boundaries of this life but proceeds to infinity.129

[I.e., in the transcendent: im Überschwenglichen.]
[Or 'start': Anfang.]
[I.e., personhood: Persönlichkeit; likewise below.]
[spürbar.]
[allgemein.]
[Or 'spectacle': Anblick; likewise below.]
[Bestimmung, which also means 'vocation.']
[Or ad infinitum: ins Unendliche.]

204

PART II METHOD

However, although admiration and respect can stimulate investigation,
they cannot make up for the lack of it. What, then, is to be done in order to
engage in investigation in a way that is useful and appropriate to the sublimity of the object? Examples may serve as a warning in this, but also for
imitation. Contemplation of the world started from the most splendid spectacle130 that could ever be put before human senses and that our understanding could ever bear to pursue in its vast range, and it ended—with
astrology. Morals started with human nature's noblest property, whose
development and cultivation point131 to infinite benefit, and it ended—with
fanaticism, or with superstition. So it is with all still crude attempts wherein
the primary part of the task hinges on the use of reason, which, unlike the
use of the feet, is not found on its own, by means of frequent exercise,
above all if it concerns properties that cannot be exhibited so directly in
common experience. But after there had come into vogue, although late, the
maxim to deliberate carefully beforehand on all steps that reason proposes
to take and not to let it enter upon its course except on the track of a method
carefully reflected upon beforehand, the judging of the world edifice132 acquired an entirely different direction and therewith also an incomparably
happier outcome. The fall of a stone, the motion of a sling, resolved into
their elements and into the forces manifesting themselves in these [actions]
and treated mathematically, ultimately produced that clear insight—unchangeable throughout the future—into the world structure which, as observation proceeds, can hope to keep always expanding but need never fear
having to regress.
Now, this example can counsel us to enter upon this same path in dealing
with the moral predispositions of our nature and can give us hope for a similar good result. We do, after all, have at hand the examples of the morally
judging reason. If we now dissect these examples but, lacking mathematics,
take up in repeated experiments on common human understanding a procedure—similar to chemistry—of separation of the empirical from the rational that may be found in them, this can allow us to cognize133 both of them
pure and, with certainty, what each can accomplish by itself; thus it can
forestall in part the straying of a still crude, unpracticed judging, and in part
130

[Or 'sight' -.Anblick.]

131

[hinaussehen.]

132

[Weltgebäude; 'world structure,' below, translates Weltbau.]

133

[kennbar machen.]

CONCLUSION

205

(what is needed far more) the soarings of genius through which—as usually
happens with the adepts of the philosopher's stone134—without any methodical investigation and cognition135 of nature, dreamed-up treasures are
promised and true ones dissipated. In a word: science (critically sought and
methodically initiated) is the narrow gate that leads to the doctrine of wisdorn, if this is taken to mean not merely what one ought to do but what
ought to serve teachers as a standard for preparing well and recognizably136
the path to wisdom that everyone ought to walk, and to secure others
against erroneous paths; [it is] a science of which philosophy must always
remain the preserver, and although the public need not take an interest137
in philosophy's subtle investigation, it must indeed take one in the doctrines™ which, after such treatment, can for the first time be quite clearly
evident to it.

134

[Literally, 'stone of the wise' : Stein der Weisen.]

135

[Kenntnis.]

136

{kenntlich.]

137

[Anteil]

138 £ Q r ' t e a c h i n g s ' :

Lehren.]

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

A. EDITIONS OF THE GERMAN TEXT

1. Original Editions
Critik der practischen Vernunft von Immanuel Kant. Ist ed. Riga: Johann Friedrich
Hartknoch, 1788. Reprinted. Kant im Original, vol. 12. Erlangen: Fischer, 1984.
Reprinted, with an introduction by Lewis White Beck. Kant's Three Critiques.
New York: Routledge, 1993.
Critik der practischen Vernunft von Immanuel Kant. 2nd and 4th eds. Riga: Johann
Friedrich Hartknoch, 1792, 1797. [There is no 3rd edition, perhaps because the
2nd was twice as large as the others.]
Critik der practischen Vernunft von Immanuel Kant. 5th and 6th eds. Leipzig: Johann Friedrich Hartknoch, 1818, 1827.
2.

Nineteenth-Century Editions

Immanuel Kant's sämmtliche Werke. 14 vols. Ed. Karl Rosenkranz and Friedrich
Wilhelm Schubert. Leipzig: Leopold Voss, 1838-42. Vol. 8. Ed. Karl
Rosenkranz, 1838.
Immanuel Kant's Werke. Carefully revised complete edition in ten volumes. Edited,
with a preface, by Gustav Hartenstein. Leipzig: Modes und Baumann, 1838-39.
Vol.4, 1838.
Immanuel Kant's sämmtliche Werke. 12 vols. Ed. Julius Hermann von Kirchmann.
Philosophische Bibliothek. Vol. 7. Leipzig: Leopold Voss, 1838-42. 2nd ed.
Berlin: L. Heimann, 1869. 3rd ed. Heidelberg: Weiss, 1882.
Immanuel Kant's sämmtliche Werke. 8 vols. In chronological order. Ed. Gustav
Hartenstein. Leipzig: Leopold Voss, 1867-68. Vol. 5, 1867.
Kritik der praktischen Vernunft. Text of the 1788 ed. with consideration of the 2nd and
4th editions (1792, 1797). Ed. Karl Kehrbach. Reclams Universal-Bibliothek.
Leipzig: Philipp Reclam Jr., 1878. Reprint. Ed. Raymund Schmidt. Reclams

206

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

207

Universal-Bibliothek. Leipzig: Philipp Reclam Jr., 1924. Reprint. Ed. Joachim
Kopper. Reclams Universal-Bibliothek. Stuttgart: Reclam, 1961, 1989.
3.

Contemporary Editions

Kants gesammelte Schriften. Königlich Preußische Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Berlin: CT. Reimer; Berlin and New York: Walter de Gruyter & Co. and Predecessors, 1902-. Vol. 5, ed., with introduction, variant readings, and factual elucidations, by Paul Natorp, 1908. Electronic edition according to vols. 1-13 of
the Akademie-Textausgabe. Edited and electronically processed for WordCruncher for Windows by the Institut für Angewandte Kommunikations- und
Sprachforschung (IKS) e.V. Version 12.02.98. Computer optical disc. Bonn:
IKS, 1998.
Kants sämtliche Werke. 10 vols. Edited, in association with Otto Buek, Paul Gedan,
Walter Kinkel, Friedrich Michael Schiele, and Theodor Valentiner, by Karl Vorländer. Philosophische Bibliothek. Leipzig: Felix Meiner, 1904-40. Vol. 2, with
introduction and indexes by Karl Vorländer, 1906.
Immanuel Kants Werke in acht Büchern. 8 books in 2 vols. Selected, and provided
with an introduction, by Hugo Renner. Berlin: Weichert, 1904,1921. Vol. 2, book 5.
Immanuel Kants sämtliche Werke. 6 vols. Ed. Felix Gross. Großherzog WilhelmErnst Ausgabe. Leipzig: Inselverlag, 1913, 1920-23. Vol. 5.
Immanuel Kants Werke. 11 vols. Ed. Ernst Cassirer, Hermann Cohen, Artur
Buchenau, Otto Buek, Albert Görland, and Benzion Kellermann. Berlin: Bruno
Cassirer, 1912-23. Vol. 5, ed. Benzion Kellermann, 1914.
Kritik der praktischen Vernunft als Prüfung der tätigen Vernunft {Critique of Practical Reason as Test of Acting Reason). Ed. Georg Deycke. Lübeck, Germany:
Coleman, 1919. 3rd ed. Lübeck: Coleman, 1922.
Kritik der praktischen Vernunft. Nebst Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten. Ed.
Heinrich Schmidt. Leipzig: Alfred Kroner, 1925.
Kritik der praktischen Vernunft. Ed. Karl Vorländer. Philosophische Bibliothek, vol.
38. 9th ed. Leipzig: Felix Meiner, 1929. 10th, expanded ed., with a bibliography
by Heiner Klemme. Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 1990. Reprint. Hamburg: Felix
Meiner, 1993.
Immanuel Kant. Werke. Theorie-Werkausgabe. 12 vols. Ed. Wilhelm Weischedel.
Frankfurt-am-Main: Suhrkamp, 1968, 1977. Vol. 7. Previously issued as Werke in
zehn Bänden. 10 vols. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1968,
1975, 1983. Vols. 6-7. Originally issued as Werke in sechs Bänden. 6 vols. Wiesbaden, Germany: Inselverlag; Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft:
1956-64, 1966-70. Vol 4.
Kritik der praktischen Vernunft; Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten. Suhrkamp
Taschenbuch Wissenschaft, vol. 56. Frankfurt-am-Main: Suhrkamp, 1956, 1974.

208

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Kritik der praktischen Vernunft. Ed. Raymund Schmidt. Unchanged reprint of the 1928
revision of the former Kehrbach edition. Wiesbaden, Germany: VMA-Verlag, 1982.
Immanuel Kant. Werke in sechs Bänden. 6 vols. Ed. Rolf Toman. Cologne: Könemann, 1995. Vol. 3.
Die drei Kritiken. Ed. Alexander Ulfig. 2 vols. Cologne: Parkland, 1999. Vol. 2.
B.

PREVIOUS COMPLETE ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS

Kant's Critique of Practical Reason and Other Works on the Theory of Ethics.
Trans. Thomas Kingsmill Abbott. "Being an enlarged edition of Kant's Theory of
Ethics!' London: Longmans, Green, 1879. 3rd ed., revised and enlarged, with a
memoir and portrait. London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1883. 5th ed., revised,
with a memoir and two portraits. London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1898;
Reprint, Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1952, 1955. 6th ed., revised, with a
memoir and one portrait. London: Longmans, Green, 1909, 1927, 1967. The Critique by itself. Amherst, N.Y.: Prometheus Books, 1996.
Critique of Practical Reason, and Other Writings in Moral Philosophy. Translated and
edited, with an introduction, by Lewis White Beck. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1949; The Critique by itself. New York: Liberal Arts Press, 1956. Indianapolis, Ind.: Bobbs-Merrill, 1956. New York: Garland, 1976. 3rd ed., with notes. New
York: Macmillan; Toronto: Maxwell Macmillan Canada; New York: Maxwell
Macmillan International, 1993; Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1993.
Critique of Practical Reason. Translated and edited by Mary Gregor; with an introduction by Andrews Reath. Cambridge Texts in the History of Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997. Also in Immanuel Kant, Practical
Philosophy. Translated and edited by Mary J. Gregor; general introduction by
Allen Wood. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Critique of Practical Reason. Trans. Heinrich Walter Cassirer; ed. G. Heath King and
Ronald Weitzman; with an introduction by D. M. MacKinnon. Marquette Studies in
Philosophy, vol. 17. Milwaukee, Wise: Marquette University Press, 1998.
C.

REFERENCE WORKS ON THE SECOND CRITIQUE

Materialien zu Kants 'Kritik der praktischen Vernunft.' Ed. Rüdiger Bittner and
Konrad Cramer. Frankfurt-am-Main: Suhrkamp, 1975.
Stellenindex und Konkordanz zur "Kritik der praktischen Vernunft." Ed. Heinrich P.
Delfosse and Michael Oberhausen, with the collaboration of Michael Albrecht,
Elfriede Conrad, and Michael Trauth. 2 vols. Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1995.
D. OTHER WORKS BY KANT CITED IN THIS TRANSLATION
Volume and page numbers refer to the original texts in the Akademie edition. The
index lists these works under their English titles, as given here.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

209

Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View (Anthropologie in pragmatischer Hinsicht). Vol. 7,117-333.
Critique of Judgment (Kritik der Urteilskraft). Vol. 5, 165-485.
Critique of Pure Reason (Kritik der reinen Vernunft). Vol. 3; vol. 4, 1-252.
Dispute among the University's Schools (Streit der Fakultäten). Vol. 7, 1-116.
First Introduction to the Critique of Judgment (Erste Einleitung zur Kritik der
Urteilskraft). Vol. 20, 193-251.
Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals (Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten).
Vol. 4, 385-463.
Logic (Logik). Vol. 9, 1-150.
Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science (Metaphysische Anfangsgründe der
Naturwissenschaft). Vol. 4, 465-565.
Metaphysics of Morals (Metaphysik der Sitten). Vol. 6, 203-493.
On a Supposed Right to Lie out of Love of Humankind (Über ein vermeintes Recht,
aus Menschenliebe zu lügen). Vol. 8, 427-30.
The Only Possible Basis of Proof for Demonstrating the Existence of God (Der
einzig mögliche Beweisgrund zu einer Demonstration des Daseins Gottes). Vol.
2,63-163.
On Pedagogy (Über Pädagogik). Vol. 9, 437-99.
Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics... (Prolegomena zu einer jeden künftigen
Metaphysik...). Vol. 4, 253-383.
Religion within the Bounds of Reason Alone (Die Religion innerhalb der Grenzen
der bloßen Vernunft). Vol. 6, 1-202.
What Does It Mean: To Orient Oneself in One's Thought? (Was heißt: Sich im
Denken orientieren?) Vol. 8, 131-48.
E.

SOURCES FROM OR CONCERNING THE ANCIENT BACKGROUND
THAT ARE CITED IN THIS TRANSLATION

The Epicurus Reader: Selected Writings and Testimonia. Trans. Brad Inwood and
Lloyd R Gerson; introduction by D. S. Hutchinson. Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett,
1994.
Horace. Satires. In The Satires of Horace. Ed. Niall Rudd. London: Cambridge University Press, 1966. Reprint. London: Bristol Classical Press, 1982, 1994.
Juvenal. Satires. In The Satires of Juvenal Translated. With explanatory and classical notes relating to the laws and customs of the Greeks and Romans. 1st AMS
ed. Works. English and Latin. 1978. New York: AMS Press, 1978.
Plato. The Republic. Trans. G.M.A. Grube. Revised by C.D.C. Reeve. Indianapolis,
Ind.: Hackett, 1992.
Plautus. Persa. In Plautus. With an English translation by Paul Nixon. The Loeb Classical Library. London: W. Heinemann; New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1916.

210

F.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

SOURCES FROM OR CONCERNING THE SEVENTEENTH- AND
EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY BACKGROUND THAT ARE CITED IN
THIS TRANSLATION

Baumgarten, Alexander Gottlieb. Metaphysica (Metaphysics),
Magdeburg:
Hemmerde, 1739. Second reprint of the 7th edition of 1779. New York:
G. Olms, 1982. Translation. Die Vorreden zur Metaphysik. Edited, translated,
and commented upon by Ursula Niggli. Frankfurt-am-Main: Klostermann,
1999.
Beattie, James. An Essay on the Nature and Immutability of Truth, in Opposition to
Sophistry and Scepticism, Edinburgh: A. Kincaid & J. Bell, 1770. Reprint. New
York: Garland, 1983.
Cheseldon, William. Report of the reaction of one of his patients. In Philosophical
Transactions XXXV 1728: 447.
Crusius, Christian August. Entwurf der notwendigen Vernunft-Wahrheiten, wiefern
sie den zufälligen entgegen gesetzet werden (Outline of Necessary Truths Insofar
as They Are Contrasted with Contingent Truths). Leipzig: Gleditsch, 1745.
Reprint. Hildesheim, Germany: G. Olms, 1964.
. Weg zur Gewissheit und Zuverlässigkeit der menschlichen Erkenntniss
(Path to Certainty and Reliability of Human Cognition). Leipzig: Gleditsch,
1747. Reprint. Hildesheim, Germany: G. Olms, 1965.
Feder, Johann Georg Heinrich. Über Raum und Caussalität, zur Prüfung der Kantischen Philosophie. Göttingen: Johann Christian Dieterich, 1787. Reprint. Brussels: Culture et civilisation, 1968.
Flatt, Johann Friedrich. Review of the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals by
Immanuel Kant. Tübingische gelehrte Anzeigen (Tübingen Scholarly Announcements). February 16, 1786, item 14, 105-12.
Fontenelle, Bernard Le Bovier de. Entretiens sur la pluralité des mondes (Conversations on the Plurality of Worlds). Paris: C. Blageart, 1686. Contemporary critical edition with (French) introduction and notes, by Alexandre Calame. Paris:
Nizet, 1984. Trans. H. A. Hargreaves, with an introduction by Nina Rattner Gelbart. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990.
Garve, Christian. Review of the Critique of Pure Reason by Immanuel Kant. Zugaben (Supplement) to the Göttingische gelehrte Anzeigen (Göttingen Scholarly
Announcements), January 19,1782, item 3, 4 0 - 4 8 . Reprinted as Beilage (Attachment) II in the Philosophische Bibliothek edition of Kant's Prolegomena to Any
Future Metaphysics, vol. 40, 167-74. Kant's reply to that review is contained in
the Anhang (Appendix) to the Prolegomena, Ak. IV, 371-83.
Hume, David. Philosophical Essays Concerning Human Understanding, later renamed An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. London: A. Millar, 1748.
Contemporary edition. An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding; A Letter
from a Gentleman to His Friend in Edinburgh; An Abstract of a Treatise of

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

211

Human Nature. Edited and introduced by Eric Steinberg. 2nd ed. Indianapolis,
Ind.: Hackett, 1993.
. A Treatise of Human Nature. London: J. Noon, 1739-40. Contemporary
edition. Edited, with an analytical index, by L. A. Selby-Bigge. 2nd ed. with text
rev. and variant readings by P. H. Nidditch. Oxford: Clarendon Press; New York:
Oxford University Press, 1978.
Hutcheson, Francis. An Inquiry into the Original of Our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue;
in Two Treatises, in Which the Principles of the Earl of Shaftesbury Are Explain'd
and Defended Against the Author of The Fable of The Bees, and the Ideas of
Moral Good and Evil are Establish 'd According to the Sentiments of the Antient
Moralists. With an Attempt to Introduce a Mathematical Calculation in Subjects
of Morality. London: J. Darby, 1725. 4th, com, ed. London: for D. Medwinter,
1738. Reprint. Westmead, Farnborough, Haunts, U.K.: Gregg International,
1969.
Leibniz, Baron Gottfried Wilhelm von. Principia philosophiae, more geometrico
demonstrata {The Principles of Philosophy, Demonstrated in the Manner of
Geometry), 1714. Contemporary edition: Monadology, and Other Philosophical
Essays. Trans. Paul Schrecker and Anne Martin Schrecker; with an introduction
and notes by Paul Schrecker. Indianapolis, Ind.: Bobbs-Merrill, 1965.
Mandeville, Bernard. The Fable of the Bees: or, Private Vices, Publick Benefits:
Containing Several Discourses to Demonstrate That Human Frailties, During the
Degeneracy of Mankind, May Be Turn'd to the Advantage of the Civil Society,
and Made to Supply the Place of Moral Virtues. London: J. Roberts, 1714. Edited,
with an introduction, by E. J. Hundert. Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett, 1997.
Mendelssohn, Moses. Morgenstunden, oder Vorlesungen über das Dasein Gottes
(Morning Hours, or Lectures on the Existence of God). Berlin: C. F. Voss &
Sohn, 1785. Recent edition, including the Briefwechsel
(Correspondence)
Mendelssohn-Kant. Ed. Dominique Bourel. Stuttgart: Reclam, 1979.
Montaigne, Michel Eyquem. "Apologie de Raymond Sebond." In the Essais. Bordeaux, France: S. Millanges, 1580. Translation. An Apology for Raymond Sebond. Translated and edited with an introduction and notes by M. A. Screech.
London: Penguin Books, 1993.
Pistorius, Hermann Andreas. Anonymous review of the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals by Immanuel Kant. Allgemeine deutsche Bibliothek. Berlin:
F. Nicolai. Vol. 66, part II, 447-63.
Priestley, Joseph. The Doctrine of Philosophical Necessity Illustrated. London: J.
Johnson, 1777. Contemporary edition: Disquisitions Relating to Matter and
Spirit, and The Doctrine of Philosophical Necessity Illustrated. New York: Garland, 1976.
Smith, Robert. A Compleat System of Opticks in Four Books, viz. a Popular, a
Mathematical, a Mechanical, and a Philosophical Treatise: To Which Are Added
Remarks upon the Whole. 2 vols. Cambridge: Printed for the author, sold by Cor-

212

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

nelius Crownfield, 1738. Translated and adapted by Abraham Gotthelf Kästner as
Vollständiger Lehrbegriff der Optik. Altenburg: Richterische Buchhandlung, 1755.
Spinoza, Baruch (Benedict). Ethica ordine geometrico demonstrata {Ethics Demonstrated in Geometrie Order). Part of the Opera posthuma {Posthumous Works).
Amsterdam: Rievwertsz, 1677. Contemporary edition of the Ethica. Ed. J. van
Vloten and J.P.N. Land. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1914. English translation: The
Ethics: Treatise on the Emendation of the Intellect; Selected Letters. Trans.
Samuel Shirley; ed., with introduction, by Seymour Feldman. 2nd ed. Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett, 1992.
The Stoics. Reprint of the Chatto & Windus edition of 1975. Indianapolis, Ind.:
Hackett, 1994. Copublished in the U.K. by Gerald Duckworth & Company Ltd.
Tittel, Gottlob August. Über Herrn Kants Moralreform {On Mr. Kant's Moral Reform). Frankfurt and Leipzig: Gebrüder Pfähler, 1786. Reprint. Brussels: Culture
et civilisation, 1969.
Wizenmann, Thomas. An den Herrn Professor Kant von dem Verfasser der Resultate Jacobi 'scher und Mendelssohn'scher Philosophie {To Professor Kant, from
the Author of the Results of JacobVs and Mendelssohn's Philosophy). Deutsches
Museum, February 1787.
. Die Resultate der JacobVsehen und Mendelssohn'sehen Philosophie,
kritisch untersucht von einem Freywilligen {The Results of JacobVs and
Mendelssohn's Philosophy, Critically Investigated by a Volunteer). Published
anonymously. Leipzig, 1786. Reprinted, with an epilogue by Rainer Wild.
Hildesheim, Germany: Gerstenberg, 1984.
Wolff, Baron Christian von. Psychologia rationalis {Rational Psychology). Frankfurt and Leipzig: Renger, 1734. Contemporary edition: Psychologia rationalis
Christiani Wolfii. Critical edition with (French) introduction, notes, and index, by
Jean École. Hildesheim, Germany: G. Olms, 1972.
G. BOOK-LENGTH SECONDARY SOURCES IN ENGLISH AND SOME
FOREIGN LANGUAGES
1.

Studies of the Second Critique or of Kant's Practical Philosophy as a
Whole

Beck, Lewis White. A Commentary on Kant's Critique of Practical Reason. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996, 1960.
Delbos, Victor. La Philosophie pratique de Kant. 2nd ed. Paris: F. Alcan, 1926.
Hare, John E. The Moral Gap: Kantian Ethics, Human Limits, and God's Assistance. Oxford: Clarendon Press; New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
Hartnack, Justus. Immanuel Kant: An Explanation of His Theory of Knowledge and
Moral Philosophy. Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Humanities Press, 1974.
Hoffe, Otfried. Immanuel Kant. Trans. Marshall Farrier. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, 1994. Translation of Immanuel Kant. Munich: C. H.
Beck, 1983. 5th, rev. ed. Munich: Beck, 2000.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

213

Kirchmann, Julius Hermann von. Erläuterungen zu Kant's Kritik der praktischen
Vernunft. Berlin: L. Heimann, 1869.
Klemme, Heiner F., and Manfred Kuehn, eds. Immanuel Kant. 2 vols. Aldershot,
U.K.; Brookfield, Vt.: International Library of Critical Essays in the History of
Philosophy. Aldershot, U.K.: Ashgate, 1999. Vol. 2.
Landucci, Sergio. La "Critica della ragion pratica" di Kant: Introduzione alia lettura. Rome: Nuova Italia scientifica, 1993.
Messer, August. Kommentar zu Kants ethischen und religions-philosophischen
Hauptschriften: Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten, Kritik der praktischen
Vernunft, Religion innerhalb der Grenzen der blossen Vernunft. Leipzig: F.
Meiner, 1929.
Nelson, Leonard. Gesammelte Schriften in neun Bänden. Ed. Paul Bernays et al. 9
vols. Hamburg: F. Meiner (1970-74). Especially vol. 4.
O'Farrell, Frank. Per leggere la Critica della ragione pratica di Kant: La "Critica
della ragione pratica" pensata corne risposte a domande. Rome: Editrice Pontificia Université Gregoriana, 1990.
O'Neill, Onora. Constructions of Reason: Explorations of Kant's Practical Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Prauss, Gerold, ed. Kant: Zur Deutung seiner Theorie von Erkennen und Handeln.
Cologne: Kiepenheuer und Witsch, 1973.
Walker, Ralph Charles Sutherland. Kant. London: Phoenix, 1997. Reprint. New
York: Routledge, 1999.
Watson, John. The Philosophy of Kant Explained. Glasgow: J. Maclehose and Sons,
1908.
2.

Studies on Basic Topics in Moral Philosophy

Acton, Harry Burrows. Kant's Moral Philosophy. London: Macmillan; New York:
St. Martin's Press, 1970.
Alquié, Ferdinand. La Morale de Kant. Paris: Centre de documentation universitaire, 1974.
Allison, Henry E. Kant's Theory of Freedom. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1990.
Altmann, Amandus. Freiheit im Spiegel des rationalen Gesetzes bei Kant. Berlin:
Duncker & Humblot, 1982.
Ameriks, Karl. Kant and the Fate of Autonomy: Problems in the Appropriation of
the Critical Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Astrada, Carlos. La ética formal y los valores. La Plata, Argentina: Imprenta Lopez,
1938.
Atwell, John E. Ends and Principles in Kant's Moral Thought. Dordrecht: M.
Nijhoff; distributed in the U.S. by Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1986.
Aune, Bruce. Kant's Theory of Morals. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
1979.

214

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Auxter, Thomas. Kant's Moral Teleology. Macon, Ga.: Mercer University Press,
1982.
Balbir Singh. Kant's Ethics of Practical Reason. Jullundur City, India: S. Nagin,
1970.
Baron, Marcia W. Kantian Ethics Almost without Apology. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press, 1995.
Bauch, Bruno. Vom Prinzip der Moral bei Kant. Halle/Saale, Germany: Hofbuchdruckerei von C. A. Kaemmerer & Co., 1903.
Beets, Muus Gerrit Jan. Reality and Freedom: Reflections on Kant's Moral Philosophy. Delft, The Netherlands: Eburon, 1988.
Böckerstette, Heinrich. Aporien der Freiheit und ihre Aufklärung
Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1982.

durch Kant.

Boutroux, Emile. La morale de Kant et le temps présent. Paris: A. Colin, 1904.
Buchenau, Artur. Kants Lehre vom kategorischen Imperativ: Eine Einführung in die
Grundfragen der Kantischen Ethik. 2nd, unchanged ed. Leipzig: F. Meiner, 1923
(1913).
Carnois, Bernard. The Coherence of Kant's Doctrine of Freedom. Trans. David
Booth. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987. Translation of La cohérence
de la doctrine kantienne de la liberté. Paris: Seuil, 1973.
Carpi, Orlando. E. Kant: Dalla critica alla metafisica délia moralità. Bologna,
Italy: V.A.E.; Distribuzione EDS, 1988.
. Kant: L'etica délia ragione. Rimini, Italy: Panozzo, 1989.
Chadwick, Ruth F., ed. Kant's Moral and Political Philosophy. New York: Routledge, 1992.
Conrad, Judith. Freiheit und Naturbeherrschung: Zur Problematik der Ethik Kants.
Würzburg, Germany: Königshausen & Neumann, 1992.
Cox, J. Gray. The Will at the Crossroads: A Reconstruction of Kant's Moral Philosophy. Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1984.
Cresson, André. La morale de Kant: Étude critique. 2nd, revised and expanded edition. Paris: F. Alcan, 1904.
Forschner, Maximilian. Gesetz und Freiheit: Zum Problem der Autonomie bei L
Kant. Munich: Pustet, 1974.
Goldman, Alan H. Moral Knowledge. New York: Routledge, 1988, 1990.
Guisân, Esperanza, coord. Esplendor y miseria de la ética kantiana. Contributions
by José Luis L. Aranguren et al. Barcelona: Anthropos, 1988.
Gunkel, Andreas. Spontaneität und moralische Autonomie: Kants Philosophie der
Freiheit. Bern: P. Haupt, 1989.
Guyer, Paul. Kant on Freedom, Law, and Happiness. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Hägerström, Axel. Kants Ethik im Verhältnis zu seinen
erkenntnistheoretischen
Grundgedanken, systematisch dargestellt. Uppsala, Sweden: Almqvist & Wiksells; Leipzig: O. Harrassowitz, 1902.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

215

Herman, Barbara. Morality as Rationality: A Study of Kant's Ethics. New York:
Garland, 1990.
. The Practice of Moral Judgment. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1993.
Hochberg, Gary M. Kant, Moral Legislation and Two Senses of 'Will' Washington,
D.C.: University Press of America, 1982.
Hudson, Hud. Kant's Compatibilism. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1994.
Jones, William Thomas. Morality and Freedom in the Philosophy of Immanuel
Kant. London: Oxford University Press, 1940.
Kohl, Harald. Kants Gesinnungsethik. Berlin: W. Gruyter, 1990.
Krüger, Gerhard. Philosophie und Moral in der Kantischen Kritik. Tübingen, Germany: Mohr, 1931. 2nd ed. Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr (R Siebeck), 1967.
Lambertino, Antonio. // rigorismo etico in Kant. 2nd, revised and expanded ed.
Parma, Italy: Maccari, 1970.
Landucci, Sergio. Sull'etica di Kant. Milan: Guerini, 1994.
Laupichler, Max. Die Grundzüge der materialen Ethik Kants. Berlin: Reuther &
Reichard, 1931.
Liebert, Arthur. Kants Ethik. Berlin: Pan-Verlagsgesellschaft, 1931.
Lo, Ping-cheung. Treating Persons as Ends: An Essay on Kant's Moral Philosophy.
Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1987.
Lorenzen, Max-Otto. Metaphysik als Grenzgang: Die Idee der Aufklärung unter
dem Primat der praktischen Vernunft in der Philosophie Immanuel Kants. Hamburg: F. Meiner, 1991.
Manganaro, Paolo. Libertà sotto leggi: La filosofia pratica di Kant. Catania, Italy:
C.U.E.C.M., 1989.
Marchi, Vittore. La filosofia morale di Emanuele Kant. Rome: Casa ed. "L'ideaHsmo realistico," 1931.
Meiklejohn, Alexander. Inclinations and Obligations. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1948.
Messer, August. Kants Ethik: Eine Einführung in ihre Hauptprobleme und Beiträge
zu deren Lösung. Leipzig: V. Veit, 1904.
Meyer, Herbert. Kants transzendentale Freiheitslehre. Freiburg, Germany: K. Alber,
1996.
Miller, Edmund Morris. Moral Law and the Highest Good: A Study of Kant's Doctrine of the Highest Good. Melbourne, Australia: Macmillan & Co. Ltd. in association with the Melbourne University Press, 1928.
Miller, Ronald Duncan. An Interpretation of Kant's Moral Philosophy. Harrogate,
U.K.: Duchy Press, 1993.
Moritz, Manfred. Studien zum Pflichtbegriff in Kants kritischer Ethik. Lund, Sweden: C.W.K. Gleerup, 1951.
. Die subjektive Sittlichkeit und das Objektiv-Sittliche in der Ethik Kants.
Dortmund, Germany: H. Lucker, 1933.

216

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Müller, Carl. Die Methode einer reinen Ethik, insbesondere der Kantischen, dargestellt an einer Analyse des Begriffes eines "praktischen Gesetzes." Berlin:
Reuther & Reichard, 1908.
Murphy, Jeffrie G. Character, Liberty, and Law: Kantian Essays in Theory and
Practice. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1998.
Nabert, Jean. L'expérience intérieure de la liberté et autres essais de philosophie
morale. Preface by Paul Ricoeur. Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1994.
Nell, Onora. Acting on Principle: An Essay on Kantian Ethics. New York: Columbia
University Press, 1975.
Nicolaci, Giuseppe. Aporetica délia conoscenza morale. Palermo, Italy: Manfredi,
1979.
Nisters, Thomas. Kants kategorischer Imperativ als Leitfaden humaner Praxis.
Freiburg, Germany: K. Alber, 1989.
Ortwein, Birger. Kants problematische Freiheitslehre. Bonn: Bouvier, 1983.
Paton, Herbert James. The Categorical Imperative: A Study in Kant's Moral Philosophy. London: Hutchinson's University Library, 1947; Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1948; New York: Harper & Row, 1967.
Pelegrinës, Theodosios N. Kant's Conceptions of the Categorical Imperative and
the Will. London: Zeno, 1980.
Perreijn, Willem. Kants ethiek tussen ervaring en a priori. Tilburg, The Netherlands: Tilburg University Press, 1993.
Porter, Noah. Kant's Ethics. Chicago: S. C. Griggs & Company, 1886.
Poser, Hans, ed. Philosophische Probleme der Handlungstheorie. Contributions by
Holger van den Boom et al. Freiburg, Germany: K. Alber, 1982.
Prauss, Gerold. Kant über Freiheit als Autonomie. Frarikfurt-arn-Main: V. Klostermann, 1983.
Quinn, Dennis P. An Examination of Kant's Treatment of Transcendental Freedom.
Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1988.
Richli, Urs. Transzendentale Reflexion und sittliche Entscheidung. Bonn: Bouvier,
1967.
Rohden, Valério. Interesse da razäo e liberdade. Säo Paulo, Brazil: Editora Atica,
1981.
Rossvaer, Viggo. Kant's Moral Philosophy: An Interpretation of the Categorical Imperative. Oslo: Universitetsforlag; Oslo: Hestholms boktrykkeri, 1979.
Rotenstreich, Nathan. Practice and Realization: Studies in Kant's Moral Philosophy. The Hague: M. Nijhoff, 1979.
Sandermann, Edmund. Die Moral der Vernunft: Transzendentale Handlungs- und
Legitimationstheorie in der Philosophie Kants. Freiburg, Germany: K. Alber,
1989.
Schefczyk, Michael. Moral ohne Nutzen: Eine Apologie des kantischen Formalismus. Sankt Augustin, Germany: Academia, 1995.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

217

Schnoor, Christian. Kants kategorischer Imperativ als Kriterium der Richtigkeit des
Handelns. Tübingen, Germany: J.C.B. Mohr, 1989.
Schopenhauer, Arthur. On the Basis of Morality. Translated by E.F.J. Payne; with an
introduction by David E. Cartwright. Rev. ed. Providence, R.I.: Berghahn Books,
1995. Reprint. Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett, 1998. Translation of Über das Fundament der Moral. In Die beiden Grundprobleme der Ethik: Behandelt in zwei
akademischen Preisschriften. Frankfurt-am-Main: Hermann, 1841. Contemporary edition. Ed. Hans Ebeling. Philosophische Bibliothek. 2 vols. Hamburg:
Meiner, 1978-79.
Sciacca, Giuseppe Maria. L'idea délia libertà: Fondamento della coscienza eticopolitica in Kant. Palermo, Italy: Palumbo, 1963.
Soloweiczik, Rafail. Kants Bestimmung der Moralität. Berlin: A. W. Hayn's Erben,
1901.
Sommerlath, Ernst. Kants Lehre vom intelligiblen Charakter: Ein Beitrag zu seiner
Freiheitslehre. Leipzig: A. Deichert, 1917.
Sternberg, Kurt. Beiträge Zur Interpretation der kritischen Ethik. Berlin: Reuther &
Reichard, 1912.
Stevens, Rex Patrick. Kant on Moral Practice: A Study of Moral Success and Failure. Macon, Ga.: Mercer University Press, 1981.
Stockhammer, Morris. Kants Zurechnungsidee
Kölner Universitats-Verlag, 1961.

und Freiheitsantinomie.

Cologne:

Strange, Carl. Die Ethik Kants: Zur Einführung in die Kritik der praktischen Vernunft. Leipzig: Dieterich'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1920.
Stratton-Lake, Philip. Kant, Duty, and Moral Worth. New York: Routledge, 2000.
Strecker, Reinhard. Kants Ethik: Eine offene Schrift an meinen verehrten Freund
Herrn Professor Dr. A. Messer, Giessen. Giessen, Germany: Emil Roth, 1909.
Sullivan, Roger J. An Introduction to Kant's Ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994.
. Immanuel Kant's Moral Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1989
Teale, A. E. Kantian Ethics. London: Oxford University Press, 1951. Reprint.
Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1975.
Tognini, Giorgio, ed. Introduzione alia morale di Kant: Guida alla critica. Rome:
La nuova Italia scientifica, 1993.
Travaglia, Sandro. Metaftsica ed etica in Kant. Dagli scritti precritici alia Critica
della ragionpura. Padua, Italy: CEDAM, 1972.
Velkley, Richard L. Freedom and the End of Reason: On the Moral Foundation of
Kant's Critical Philosophy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989.
Verondini, Enrico. Lafilosofia morale di Emanuele Kant. Bologna, Italy: Cappelli
Editore, 1966.
Vialatoux, Joseph. La Morale de Kant. 5th ed. Paris: Presses universitaires de
France, 1968(1956).

218

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ward, Keith. The Development of Kant's View of Ethics. Oxford: Blackwell, 1972;
New York: Humanities Press, 1972.
Washington, William Morrow. The Formal and Material Elements of Kant's Ethics.
New York: Macmillan, 1898.
Weeland, Horst. Autonomie und Sinnprinzip: Zum Vorgang kantischen Philosophierens. Bern: Peter Lang, 1987.
Willaschek, Marcus. Praktische Vernunft: Handlungstheorie und Moralbegründung
bei Kant. Stuttgart: J. B. Metzler, 1992.
Williams, Terence Charles. The Concept of the Categorical Imperative: A Study of
the Place of the Categorical Imperative in Kant's Ethical Theory. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1968.
Wood, Allen W. Kant's Ethical Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1999.

3.

Studies on Special Topics in Moral Philosophy

Anderson-Gold, Sharon. Unnecessary Evil: History and Moral Progress in the Philosophy of Immanuel Kant. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press,
2001.
Aramayo, Roberto Rodriguez. Critica de la razôn ucrônica: Estudios en torno a las
aporias morales de Kant. Foreword by Javier Muguerza. Madrid: Tecnos, 1992.
Axinn, Sidney. A Moral Military. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1989.
Bowie, Norman E. Business Ethics: A Kantian Perspective. Maiden, Mass.: Blackwell Publishers, 1999.
Cattaneo, Mario A. Dignità umana epena nellafilosofiadi Kant. Milan: A. Giuffrè,
1981.
Crowther, Paul. The Kantian Sublime: From Morality to Art. Oxford: Clarendon
Press; New York: Oxford University Press, 1989
Cummiskey, David. Kantian Consequentialism. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1996.
Denis, Lara. Moral Self-Regard: Duties to Oneself in Kant's Moral Theory. New
York: Routledge, 2001.
Edelman, Bernard. The House That Kant Built: A Moral Tale. Trans. Graeme
Hunter. Toronto: Canadian Philosophical Monographs for the Canadian Association for Publishing in Philosophy, 1987. Translation of La Maison de Kant: Conte
moral. Paris: Payot, 1984.
Fairbanks, Sandra Jane. Kantian Moral Theory and the Destruction of the Self.
Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 2000.
Firla-Forkl, Monika. Untersuchungen zum Verhältnis von Anthropologie und
Moralphilosophie bei Kant. Bern: Peter Lang, 1981.
Goodreau, John R. The Role of the Sublime in Kant's Moral Metaphysics. Washington, D.C.: Council for Research in Values and Philosophy, 1998.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

219

Gregor, Mary J. Laws of Freedom: A Study of Kant's Method of Applying the Categorical Imperative in the Metaphysik der Sitten. Oxford: Blackwell; New York:
Barnes & Noble, 1963.
Guevara, Daniel. Kant's Theory of Moral Motivation. Boulder, Colo.: Westview
Press, 2000.
Hansson, Mats G. Human Dignity and Animal Well-Being: A Kantian Contribution
to Biomedical Ethics. Uppsala, Sweden: [Uppsala University]; distributed by
Almqvist & Wiksell International, 1991.
Harper, William L., and Ralf Meerbote, eds. Kant on Causality, Freedom, and Objectivity. Minneapolis, Minn.: University of Minnesota Press, 1984.
Heinrichs, Jürgen. Das Problem der Zeit in der praktischen Philosophie Kants.
Bonn: Bouvier, 1968.
Henrich, Dieter. Aesthetic Judgment and the Moral Image of the World'. Studies in
Kant. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1992.
Hess, Heinz-Jürgen. Die obersten Grundsätze Kantischer Ethik und ihre Konkretisierbarkeit. Bonn: Bouvier, 1971.
Hill, Thomas E., Jr. Dignity and Practical Reason in Kant's Moral Theory. Ithaca,
N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1992.
. Respect, Pluralism, and Justice: Kantian Perspectives. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2000.
Homsi, Hikmat. Vernunft und Realität in der Ethik Kants. Bern: Peter Lang, 1975.
Hylkema, Govert Willem. Homo duplex: Het geweten als kern der ethiek. Haarlem,
The Netherlands: Erven F. Bohn, 1963.
Kneller, Jane, and Sidney Axinn, eds. Autonomy and Community: Readings in Contemporary Kantian Social Philosophy. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New
York Press, 1998.
Korsgaard, Christine Marion. Creating the Kingdom of Ends. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Langthaler, Rudolf. Kants Ethik als "System der Zwecke": Perspektiven einer modifizierten Idee der "moralischen Teleologie" undEthikotheologie. Berlin: Walter
deGruyter, 1991, 1990.
Louden, Robert B. Kant's Impure Ethics: From Rational Beings to Human Beings.
New York: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Ludwig, Ralf. Kategorischer Imperativ und Metaphysik der Sitten: Die Frage nach
der Einheitlichkeit von Kants Ethik. Bern: Peter Lang, 1992.
Méndez-Burguillos, Manuel. Zweckmäßigkeit und Autonomie: Im Zusammenhang
mit den Versuchen Kants, die Gültigkeit des moralischen Gesetzes zu begründen.
Bern: Peter Lang, 1996.
Michalson, Gordon E. Fallen Freedom: Kant on Radical Evil and Moral Regeneration. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Miller, Edmund Morris. Moral Action and Natural Law in Kant, and Some Developments. Melbourne, Australia: G. Robertson & Company, 1911.

220

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Moreau, Paul. L'éducation morale chez Kant. Paris: Cerf, 1988.
Müller, Peter. Transzendentale Kritik und moralische Teleologie: Eine Auseinandersetzung mit den zeitgenössischen Transformationen der Transzendentalphilosophie im Hinblick auf Kant. Würzburg, Germany: Königshausen & Neumann,
1983.
Müller, Wolfgang Hermann. Ethik als Wissenschaft und Rechtsphilosophie nach Immanuel Kant. Würzburg, Germany: Königshausen & Neumann, 1992.
Munzel, G. Félicitas. Kant's Conception of Moral Character: The "Critical" Link
of Morality, Anthropology, and Reflective Judgment. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1999.
Nieschmidt, Gerd-Peter. Praktische Vernunft und ewiger Friede: Eine Untersuchung zum Freiheitsbegriff in der Philosophie Kants. Munich: F. Frank, 1965.
Pirillo, Nestore. Morale e civiltà: Studi su Kant e la condotta di vita. Naples: Loffredo, 1995.
Probst, Peter. Kant: bestirnter Himmel und moralisches Gesetz: Zum geschichtlichen Horizont einer These Immanuel Kants. Würzburg, Germany: Königshausen & Neumann, 1994.
Puder, Martin. Kant, Stringenz und Ausdruck. Freiburg, Germany: Rombach, 1974.
Ramos, Samuel. Mâs alla de la moral de Kant: An Essay. Mexico, D.F.: Imprimiö
A. Châpero, 1938.
Renda, Antonio. Conoscenza e moralità in Kant. Palermo, Italy: G. B. Palumbo, 1944.
Rodriguez Aramayo, Roberto. Immanuel Kant: La Utopia moral como emancipaciön del azar. Madrid: Edaf, 2001.
Rosier, Winfried. Argumentation und moralisches Handeln: Zur Kantrekonstruktion
in der konstruktiven Ethik. Bern: Peter Lang, 1980.
Rüge, Arnold. Die Deduction der practischen und der moralischen Freiheit aus den
Prinzipien der kantischen Morallehre. Tübingen, Germany: H. Laupp Jr., 1910.
Schmidt, Helmut. Maximen politischen Handelns: Bemerkungen zu Moral, Pflicht
und Verantwortung des Politikers. Speech by the Federal Chancellor at the Kant
Congress of the Friedrich Ebert Foundation on March 12,1981. Bonn: Presse und
Informationsamt der Bundesregierung, 1981.
Schmidt, Karl. Beiträge zur Entwicklung der Kant'schen Ethik. Marburg, Germany:
J. Hamel, 1900.
Schmidt-Sauerhöfer, Paul. Wahrhaftigkeit und Handeln aus Freiheit: Zum TheoriePraxis-Problem der Ethik Immanuel Kants. Bonn: Bouvier, 1978.
Schnädelbach, Herbert. Zum Problem der Entscheidbarkeit in der Kantischen Ethik.
Frankfurt-am-Main: H. Heiderhoff, 1971.
Schroeter, François. La critique kantienne de Veudémonisme. Bern: Peter Lang,
1992.
Schwaiger, Clemens. Kategorische und andere Imperative: Zur Entwicklung von
Kants praktischer Philosophie bis 1785. Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt: FrommannHolzboog, 1999.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

221

Schwemmer, Oswald. Philosophie der Praxis: Versuch zur Grundlegung einer
Lehre vom moralischen Argumentieren in Verbindung mit einer Interpretation der
praktischen Philosophie Kants. Frankfurt-am-Main: Suhrkamp, 1980 (1971).
Seidler, Victor J. Kant, Respect and Injustice: The Limits of Liberal Moral Theory.
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1986.
Sena, Michelantonio. Etica e cosmopolitismo in Kant. Reggio Calabria, Italy: Parall e l 38, 1976.
Seung, T. K. Kant's Platonic Revolution in Moral and Political Philosophy. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994.
Shimizu, Daisuke. Freiheit und Zweck: Kants Grundlegung der Ethik in zwei
Phasen. Vienna: WUV-Universitätsverlag, 1997.
Sussman, David G. The Idea of Humanity: Anthropology and Anthroponomy in
Kant's Ethics. New York: Routledge, 2001.
Tenkku, Jussi. Are Single Moral Rules Absolute in Kant's Ethics? Jyväskylä, Finland: Jyväskylän Yliopisto, 1967.
Toyama, Yoshitaka. Kants praktische Philosophie mit Rücksicht auf eine Theorie
des Friedens. Hamburg: H. Buske, 1973.
Tunick, Mark. Practices and Principles: Approaches to Ethical and Legal Judgment. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1998.
Van der Linden, Harry. Kantian Ethics and Socialism. Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett,
1988.
Voeller, Carol W. The Metaphysics of the Moral Law: Kant's Deduction of Freedom.
New York: Garland, 1999.
Wellmer, Albrecht. Ethik und Dialog: Elemente des moralischen Urteils bei Kant
und in der Diskursethik. Frankfurt-am-Main: Suhrkamp, 1986.
Wike, Victoria S. Kant on Happiness in Ethics. Albany, N.Y.: State University of
New York Press, 1994.
Witschen, Dieter. Kant und die Idee einer christlichen Ethik: Ein Beitrag zur
Diskussion über das Proprium einer christlichen Moral. Düsseldorf, Germany:
Patmos, 1984.
Zwingelberg, Hans Willi. Kants Ethik und das Problem der Einheit von Freiheit und
Gesetz. Bonn: H. Bouvier, 1969.

4.

Studies on Basic Topics in Philosophy of Religion

Bruch, Jean-Louis. La Philosophie religieuse de Kant. Aubier, France: Éditions
Montaigne, 1968.
Cortina Orts, Adela. Dios en lafilosofia trascendental de Kant. Salamanca, Spain:
Universidad Pontifica, 1981.
Gömez Caffarena, José. El teismo moral de Kant. Madrid: Ediciones Cristiandad,
1983.
Green, Ronald Michael. Religious Reason: The Rational and Moral Basis of Religious Belief New York: Oxford University Press, 1978.

222

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Hasenfuß, Josef. Die Grundlagen der Religion bei Kant: dargestellt und kritisch
gewürdigt. Würzburg, Germany: C. J. Becker, 1927.
Lacorte, Carmelo. Kant: ancora un episodio delV alleanza di religione
Urbino, Italy: Argalia, 1969.

efilosofia.

Lamacchia, Ada. Lafilosofia della religione in Kant. Manduria, Italy: Lacaita, 1969.
Mancini, Italo. Kant e la teologia. Assisi, Italy: Cittadella éditrice, 1975.
Mavrodes, George L, ed. The Rationality of Belief in God. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice Hall, 1970.
Michalson, Gordon E. Kant and the Problem of God. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers,
1999.
Odero, José Miguel. La fe en Kant. Pamplona, Spain: Ediciones Universidad de
Navarra, 1992.
Palmquist, Stephen. Kant's Critical Religion. Aldershot, U.K.: Ashgate, 2000.
Picht, Georg. Kants Religionsphilosophie.

Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, 1985.

Reardon, Bernard M. G. Kant as Philosophical Theologian. Totowa, N.J.: Barnes &
Noble, 1988.
Rosenberg, Philipp. Die Grundzüge der Kant'sehen Religionsphilosophie in der
"Kritik der praktischen Vernunft" und in der "Kritik der Urteilskraft." Bazin,
Hungary: Alfred Klein, 1904.
Rossi, Philip J., and Michael Wreen, eds. Kant's Philosophy of Religion Reconsidered. Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press, 1991.
Sacken, Helene. Zur Frage des Religionsbegriffs im System der Philosophie. The
problem of the philosophy of religion in the framework of Kant's critical system.
Marburg, Germany: J. Hamel, 1919.
•
Sala, Giovanni B. Kant über die menschliche Vernunft: Die Kritik der reinen Vernunft und die Erkennbarkeit Gottes durch die praktische Vernunft. WeilheimBierbronnen, Germany: Gustav-Siewerth-Akademie, 1993.
Sänger, Ernst Adolf. Kants Lehre vom Glauben. Leipzig: Dürr, 1903.
Sasao, Kumetaro. Prolegomena zur Bestimmung
Halle/Saale, Germany: E. Karras, 1900.

des Gottesbegriffes

bei Kant.

Schroll-Fleischer, Niels Otto. Der Gottesgedanke in der Philosophie Kants. Odense,
Denmark: Odense University Press, 1981.
Schweitzer, Albert. Die Religionsphilosophie Kants von der Kritik der reinen Vernunft bis zur Religion innerhalb der Grenzen der blossen Vernunft. Freiburg, Germany: Mohr, 1899. Reprint. Hildesheim, Germany: G. Olms, 1974.
Thilo, Christfried Albert. Kants Religionsphilosophie.
Beyer & Söhne, 1905.

Langensalza, Germany: H.

Vos, Härmen de. Kant als theoloog. Baarn, The Netherlands: Het Wereldvenster,
1968.
Walsh, William Henry. Kant's Moral Theology. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1963.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

223

Webb, Clement Charles Julian. Kant's Philosophy of Religion, Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1926.
Wimmer, Reiner. Kants kritische Religionsphilosophie.
1990.

Berlin: Walter de Gruyter,

Winter, Aloysius. Der andere Kant: Zur philosophischen Theologie Immanuel
Kants. With a foreword by Norbert Hinske. Hildesheim, Germany: G. Olms,
2000.
Wood, Allen W. Kant's Moral Religion. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press,
1970.
. Kant's Rational Theology. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1978.

5.

Studies on Special Topics in Philosophy of Religion

Aviau de Ternay, Henri d'. Traces bibliques dans la loi morale chez Kant. Preface
by François Marty. Paris: Beauchesne, 1986.
Baumbach, Rudolf. Das Irrationale in Kants Religionsphilosophie.
many: Euker, 1929.

Marburg, Ger-

Chang, Maria Hsüeh~Chu. Die Einheit der Wirklichkeit: Kants Gotteslehre in metaphysischer Perspektive. Bern: Peter Lang, 1996.
Crumbach, Karl-Heinz. Theologie in kritischer Öffentlichkeit: Die Frage Kants an
das kirchliche Christentum. Munich: Kaiser; Mainz, Germany: Grünewald, 1977.
Davidovich, Adina. Religion as a Province of Meaning: The Kantian Foundations of
Modern Theology. Minneapolis, Minn.: Augsburg Fortress, 1993.
Dell'Oro, Regina O. M. From Existence to the Ideal: Continuity and Development
in Kant's Theology. New York: Peter Lang, 1994.
Eklund, Harald. Die Würde der Menschheit: Über die erkenntnistheoretischen Voraussetzungen der Religionsphilosophie bei Kant. Uppsala, Sweden: Lundequistaka Bokhandeln, 1947.
Elschazli, A. E. Abd Elhamid. Kants kritische Philosophie und das Problem der Offenbarung. Hamburg: Buske, 1970.
England, Frederick Ernest. Kant's Conception of God: A Critical Exposition of Its
Metaphysical Development Together with a Translation of the Nova dilucidatio.
With a foreword by G. Dawes Hicks. London: G. Allen & Unwin, 1929. Reprint.
New York: Humanities Press, 1968, 1969.
Frankenberger, Horst. Kant und die Frage nach der göttlichen Allgenugsamkeit: Zur
transzendentalen Wende in der philosophischen Gotteslehre. Bern: Peter Lang,
1984.
Galbraith, Elizabeth Cameron. Kant and Theology: Was Kant a Closet Theologian?
San Francisco: International Scholars Publications, 1996.
Geisler, Ralf. Kants moralischer Gottesbeweis im protestantischen
Göttingen, Germany: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1992.
Guttmann, Julius. Kants Gottesbegriff
Reuther & Reichard, 1906.

Positivismus.

in seiner positiven Entwicklung.

Berlin:

224

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Habichler, Alfred. Reich Gottes als Thema des Denkens bei Kant: Entwicklungsgeschichtliche und systematische Studie zur kantischen Reich-Gottes-Idee.
Mainz, Germany: M.-Grünewald, 1991.
Hauser, Linus. Religion als Prinzip und Faktum: Das Verhältnis von konkreter Subjektivität und Prinzipientheorie in Kants Religions- und Geschichtsphilosophie.
Bern: Peter Lang, 1983.
Heimsoeth, Heinz. Astronomisches und Theologisches in Kants Weltverständnis.
Mainz, Germany: Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur; in Kommission bei F. Steiner, Wiesbaden, 1963.
Jansen, Bernhard. Die Religionsphilosophie Kants. Geschichtlich dargestellt und
kritisch-systematisch gewürdigt. Berlin: F. Dümmlers, 1929.
Kielkopf, Charles F. A Kantian Condemnation of Atheistic Despair: A Declaration
of Dependence. New York: Peter Lang, 1997.
Lazzarini, Renato. Dalla religione naturale prekantiana alia religione morale di
Kant. Rome: Perrella, 1942.
Lötzsch, Frieder. Vernunft und Religion im Denken Kants: Lutherisches Erbe bei
Immanuel Kant. Cologne: Böhlau, 1976.
Michalson, Gordon E. The Historical Dimensions of a Rational Faith: The Role of
History in Kant's Religious Thought. Washington, D.C.: University Press of
America, 1977.
Noti, Odilo. Kant, Publikum und Gelehrter: Theologische Erinnerung an einen
abgebrochenen Diskurs zum Theorie-Praxis-Problem. Fribourg, Switzerland:
Universitätsverlag, 1994.
Scholz, Heinrich. Die Religionsphilosophie des Als-ob: Eine Nachprüfung Kants
und des idealistischen Positivismus. Leipzig: F. Meiner, 1921.
Waldau, Knut. Das Problem der Denkmöglichkeit der notwendigen Existenz Gottes
bei Immanuel Kant. Neuried, Germany: Ars Una, 1997.

6.

Studies on Other Special Topics

Albrecht, Michael. Kants Antinomie der praktischen Vernunft. Hildesheim, Germany: G. Olms, 1978.
Allison, Henry E. Idealism and Freedom: Essays on Kant's Theoretical and Practical Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Attisani, Adelchi. Metodo attivo e metodo speculativo nella Metodica della ragion
pratica di E. Kant. Messina, Italy: A. Sessa, 1951.
Bache, Kurt. Kants Prinzip der Autonomie im Verhältnis zur Idee des Reiches der
Zwecke. Berlin: Reuther & Reichard, 1909.
Baum, Hermann Alois. Kant: Moral und Religion. Sankt Augustin, Germany: Academia, 1998.
Benton, Robert J. Kant's Second Critique and the Problem of Transcendental Arguments. The Hague: M. Nijhoff, 1977.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

225

Chadwick, Ruth F., ed. Immanuel Kant: Critical Assessments. 4 vols. New York:
Routledge, 1992.
Council for Philosophical Studies. Kantian Ethical Thought: A Curricular Report
and Annotated Bibliography Based on an NEH Summer Institute Exploring the
Moral, Political, and Religious Views of Immanuel Kant. Tallahassee, Fla.:
Florida State University, 1984.
Dünnhaupt, Rudolf. Sittlichkeit, Staat und Recht bei Kant. Autonomie und Heteronomie in der Kantischen Ethik. Dessau, Germany: C. Dünnhaupt, 1926.
Ertl, Wolfgang. Kants Auflösung der Cidritten Antinomie"': Zur Bedeutung des
Schöpfungskonzepts für die Freiheitslehre. Freiburg, Germany: K. Alber, 1998.
Gaziaux, Eric. L'autonomie en morale: Au croisement de la philosophie et de la
théologie. Leuven, Belgium: Leuven University Press; Uitgeverij Peeters, 1998.
Goldschmidt, Ludwig. Kant über Freiheit, Unsterblichkeit, Gott. Gotha, Germany:
E. F. Thienemann, 1904.
Guyer, Paul. Kant and the Experience of Freedom: Essays on Aesthetics and Morality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
Kawamura, Katsutoshi. Spontaneität und Willkür: Der Freiheitsbegriff in Kants Antinomienlehre und seine historischen Wurzeln. Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1996.
Kinker, Johannes. Le dualisme de la raison humaine; ou, Le criticisme de Emmanuel Kant, amélioré sous le rapport de la Raison pure, et rendu complet sous
celui de la Raison pratique. Published under the care and auspices of, and with
notes by, J. D. Cocheret de la Morinière. 2 vols. Amsterdam: Weytingh & Van der
Haart, 1850-52.
Nobile, Emilia. Concetto e funzione della dialettica nella linea di svolgimento del
pensiero di Kant: introduzione alio studio della dialettica della Ragion purapratica. Naples: L. Loffredo, 1940.
Ouden, Bernard den, ed. New Essays on Kant. New York: Peter Lang, 1987.
Pascher, Manfred. Einführung in den Neukantianismus: Kontext, Grundpositionen,
praktische Philosophie. Munich: Fink, 1997.
Pirni, Alberto. // regno deifini in Kant: Morale, religione epolitica in collegamento
sistematico. Genoa, Italy: Il Melangolo, 2000.
Pleines, Jürgen-Eckardt, ed. Kant und die Pädagogik: Pädagogik und praktische
Philosophie. Würzburg, Germany: Königshausen & Neumann, 1985.
. Praxis und Vernunft: zum Begriff praktischer Urteilskraft. Würzburg, Germany: Königshausen & Neumann; Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1983.
Raschke, Carl A. Moral Action, God, and History in the Thought of Immanuel Kant.
[Tallahassee]: American Academy of Religion; Missoula, Mont.: distributed by
Scholars Press, 1975.
Strangas, Ioannës S. Kritik der kantischen Rechtsphilosophie: Ein Beitrag zur Herstellung der Einheit der praktischen Philosophie. Cologne: Böhlau, 1988.

226

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Teichner, Wilhelm. Die intelligible Welt Ein Problem der theoretischen und praktischen Philosophie L Kants. Meisenheim-am-Glan, Germany: Hain, 1967.
Vaihinger, Hans. The Philosophy of 'As If: A System of the Theoretical, Practical
and Religious Fictions of Mankind. Trans. C. K. Ogden. London: K. Paul, Trench,
Trubner & Co., Ltd.; New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1924, 1925. 2nd ed.,
reprinted. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1965. Translation of Die Philosophie des Als Ob: System der theoretischen, praktischen und religiösen Fiktionen
der Menschheit auf Grund eines idealistischen Positivismus. Ed. Raymund
Schmidt. 7th and 8th eds. Leipzig: F. Meiner, 1922.
Venturelli, Domenico. Etica e fede filosofica: Studi sullafilosofia di Kant. Naples:
Morano, 1989.
Yovel, Yirmiyahu, ed. Kant's Practical Philosophy Reconsidered. Papers Presented
at the Seventh Jerusalem Philosophical Encounter, December 1986. Boston:
Kluwer Academic, 1989.

7.

Comparative Studies

Abdullah, M. Amin. Kant and Ghazali: The Idea of Universality of Ethical Norms.
Frankfurt-am-Main: Landeck, 2000.
Adam, Armin. Despotie der Vernunft?: Hobbes, Rousseau, Kant, Hegel. Freiburg,
Germany: K. Alber, 1999.
Anderson, Pamela Sue. Ricoeur and Kant: Philosophy of the Will. Atlanta: Scholars
Press, 1993.
Appelmann, Anton Hermann. Der Unterschied in der Auffassung der Ethik bei
Schiller und Kant. With source documentation. New York: G. E. Stechert and
Company, 1917.
Attfield, Robin. God and the Secular: A Philosophical Assessment of Secular Reasoning from Bacon to Kant. Cardiff, Wales: University College Cardiff Press,
1978.
Baake, Wilhelm. Kants Ethik bei den englischen Moralphilosophen des 19. Jahrhunderts. Leipzig: Fock, 1911.
Bailey, William H. The Ethics of Kant and Brunner: An Existential Blend. New
York: Peter Lang, 1998.
Balbir Singh. A Comparative Study of the Ethical Teachings of Kant and the Bhagavadgita. Hoshiarpur, India: Vishveshvaranand Book Agency, 1958.
. The Concept of Perfection in the Teachings of Kant and the Gita. Delhi,
India: M. Banarsidass, 1967.
Baron, Marcia W., ed. Three Methods of Ethics: A Debate. Essays presented at a
conference by the Department of Philosophy, Monash University, June 1995.
Maiden, Mass.: Blackwell, 1997.
Baumann-Hölzle, Ruth. Autonomie und Freiheit in der Medizin-Ethik: Immanuel
Kant und Karl Barth. Freiburg, Germany: K. Alber, 1999.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

227

Bernstein, John Andrew. Shaftesbury, Rousseau, and Kant: An Introduction to the
Conflict between Aesthetic and Moral Values in Modern Thought. Rutherford,
N.J.: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 1980.
Besse, Guy. La morale selon Kant et selon Marx. Paris: Centre d'études et de
recherches marxistes, 1963.
Blosser, Philip. Scheler's Critique of Kant's Ethics. Athens, Oh.: Ohio University
Press, 1995.
Bockow, Jörg. Erziehung zur Sittlichkeit: Zum Verhältnis von praktischer Philosophie und Pädagogik bei Jean-Jacques Rousseau und Immanuel Kant. Bern: Peter
Lang, 1984.
Brady, Jules M. New Approaches to God: Based on Proofs by Anselm, Aquinas, and
Kant. With an introduction by Joseph Bobik. North Andover, Mass.: Genesis
Pub., 1996.
Brezina, Friedrich F. Die Achtung: Ethik und Moral der Achtung und Unterwerfung
bei Immanuel Kant, Ernst Tugendhat, Ursula Wolf und Peter Singer. Bern: Peter
Lang, 1999.
Bueb, Bernhard. Nietzsches Kritik der praktischen Vernunft. Stuttgart: E. Klett,
1970.
Carus, Paul. Kant and Spencer: A Study of the Fallacies of Agnosticism. Chicago:
Open Court, 1899.
Chalier, Catherine. Pour une morale au-delà du savoir: Kant et Levinas. Paris: A.
Michel, 1998.
Colebrook, Ciaire. Ethics and Representation: From Kant to Post-Structuralism.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1999.
Cook, Webster. The Ethics of Bishop Butler and Immanuel Kant. Ann Arbor, Mich.:
Andrews & Company, 1888.
Dorschel, Andreas. Die idealistische Kritik des Willens: Versuch über die Theorie
der praktischen Subjektivität bei Kant und Hegel. Hamburg: F. Meiner, 1992.
Engstrom, Stephen, and Jennifer Whiting, eds. Aristotle, Kant, and the Stoics: Rethinking Happiness and Duty. Essays originally prepared for a conference entitled "Duty, Interest, and Practical Reason: Aristotle, Kant, and the Stoics," held at
the University of Pittsburg in March 1994. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1996.
Field, Guy Cromwell. Moral Theory: An Introduction to Ethics. With a new introduction by Stephan Körner. 2nd ed. Reprint. London: Methuen, 1966.
Fleischacker, Samuel. A Third Concept of Liberty: Judgment and Freedom in Kant
and Adam Smith. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1999.
Gracanin, G. La personnalité morale d'après Kant: Son exposé, sa critique à la lumière du thomisme. Preface by Jacques Maritain. Paris: Mignard, 1929.
Greene, Theodore Meyer. Moral, Aesthetic, and Religious Insight. New Brunswick,
N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1957.

228

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Harris, George W. Agent-Centered Morality: An Aristotelian Alternative to Kantian
Internalism. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999.
Heizmann, Winfried. Kants Kritik spekulativer Theologie und Begriff moralischen
Vernunftglaubens im katholischen Denken der späten Aufklärung: Ein religionsphilosophischer Vergleich. Göttingen, Germany: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht,
1976.
Hepfer, Karl. Motivation und Bewertung: Eine Studie zur praktischen Philosophie
Humes und Kants. Göttingen, Germany: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1997.
Horstmann, Rolf-Peter. Die Grenzen der Vernunft: Eine Untersuchung zu Zielen
und Motiven des deutschen Idealismus. Frarikfurt-am-Main: A. Hain, 1991.
Jackson, William Taylor. Seneca and Kant. Dayton, Oh.: United Brethren Publishing House, 1881.
Jacobs, Wilhelm G. Trieb als sittliches Phänomen: Eine Untersuchung zur Grundlegung der Philosophie nach Kant und Eichte. Bonn: H. Bouvier, 1967.
Jaffro, Laurent, coordinator. Le Sens moral: Une histoire de la philosophie morale
de Locke à Kant. Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 2000.
Kelly, Michael. Kant's Ethics and Schopenhauer's Criticism. London: Swan Sonnenschein, 1910.
Kerner, George C. Three Philosophical Moralists: Mill, Kant, and Sartre: An Introduction to Ethics. Oxford: Clarendon Press; New York: Oxford University Press,
1990.
Kim, Chin. Kants Postulatenlehre: Ihre Rezeption durch Ernst Bloch und ihre
mögliche Anwendung zur Interpretation des Buddhismus: Zur Unterscheidung
zwischen postulatorischer Struktur und Postulats-Inhalten bei der Auflösung der
Dialektik des praktischen Vernunftgebrauchs. Bern: Peter Lang, 1988.
Kittmann, Siegfried. Kant und Nietzsche: Darstellung und Vergleich ihrer Ethik und
Moral. Bern: Peter Lang, 1984.
Kleinhans, Bernd. Der "Philosoph " in der neueren Geschichte der Philosophie:
"eigentlicher Philosoph" und "vollendeter Gelehrter": Konkretionen des praktischen Philosophen bei Kant und Fichte. Würzburg, Germany: Königshausen &
Neumann, 1999.
Kleppel, Erich. Autonomie und Anerkennung: Eine Untersuchung des Verhältnisses
der Grundlagen der Südwestdeutschen Kantschule zum Sittlichkeitsbegriffe
Kants. Bern: Peter Lang, 1978.
Lopez Thode, Mario A. Très sistemas morales: Jesus, Kant, Marx. Mercedes,
Uruguay: distributed by J. Bastreri, 1970.
Martin, Werner. Bestimmung und Abgrenzung von Ethik und Religion: Ein Beitrag
zur Diskussion über das christliche Proprium in der Ethik unter besonderer
Berücksichtigung der Philosophie Kants. Pfaffenweiler, Germany: CentaurusVerlagsgesellschaft, 1990.
Mathieu, V. et al., eds. A partire da Kant: Ueredità délia "Critica della ragion
practica." Introduction by S. Marcucci. Proceedings of the national convention of

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

229

the Società filosofica italiana held in Lucca on May 19-21, 1988. Milan: F.
Angeli, 1989.
Mazzantini, Carlo. L'etica di Kant e di Schopenhauer. Turin, Italy: Editrice tirrenia,
1965.
Muguerza, Javier, and Roberto Rodriguez Aramayo, eds. Kant después de Kant: En
el bicentenario de la Critica de la razôn practica. Instituto de Filosofîa del
CS J.C. Madrid: Tecnos, 1989.
Novak, David. Suicide and Morality: The Theories of Plato, Aquinas, and Kant and
Their Relevance for Suicidology. New York: Scholars Studies Press, 1975.
Olson, Phillip. The Discipline of Freedom: A Kantian View of the Role of Moral Precepts in Zen Practice. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, 1993.
Osongo-Lukadi, Antoine-Dover. La philosophie pratique à l'époque de Vontologie
fondamentale: Le dialogue de Heidegger avec Kant. Prefaces by Gilbert Gérard
and V. Y. Mudimbe. Paris: Harmattan, 2000.
Otto, Rudolf. The Philosophy of Religion, Based on Kant and Fries. Translated by
E. B. Dicker, with a foreword by W. Tudor Jones. London: Williams & Norgate
Ltd., 1931. Translation of Kantisch-Fries 'sehe Religionsphilosophie und ihre Anwendung auf die Theologie: zur Einleitung in die Glaubenslehre für Studenten
der Theologie. Tübingen, Germany: J.C.B. Mohr, 1909.
Park, Chan-Goo. Das moralische Gefühl in der britischen moral-sense-Schule und
bei Kant. Tübingen, Germany: [s.n.], 1995.
Pasquali, Antonio. Fundamentos gnoseolögicos para una ciencia de la moral: Ensayo sobre la formaciôn de una teoria especial del conocimiento moral en las
filosofias de Kant, Lequier, Renouvier y Bergson. Caracas: Universidad Central
de Venezuela, 1963.
Phillips, D. Z., and Timothy Tessin, eds. Kant and Kierkegaard on Religion. Basingstoke, U.K.: Macmillan; New York: St. Martin's Press, 2000.
Pioletti, Antje Ehrhardt. Die Realität des moralischen Handelns: Mou Zongsans
Darstellung des Neokonfuzianismus als Vollendung der praktischen Philosophie
Kants. Bern: Peter Lang, 1997.
Pleines, Jürgen-Eckardt. Eudaimonia zwischen Kant und Aristoteles: Glückseligkeit
als höchstes Gut menschlichen Handelns. Würzburg, Germany: Königshausen &
Neumann, 1984.
Reich, Klaus. Kant und die Ethik der Griechen. Tübingen, Germany: J.C.B. Mohr
(P. Siebeck), 1935.
Reiner, Hans. Duty and Inclination: The Fundamentals of Morality Discussed and
Redefined with Special Regard to Kant and Schiller. The Hague: Nijhoff; distributed by Kluwer, 1983. Translation, accompanied by four previously published
essays, of the first four chapters of Die Grundlagen der Sittlichkeit. Meisenheimam-Glan, Germany: Hain, 1974.
Schalow, Frank. Imagination and Existence: Heidegger's Retrieval of the Kantian
Ethic. Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1986.
Scheler, Max Ferdinand. Formalism in Ethics and Non-Formal Ethics of Values: A

230

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

New Attempt toward the Foundation of an Ethical Personalism. [5th, rev. ed.]
Trans. Manfred S. Frings and Roger L. Funk. Evanston, 111.: Northwestern University Press, 1973. 6th, rev. ed. Bern: Francke, 1980. Translation of Der Formalismus in der Ethik und die materiale Wertethik; neuer Versuch der Grundlegung
eines ethischen Personalismus. 3rd, unchanged edition, supplemented by a comprehensive subject index. Halle/Saale, Germany: M. Niemeyer, 1927.
Schmitt-Wendel, Karl. Kants Einfluss auf die englische Ethik. Berlin: Reuther &
Reichard, 1912.
Schneewind, Jerome B. The Invention of Autonomy: A History of Modern Moral
Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Schneewind, Jerome B., ed. Moral Philosophy from Montaigne to Kant: An Anthology. 2 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Schröer, Christian. Naturbegriff und Moralbegründung: Die Grundlegung der Ethik
bei Christian Wolff und deren Kritik durch Immanuel Kant. Stuttgart: W.
Kohlhammer, 1988.
Sherman, Nancy. Making a Necessity of Virtue: Aristotle and Kant on Virtue. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Slote, Michael A. From Morality to Virtue. New York: Oxford University Press,
1992.
Swabey, William Curtis. Ethical Theory: From Hobbes to Kant. New York: Philosophical Library, 1961. Reprint. New York: Greenwood Press, 1969.
Verma, Krishna Murari Prasad. Kant and the Gita. New Delhi: Classical Publishing
Co., 1980.
Vincenti, Luc. Pratique et réalité: Dans les philosophies de Kant et de Fichte. Preface by Bernard Bourgeois. Paris: Kimé, 1997.
Zenkert, Georg. Konturen praktischer Rationalität: Die Rekonstruktion praktischer
Vernunft bei Kant und Hegels Begriff vernünftiger Praxis. Würzburg, Germany:
Königshausen & Neumann, 1989.
Zupancic, Alenka. Ethics of the Real: Kant, Lacan. London: Verso, 2000.

8.

Studies from the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries

Abicht, Johann Heinrich. Kritische Briefe über die Möglichkeit einer wahren wissenschaftlichen Moral, Theologie, Rechtslehre, empirischen Psychologie und
Geschmackslehre mit prüfender Hinsicht auf die Kantische Begründung dieser
Lehre. Nürnberg: Felseker, 1793.
Barni, Jules Romain. Philosophie de Kant: Examen des fondements de la métaphysique des moeurs et de la Critique de la raison pratique. Paris: Ladrange,
1851.
Bauernfeind, Gotthold. Wie verhält sich in Kants Religionslehre das theoretische
Element zum praktischen? Rostock, Germany: C. Boldt, 1875.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

231

Bernhardi, Ambrosius Bethmann. Gemeinfassliche Darstellung der Kantischen
N Lehren über Sittlichkeit, Freyheit, Gottheit und Unsterblichkeit. Freyberg: Craz,
1796-97. Reprint. Brussels: Culture et civilisation, 1968.
Brandt, Samuel. Kant's Lehre von der Freiheit: ein kritischer Versuch. Bonn: C.
Georgi, 1872.
Brastberger, Gebhard Ulrich. Untersuchungen über Kants Kritik der practischen
Vernunft. Tübingen: J. G. Cotta, 1792. Reprint. Brussels: Culture et civilisation,
1968.
Bridel, Philippe. La philosophie de la religion de Immanuel Kant: Étude présentée
à la Faculté de théologie de l'église libre du canton de Vaud. Lausanne, Switzerland: G. Bridel, 1876.
Caird, Edward. The Critical Philosophy of Immanuel Kant. 2nd ed. 2 vols. Glasgow: J. Maclehose & Sons, 1909, 1889. Reprint. 2 vols. Amsterdam: Rodopi,
1969.
Cohen, Hermann. Kants Begründung der Ethik. Berlin: F. Dümmler, 1877.
Colani, Timothée. Exposé critique de la philosophie de la religion de Kant. Strasbourg: Berger-Levrault, 1845.
Edmunds, James. Kant's Ethics: The Clavis to an Index. Including extracts from
several oriental sacred scriptures, and from certain Greek and Roman philosophical writings. Louisville, Ky.: Louisville Courier-Journal, 1877, 1884.
Frederichs, Friedrich. Über Kant's Princip der Ethik. Berlin: Bahlke, 1875.
Grillo, Friedrich. Aphoristische Darstellung der Religion, innerhalb der Gränzen
der blossen Vernunft des Herrn Immanuel Kant. Rostock: Karl Christoph Stiller,
1794. Reprint. Brussels: Culture et civilisation, 1968.
Hegler, Alfred. Die Psychologie in Kants Ethik. Freiburg, Germany: J.C.B. Mohr (P.
Siebeck), 1891.
Hoffbauer, Johann Christoph. Anfangsgründe der Moralphilosophie und insbesondere der Sittenlehre nebst einer allgemeinen Geschichte derselben. Halle: C. A.
Kümmel, 1798.
Immanuel: Ein Buch für Christen und Juden. Oder: die völlige Vernichtung der
natürlichen Religion durch die kritische Philosophie. Ein neuer Beweis für die
Notwendigkeit und Wünschenswürdigkeit der in der Bibel wirklich enthaltenen
Offenbarung. Berlin: F. Nicolai, 1805. [No editor.] Reprint. Brussels: Culture et
civilisation, 1968.
Jenisch, Daniel. Ueber Grund und Werth der Entdeckungen des Herrn Professor
Kant in der Metaphysik, Moral und Aesthetik. Nebst einem Sendschreiben des
Verfassers an Herrn Professor Kant über die bisherigen günstigen und ungünstigen Einflüsse der kritischen Philosophie. Berlin: Friedrich Vieweg dem Älteren,
1796. Reprint. Brussels: Culture et civilisation, 1973.
Koppelmann, Wilhelm. Immanuel Kant und die Grundlagen der christlichen Religion. Gütersloh: C. Bertelsmann, 1890.

232

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Kügelgen, Constantin von. Immanuel Kants Auffassung von der Bibel und seine
Auslegung derselben: Ein Kompendium Kantscher Theologie. Leipzig: A. Deichen, 1896.
Mayer, Emil Hugo Walter. Das Verhältniss der Kantischen Religions-Philosophie zu
dem Ganzen des Kantischen Systems. Halle: [s.n.], 1879; Berlin: Kayssler & Co.:
[s.d.].
Mengel, Wilhelm. Kants Begründung der Religion. Ein kritischer Versuch. Leipzig:
WEnglemann, 1899.
Obereit, Jacob Hermann. Finale Vernunftkritik für das grade Herz. Nürnberg: A.
Schneider und Weigel, 1796.
Porter, Noah. Kant's Ethics: A Critical Exposition. 2nd ed. Chicago: S. C. Griggs,
1886.
Promnitz, Charlotte Friederike von. Antischrift zur Verteidigung der Vernunft und
Religion, wider die Critik des Herrn Kant, in fünf Abhandlungen. Berlin: [s.n.],
1796.
Reiner, Gregor Leonhard. Kant's Theorie der reinmoralischen Religion mit Rücksicht auf das reine Christenthum kurz dargestellt. Riga: J. F. Hartknoch, 1796.
Romundt, Heinrich. Kants philosophische Religionslehre: Eine Frucht der gesamten
Vernunftkritik. Gotha, Germany: E. F. Thienemann, 1902.
Schrempf, Christoph. Die christliche Weltanschauung und Kant's sittlicher Glaube:
Eine religiöse Untersuchung. Göttingen, Germany: Vandenhœck & Ruprecht, 1891.
Storr, Gottlob Christian. Bemerkungen über Kant's philosophische Religionslehre.
Trans. Friedrich Gottlieb Süskind. Tübingen: J. G. Cotta, 1794. Reprint. Brussels:
Culture et civilisation, 1968. Translation of Annotationes quaedam theologicae
ad philosophicam Kantii de religione doctrinam. Tübingen, Germany: [s.n.],
1793.
Treutmann, Max. Darstellung und Beurteilung des Kantschen Pflichtbegriffs.
Marienburg: L. Giesow, 1888.
Zwanziger, Johann Christian. Commentar über Herrn Professor Kants Kritik der
praktischen Vernunft; nebst einem Sendschreiben an den gelehrten Herrn Censor
in Rücksicht der dem Verfasser des Commentars in den gelehrten Gothaischen
Zeitungen mitgetheilten kritischen Anmerkungen. Leipzig: C. G. Hilscher, 1794.
Reprint. Brussels: Culture et civilisation, 1968.

GLOSSARY

The German terms are usually given not as they appear in the original text,
but in their modern spelling, so that they can be found more easily in a
modern German dictionary. For translations from English to German,
please see the Index.
A
Abbruch (tun)
Aberglaube
Ableitung
Abscheu
Absicht
ab würdigen
Achtung
allgemein
allmächtig
allwissend
Änderung
anerkennen
angemessen

angenehm
Anlage
Anleitung
Anlockung
anmaßen (sich)
annehmen

impairment (to
impair)
superstition
derivation
loathing
aim, intention, respect, view
to degrade
respect
universal, general
omnipotent
omniscient
change
to acknowledge
appropriate, adequate, commensurate
agreeable
predisposition
guidance
enticement
to presume, to
(lay) claim
to assume, to suppose, to take, to
accept

Anschauung
Anspruch
Anstrengung
Antrieb
Art
auferlegen
Aufführung
Aufgabe
aufheben
auflösen
Aufmerksamkeit
Aufopferung
Aufrichtigkeit
aufstellen

aufzeigen
Augenblick
augenscheinlich
ausmachen

äußer

233

intuition
claim, pretension
endeavor
impulse
kind, way, manner, mode
to impose, to
enjoin
behavior
problem, task,
assignment
to annul
to solve, to
resolve
attentiveness,
attention
sacrifice
sincerity
to put forth, to ad
duce, to pose,
to list
to show
moment, instant
obvious
to amount to, to
establish, to
decide
external, outer

234

GLOSSARY

ausüben

to exercise, to perform, to carry
out, to exert
autonomy

Autonomie

Bestimmungsgrund
Bestrafung
Bestrebung
bestreiten
betrachten

B
Betrachtung
bedeuten

to signify, to
mean
condition
Bedingung
bedürfen
to need, to require
befolgen
to comply with, to
follow
befriedigen
to satisfy
authority
Befugnis
Begebenheit
event
begehen
to commit, to
perpetrate
Begehrung, Begierde desire
begreifen
to comprehend
Begriff
concept
Beharrlichkeit
perseverance,
permanence
behaupten
to assert, to maintain, to claim,
to affirm
Beistimmung
assent
bekannt
familiar
Bemühung
endeavor
Benennung
designation
Beobachtung
observation,
observance
berechtigen
to entitle
Beschaffenheit
character(istic),
constitution
beschränkt
limited
Beschuldigung
accusation
besonder
particular, special
bestätigen
to confirm
bestehen
to consist, to
subsist
determination,
Bestimmung
vocation,
attribute

Betragen
Bewegungsgrund
Bewegursache
Beweis
beweisen
Bewunderung
Bewußtsein
bezeichnen
Beziehung
bezweifeln
billigen
Blendwerk
Bösartigkeit
böse
Bosheit
Brauchbarkeit

determining basis
punishment
endeavor, striving
to dispute
to consider, to
regard, to
examine
contemplation,
consideration
behavior
motive
motivating cause
proof
to prove
admiration
consciousness
to designate
reference, relation, regard
to doubt
to approve
deception,
illusion
malice
evil
villainy
usefulness

C
Charakter

character

D
darlegen
darstellen
Darstellung
dartun
Dasein
Dauer
dauerhaft
Demut

to set forth, to
display
to exhibit
exhibition
to establish
existence
duration
lasting
humility

GLOSSARY

denken
Denkungs-

to think
of thinking, of
thought
deutlich
distinct
useful
dienlich
Ding
thing
Ding an sich (selbst) thing in itself
durchgängig
thoroughgoing,
throughout,
thoroughly

E
echt
edel
Ehre
Ehrfurcht
Eigendünkel
Eigenliebe
Eigennutz
Eigenschaft
Einbildung

Einheit
einhellig
Einhelligkeit
einleuchtend
einräumen
Einschränkung
einsehen
Einsicht
Einstimmung

Einwurf
einzeln
eitel
empfänglich

genuine
noble
honor, glory
reverence
self-conceit, conceit for oneself
love for oneself
self-interest
property
imagination,
imagining,
conceit
unity
accordant
agreement
evident, plausible
to grant, to concede, to admit
restriction,
limitation
to have (gain) insight into, to see
insight
agreement,
accordance,
harmony
objection
individual
vain
susceptible,
receptive

Empfindung
Endabsicht
Endzweck
entdecken

235

sensation
final aim
final purpose
to discover, to uncover, to reveal
to decide
to endure
experience (experiential, of
experience)
delight
to fathom
sublime, exalted
to elevate, to raise
to cognize, to
recognize
cognition (cognitive, of cognition)
to explicate, to
explain, to
declare
remission
to allow, to permit, to grant
to elucidate
to attain, to
achieve
appearance
amazement
to expand
(self-)evidence
eternal
existence

entscheiden
erdulden
Erfahrung(s)

Ergötzung
ergründen
erhaben
erheben
erkennen
Erkenntnis(-)

erklären

Erlassung
erlauben
erläutern
erreichen
Erscheinung
Erstaunen
erweitern (sich)
Evidenz
ewig
Existenz

F
Fähigkeit
falsch
fassen
Fehler
Feld
festsetzen
feststehen

capacity
false
to grasp
mistake, error
realm
to establish
to be established

236

GLOSSARY

Folge
Folgerung
fordern

consequence
inference
to demand, to
require
to further
to investigate, to
search
freedom
voluntary
to feel
assent

fördern
forschen
Freiheit
freiwillig
fühlen
Fürwahrhalten

gesetzwidrig
Gesinnung
gewiß
Gewissen
Gewohnheit
Glaube
glauben
gleichartig
Gleichheit
gleichgültig
Gleisnerei
Glück
glücklich

unlawful
attitude
certain
conscience
habit, custom
faith
to believe
homogeneous
equality
indifferent
hypocrisy
fortune
happy, fortunate,
favorable
happiness
God (deity)
bounds,
boundaries
magnitude
magnanimity
basis, ground,
reason
foundation
principle
valid
benignity

G
Gang
Ganzes
Gebot
Gedanke
Gefühl
Gegenstand
Gegenteil
Gehalt
gehorchen
Geist
Gelegenheit
Gelehrsamkeit
gelten
gemäßigt
gemein(sam)
Gemüt(s-)
genau
Genuß
Gerechtigkeit
Geschäft
Geschöpf
Gesetz
gesetzgebend
gesetzlich
gesetzmäßig

progression,
course, path
whole
command
thought
feeling, touch
object
opposite, contrast
import
to obey
spirit, intellect
occasion,
opportunity
scholarship
to hold, to count
moderate
common
mind (mental)
exact, accurate
enjoyment
justice
task, business,
occupation
creature
law
legislative,
legislating
legal
lawful

Glückseligkeit
Gott(heit)
Grenzen
Größe
Großmut
Grund
Grundlage
Grundsatz
gültig
Güte

H
action
propensity
holy, sacred
to downgrade, to
degrade
to be hypocritical
sufficient
chimera

Handlung
Hang
heilig
herabsetzen
heucheln
hinreichend
Hirngespinst

I
Imperativ
Individuum

imperative
individual

GLOSSARY

aware
inner, internal,
intrinsic
error

inné

inner
Irrtum

Mäßigung
Maßregel (-stab)

moderation
guideline
(standard)
maxim
to mean, to deem,
to suppose, to
think
opinion, intent,
intention
human being
(humanity)
characteristic,
mark
to disapprove
sympathy
to communicate
means
indirect
possible
morality
moral
moralist
model
courage, mettle

Maxime
meinen

K
kategorisch
kennen

categorical
to be acquainted
(familiar) with,
to cognize, to
know
acquaintance,
knowledge,
cognition(s)
clear, evident
prudent
consistent
power, force,
strength
critique
critical

Kenntnis(se)

klar
klug
konsequent
Kraft
Kritik
kritisch

refraining
vice
purity
doctrine, science,
teaching
theorem
ultimate
to deny
to entice
pleasure

Lassen
Laster
Lauterkeit
Lehre
Lehrsatz
letzt
leugnen
locken
Lust

M
mannigfaltig
Maß

manifold, ample
measure, extent,
degree

237

Meinung
Mensch(heit)
Merkmal
mißbilligen
Mitleid
mitteilen
Mittel
mittelbar
möglich
Moral(ität)
moralisch
Moralist
Muster
Mut

N
Nachahmung
nachdenken
Nachforschung
Nachsicht
nachsinnen
Neigung
nichtig
nichtswürdig
nötig
nötigen
Nötigung
notwendig
Nutzen

imitation, imitating
to meditate
investigation
forbearance
to reflect
inclination
null, void
worthless
needed
to compel
necessitation
necessary
benefit, utility

238

GLOSSARY

O
supreme
object
objective
Obligation
manifest, obvious
sacrifice
order

oberst
Objekt
objektiv
Obliegenheit
offenbar
Opfer
Ordnung

rechtmäßig
rechtschaffen
Regel
Reich
Reihe
rein
reizen
Reue

legitimate
righteous
rule
kingdom
series
pure
to stimulate
repentance
correct
standard,
guidance

richtig
Richtmaß, -schnür

parteiisch
Persönlichkeit
Pflicht
pflichtmäßig

partial
personality
duty
conforming to (in
conformity
with) duty
contrary to duty
philosophy
practical
to praise
primacy
principle
test
touchstone
to test
examination

pflichtwidrig
Philosophie
praktisch
preisen
Primat
Prinzip
Probe
Probierstein
prüfen
Prüfung

Q
Quelle

source

R
rational
real
recht
Recht
rechtfertigen

rational
real
proper, right,
quite
right
to justify

S
Sache
Satz
schätzen
Schein
scheinbar
schicklich
Schlechte, das
schlechterdings,
schlechthin
schließen

Schluß
Schmerz
Schöpfung
Schranke
Schuld
schuldfrei
Schwäche
Schwanken
schwärmen
Schwärmerei
Seele
Selbstliebe
Selbstsucht

thing, matter,
business
proposition,
principle
to esteem
illusion
seeming, specious, plausible
fitting
the bad
absolutely, simply
to conclude, to
infer, to make
(an) inference^)
inference
pain
creation
limit
guilt
innocent
weakness
wavering
to rove
fanaticism
soul
self-love
selfishness

GLOSSARY

Seligkeit
setzen

bliss
to place, to put, to
set, to suppose,
to posit
secure, safe, sure
sense, mind
sensible
morals
moral
morality
ought, to be to,
should
strength, fortitude
pride
punishment
to strive
conflict
to dispute
controversy
strict, severe,
stern
component, item,
point
subject
subjective

sicher
Sinn
sinnlich
Sitten
sittlich
Sittlichkeit
sollen
Stärke
Stolz
Strafe
streben
Streit
streiten
Streitigkeit
streng
Stück
Subjekt
subjektiv

censure, blemish
to rebuke
deed
activity
suitable
delusion, illusion
compassionate
theoretical
animal(ity)
transcendent
transcendental
faithful
incentive
deceptive
virtue

virtuous
doing
feasible
practicability

U
übel
überall
überdenken
Übereinstimmung
überhaupt
überlegen
überschwenglich
übersinnlich
übertreten
überwinden
überzeugen
umändern
unablässig
unaufhörlich
unausbleiblich
unbedingt

T
Tadel
tadeln
Tat
Tätigkeit
tauglich
Täuschung
teilnehmend
theoretisch
Tier(heit)
transzendent
transzendental
treu
Triebfeder
trüglich
Tugend

tugendhaft
Tun
tunlich
Tunlichkeit

239

unbezweifelt
Unding
unecht
unempfindlich
unendlich
unentbehrlich
unerläßlich
unfehlbar
ungereimt
ungezweifelt
Unglaube
ungleichartig
Unlust
unmittelbar

bad
at all, throughout,
everywhere
to reflect upon
agreement,
harmony
as such, in general, at all
to deliberate
extravagant
suprasensible
to transgress
to overcome
to convince
to transform
unceasingly
incessantly,
unceasing
unfailingly
unconditioned,
unconditional
indubitable
absurdity
spurious
insensitive
infinite
indispensable
irrémissible
unfailing
absurd
indubitable
lack of faith
different in kind,
heterogeneous
displeasure
direct

240

GLOSSARY

unnachläßlich
unrecht
unschuldig
Unsterblichkeit
unterlassen
unterscheiden,
Unterschied
untersuchen
ununterbrochen
unverletzlich
unvermeidlich
unwandelbar
unwidersprechlich
Unwissenheit
Urbild
Urgrund
Urheber
Ursache
Ursprung
Urteil(s)
urteilen
Urwesen

unremittingly
wrong
innocent
immortality
to omit, to abstain
to distinguish
distinction,
difference
to investigate
uninterrupted
inviolable
unavoidable,
inevitable
immutable
incontestable
ignorance
archetype
original basis
originator
cause, reason
origin
judgment (of
judgment)
to judge, to make
(a) judgment(s)
original being

Verbrechen
verdienen
Verdienst
Verehrung
vereinigen

to loathe
to despise
contempt
change
to prompt, to
occasion
responsible
to forbid
to combine, to
link, to oblige,
to obligate
obligatory
obligation

Vermutung
vernichten
Vernunft
Vernunft-

V
verabscheuen
verachten
Verachtung
Veränderung
veranlassen
verantwortlich
verbieten
verbinden

verbindend
Verbindlichkeit

Verfahren
vergeblich
Vergehung
Vergnügen
Verhalten
Verhältnis
verheißen
verhindern
verhüten

verkennen
Verknüpfung
verlangen
Verlegenheit
verletzen
Verleugnung
Verleumder
vermeiden
Vermögen

Vernünfteln
vernünftig
Vernunftschluß
verraten
verrichten

crime
to deserve
merit
veneration
to unite, to
reconcile
procedure
futile, vain
offense
gratification
conduct, behaving
relation, proportion
to promise
to prevent
to prevent, to
keep from, to
help
to fail to
recognize
connection
to demand, to
require
perplexity
to violate
denial
defamer
to avoid
power, ability,
assets
presumption
to annihilate
reason
rational, of reason, reason's
subtle reasoning
reasonable,
rational
syllogism, inference of reason
to betray
to perform, to
accomplish

GLOSSARY

versäumen
verschieden
Verstand
verstehen
verstoßen
Versuch
Versuchung
verteidigen
verträglich
verwandeln
verweigern
verwerflich
Verwirrung
Vollendung
vollkommen
vollständig
voraussetzen
Vorbedacht, mit
vorgeben
Vorsatz
vorsätzlich
vorschreiben
Vorschrift
vorstellen (sich)

Vorstellung

Vorteil
Vortrag
vortragen
Vorzug

to neglect
different, various
understanding,
meaning, mind
to understand, to
mean
to offend
attempt,
experiment
temptation
to defend
compatible
to transform, to
convert
to refuse
reprehensible
confusion
perfection,
completion
perfect, complete
complete
to presuppose
deliberately
to allege, to
profess
project, resolve
deliberate
to prescribe
precept
to present, to
conceive, to
represent
presentation,
presenting,
conception
advantage
exposition
to set forth, to
propound
superiority, advantage, preeminence,
merit

241

W
wählen
Wahn(sinn)
wahr(haftig)
wahrnehmen
wechselseitig
Weg
weigern (sich)
weihen
Weisheit
Weite
Werk
Wert
Wesen
wesentlich
wichtig
widerlegen
widersinnisch
widersprechend
Widerstand
widerstehen
Widerstrebung
Widerstreit
widmen
Wille
Willkür
willkürlich
wirklich
wirksam
Wirkung
Wissen
Wissenschaft
Wohl(befinden),
Wohlsein
Wohlgefallen
Wohltat
Wohlwollen
Würde

to select, to
choose
delusion
(madness)
true (truly)
to perceive
reciprocal
path, way
to refuse
to dedicate, to
devote
wisdom
distance
work
worth, value
being, essence
essential
important
to refute
paradoxical
contradictory
resistance
to oppose
resistance
conflict
to devote, to
dedicate
will
power of choice
chosen, by choice
actual
efficient, active
effect, action
knowledge
science
well-being
liking, fondness
benefaction
benevolence
dignity

242

GLOSSARY

würdig

worthy

Z
zeigen
Zeit
Zeitalter
zergliedern
Ziel
Zucht
zufällig
Zufriedenheit
zugleich

zulangen
Zulänglichkeit
zuletzt
zumuten

to show, to
manifest
time
age
to dissect
goal
discipline
contingent
satisfaction
at the same time,
simultaneous,
also, as well
to be sufficient
adequacy
ultimately, finally
to require, to
demand

zureichend
Zusammenhang

sufficient
coherence,
connection
zusammenhängen to be linked
zusammenstimmen to agree, to harmonize, to be
harmonious
zuschreiben
to ascribe
state, situation
Zustand
zuträglich
conducive,
beneficial
Zutrauen
trust
Zuversicht
confidence
zuwider
contrary, opposed
Zwang
constraint
Zweck
purpose
purposive
zweckmäßig
zweideutig
ambiguous
Zweifel
doubt
Zweifellehre
skepticism

INDEX

All references are to the numbers in the margin of the text, which follow the
pagination of the Akademie edition on which this translation is based.
Headings are arranged alphabetically, but subheadings are ordered by affinity of topics. The sequence of the individual references follows the arrangement of the text in this volume, except that indirect references (introduced
by 'cf.') follow direct references as a group. References to Kant's own notes
are marked by 'n.' or the plural 'ns.' References to the translator's bracketed
notes are marked by 'br. n.' or 'br. ns.' (Notes identified by lower-case letters are notes to other notes; see the Translator's Preface for further details.)
Works by Kant are listed by their English titles, with the original titles given
in parentheses. Other authors are listed here only by their names; their
works, insofar as these are cited in this translation, are listed in the Selected
Bibliography.
Abel, Jacob Friedrich von, 12 br. n. 95
Abstracto: in, 67, see also Abstract,
Ability (Vermögen), 3 br. n. 7, 9 br. n.
Concreto: in
90c, 12,13, 20, 23, 32 br. n. 80, 33 br. Absurd(ity) (ungereimt [Unding]), 37,
n. 91, 37, 57 incl. br. n. 243, 58, 94,
56, 98, 102, 144
109, 113, 121, 127 incl. br. n. 151m, Accidents (Akzidenzen), 102, see also
129, 132, 135, 136 br. n. 229, 143 n.
Contingent
282, 160, 161, see also Power, Ca- Accordance or accordant (Einstimmipacity, Inability
gung, einhellig), 20, 24, 26, 28, 46,
Absolutely) (absolut [schlechthin, schlech- 54, 87, 105, 110, 112, 120, 131, 146,
cf. 7 br. n. 73, see also Agree
terdings]), 3 incl. br. ns. 2 and 15, 14,
20, 28, 31, 43, 48, 58, 59 br. n. 259, Acquaintance or be acquainted with
60, 62, 64, 70, 74, 81, 90, 97, 99, 107
(Kenntnis, kennen), 8, 10, 35 br. n.
incl. br. n. 3, 111, 113, 114, 134, 139,
120, 36, 55, 56, 81 br. n. 377a, 99,
142 n. 271, 143
113, 138, 139, see also Familiarity,
Abstract(ed) or abstractly (abstrakt, abCognition, Knowledge, Expert, Unstrahiert, abziehen [abgezogen]), 10
acquainted
br. n. 91, 21, 49, 51, 109, 134, 137, Action or act (Handlung, Wirkung, han155, see also Abstracto: in
deln, wirken), 3 br. n. 11, 8 br. ns. 78

243

244

INDEX

and 83f, 9 n. 90, 11 n. 93, 19, 20, 26
incl. n. 52, 30, 32, 33, 37 incl. br. n.
142, 38, 41,44, 48,49, 53, 57, 58, 60,
62, 65-69 incl. br. n. 293, 71, 72 incl.
n. 318, 75, 76, 79-87 incl. br. n. 371,
90, 94-102 incl. br. n. 469, 104, 111,
113-19, 124-25 incl. br. n. 140, 127
incl. n. 151, 137 br. n. 237, 143,
147-48, 151-56 incl. n. 52, 158-60,
see also Activity, Deed, Doing, Effect
Activity or active (Tätig[keit\, wirksam), 5 br. n. 49, 23, 35, 38, 78, 79,
105, 106, 116, 147, 154, cf. 3 br. n. 1,
24 br. n. 41, see also Action, Agent,
Passively
Actual(ity) (Wirklichkeit]), 3, 4, 8 incl.
br. n. 87, 9 n. 90, 11 n. 93, 12, 13 n.
119 incl. br. n. 119a, 21, 22, 25, 34,
37, 39, 43-7, 49, 56-8, 60, 66, 71,
81, 89, 90, 94, 97, 104, 105, 113,
119-21, 125, 127, 133-36, 142, 143
incl. n. 282, 146, 152, 153, cf. 89 br.
n. 423, see also Exist
Adickes, Erich, 5 br. n. 57, 73 br. n. 333
Ad infinitum, see Infinity
Admiration or admire {Bewunderung,
bewundern), 76, 78, 111, 156, 157,
160-62, see also Amazement
Aesthetic (Ästhetik), 90, see also Aesthetic (ästhetisch)
Aesthetic (ästhetisch), 112, 116-18, see
also Aesthetic (Ästhetik), Logical
Affect (Affekt, Offizieren), 19 incl. br. n.
5, 23, 32 incl. br. n. 87, 62, 75, 76, 80,
88,92,99,115,117
Affirm(ative) (behauptend]), 100, 102,
121, see also Assert, Negative
Agent (Täter), 20, 37, see also Activity
Agreeable(ness) (angenehm [Annehmlichkeit}), 22-4, 58-60, 75, 88, 111,
116, 117, see also Enjoyment, Disagreeable
Agree(ment) (zusammenstimmen, übereinstimmen,
{(Übereinstimmung,

Zusammenstimmung, Einhelligkeit]),
6,9 n. 90, 11 n. 93,13, 26,41, 59, 63,
67, 69, 73, 78, 79, 81, 83, 88, 98,111,
112, 120, 123, 124 br. n. 128, 132;
see also Accordance, Harmony, Concord, Consent
Aim (Absicht), 3, 5, 7, 20, 21, 26, 28,
36, 37, 45 incl. br. n. 186, 58, 65, 66,
70, 87, 113, 132, 133 br. ns. 197 and
200, 134, 143, 154, 158, 161; speculative, 134, 136,143; theoretical, 105,
121, 134; practical, 4, 41, 49, 54, 57,
105, 106, 121, 126, 133, 134, 136,
141, 143; moral, 146; necessary, 143;
discretionary, 5; psychological, 81 n.
377; private, 10; final, see Final aim;
see also Intent, Goal, Purpose
Alter (abändern), 9 br. n. 90k, see also
Change
Amazement (Erstaunen), 76, 106, 156,
see also Admiration
Analogy or analogue or analogous (Analogie, Analogon, analogisch), 8 br. n.
78, 12, 53 br. n. 221, 57, 78, 85, 90,
91,117, 118
Analytic (Analytik), 8, 9, 16, 19, 42, 57,
71, 89-92 incl. br. n. 429, 110, 112,
113, see also Analytic (analytisch)
Analytic (analytisch), proposition(s), 13
incl. br. n. 114, 27 br. n. 57, 31, 52, cf.
10; principle, 48; unity, 111; linkage,
113, cf. 112; see also Analytic (Analytik), Synthetic
Anaxagoras (Anaxagoras), 140
Ancients: the (die Alten), 64, 108, 109,
see also Greek, History
Animal(ity) (Tier[heit\), 12, 61, 76, 127
n. 151, 160, 162
Annihilation or annihilate (Vernichtung,
vernichten), 25, 27, 28, 129, 162, see
also Destruction
Annul(ment) (aufheben [Aufhebung]),
38,39,93,94,97,111,114,120
Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of

INDEX

View (Anthropologie in pragmatischer Hinsicht), 22 br. n. 31
Anthropomorphism or anthropomorphic (Anthropomorphismus, anthropomorphistisch), 131, 135, 137, 138
Antinomy (Antinomie), 3 incl. br. n. 18,
13 incl. br. n. 116, 30, 107, 113-15,
119, 133 incl. br. n. 198, see also
Conflict
Apodeictic (apodiktisch), 3, 11 n. 93,
13,33,47,52,135,142,145
A posteriori, 1, see also Empirical, A
priori
Appearance or appear (Erscheinung, erscheinen), 6 incl. n. 64 and br. n. 59,
26, 28-30, 46, 48, 49, 53, 65, 67, 77,
94, 95, 97-102, 107, 114, 115, 152,
158
A priori, 4, 5, 11 n. 93, 12 incl. br. n.
95, 14, 21, 22, 26, 31, 32, 42,44-55,
57, 58, 62-6, 68-70 incl. br. n. 298,
72-4 incl. br. n. 322, 78-80, 90,
91, 93, 113, 120-22, 133, 134, 138,
141, 143 n. 282, 160, see also A posteriori
Archetype or archetypal (Urbild[lich]),
32,43 incl. br. n. 177, 83, 127 n. 151,
129, see also Ideal (Ideal), Model,
Type
Architectonic (architektonisch), 10, see
also System
Aristotle (Aristoteles), 127 n. 151
Ascend ([hin]aufsteigen, hinaufkommen), 5, 30, 52, 105, 142
Assembled (zusammengesetzt), 104, see
also Combination
Assent (Fürwahrhalten, Beistimmung),
4,12,13 incl. br. n. 107, 52, 142, 145,
146
Assert(ion) (behaupten [Behauptung,
Assertion]), 5, 6, 26 n. 92, 42, 98, 99,
112, 120, 132, cf. 74 br. n. 337, see
also Assertoric, Judgment, Proposition

245

Assertoric (assertorisch), 11 n. 93, 105,
134, see also Assert
Aster, Ernst von, 57 br. n. 240
Attention or attentive(ness) (Aufmerksamkeit]), 7, 10, 43, 87, 98, 106,
110, 117, 143, 155 n. 52, 159, 160
Attitude (Gesinnung), 33 incl. br. n. 96,
56, 66, 71, 72 n. 318, 73, 75, 82-86,
89, 98, 99, 109, 113-17, 118 br. n.
81, 122, 123 incl. n. 125, 125, 127 n.
151, 128, 140, 143, 144, 146, 147,
151-53, 155 n. 52, 157, 159-61, see
also Way of thinking
Attune (stimmen), 36, 75, 84, cf. 71 br.
n. 307, see also Harmony
Authority (Ansehen), 38, 73 br. n. 331,
76 incl. br. n. 350, 82, 141, see also
Respect
Authority or authorized (Befugnis, befugt), 4 incl. br. n. 38, 28, 50, 56, 57,
69, 73 incl. br. n. 331, 76 br. n. 350,
101, 114, 125, 139, 143 n. 282
Autonomy (Autonomie), 29 br. n. 64,
33, 36, 39, 42, 43, 87, 110, 126, 129,
132, see also Freedom, Will, Choice
Aversion (Widerwille), 58 br. n. 247, 86,
161, cf. 59, see also Loathing
Bad (übel, schlecht), 37 incl. br. ns. 142
and 143, 38, 59 br. ns. 254, 258 and
259, 60-62 incl. br. n. 267, 78, 98,
103, 108, 127, 140,152, see also Evil
Basis, determining (Bestimmungsgrund),
see Determining basis
Baumgarten, Alexander Gottlieb, 59 br.
n.253
Beattie, James, 13 br. n. 114
Behavior or behave (Betragen, Aufführung, sich verhalten), 37, 61, 98, see
also Conduct
Being (Wesen), human, see Human
being; rational, see Rational;
supreme, 76, 101, 118, 129, 133,137,
140, cf. 32, 125, see also God

246

INDEX

Believe (glauben), 22, 24, 36, 58, 69,
77, 78, 94, 110, see also Faith, Opinion
Benefaction or beneficial (Wohltat, wohltätig), 67, 107, 109, 160, see also
Beneficence, Good
Beneficence (Wohltun, Wohltätigkeit),
35, 118, 131, see also Benefaction,
Benevolence
Benevolence (Wohlwollen), 73, 82, cf.
131 n. 178, 139, see also Benignity,
Volition, Beneficence
Benign(ity) or benign (gütig [Gütigkeit,
Güte]), 37, 129, 131 incl. n. 178, 139,
cf. 131 br. n. 178c, 139 br. n. 248, see
also Benevolence
Blemish (Tadel), 11, 154, see also Censure
B\i$s(Seligkeit),25, 118, 129
Bodily (körperlich), 24, 96, cf. 24 br. n.
41,76,96br.n.470
Boundary or bound (Grenze, begrenzen), 8, 10, 12, 15, 36, 49, 50, 54, 55,
85, 86, 120, 121, 162, see also Limit,
Boundless
Boundless or unbounded (grenzenlos,
unbegrenzt), 79 incl. br. n. 367, 130,
162, see also Boundary
Building (Bau), 1, see also Edifice,
Structure
Canon (Kanonik), 120
Capacity (Fähigkeit), 80, 90, 146, see
also Ability, Power
Categorical (kategorisch), 20, 21, 30 br.
n. 70, 31, 32, 36, 41, 134, see also
Imperative, Law
Category (Kategorie), 5 incl. br. ns. 55
and 58, 6, 9 n. 90, 11 n. 93, 12 br. n.
96, 46, 54, 56, 57, 65-67 incl. br. ns.
289 and 293, 103, 104, 136, 141
Causal(ity) (Kausal[itäi\), 3, 6 incl. n.
64, 9 n. 90, 13, 15, 16, 20, 21, 28, 29,
32, 42, 44-50, 52-55, 58, 65, 67-70

incl. br. n. 293, 73, 75, 78, 80, 89,
93-98, 100-05, 111, 114, 115, 125,
132, 133 incl. br. n. 207, 142; law of,
see Law; of freedom, see Freedom,
Law; of the will, see Will
Censure or be censured (Tadel), 8 n. 83,
46, 98, 154, see also Rebuke, Selfcondemnation, Blemish, see also
Self-censure
Certain(ty) (Gewiß[heit\), 11 n. 93, 31,
33, 42, 47, 52, 60 incl. br. n. 261, 73,
99,123 n. 125,142,145, 147,163, cf.
13, see also Uncertain
Change ([Veränderung) 95, 102, 138,
142, cf. 5 br. n. 50, see also Alter,
Vary, Transform, Convert, Changeable
Changeable (veränderlich), 36, see also
Change, Unchangeable
Character (Charakter), 8 br. n. 84, 38,
77, 78, 97-100, 152, 153, 156, 157
Charles V (Karl V), 28 incl. br. n. 62
Chemistry or chemist (Chemie, Chemist, Scheidekünstler), 92 incl. br.
n. 450, 163
Cheselden, William, 13 incl. br. n. 118
Chimera (Hirngespinst), 14L, 143 n.
282, 154
Choice or choose (Wahl, wählen), 23,
83, 88, 126 incl. br. n. 146, 143, 145,
cf. 85; power of, see Power; see also
Select, Chosen
Chosen or by choice (willkürlich), 44,
129, see also Choice
Christianity or Christian(s) (Christentum, christlich [Christen]), 123 n.
125, 127-29 incl. n. 151
Cognition or recognition or (re)cognize
(Erkenntnis, erkennen), contrasted
with knowledge, 4 br. n. 31 ; power of,
see Power (cognitive); of reason, see
Reason; of nature, see Nature, of objects, see Object; of the moral law,
see Law; human, 10; common, 91;

INDEX

popular, 151, cf. 10; scientific, 151;
analytically, 112-13; synthetically,
45; determinately, 49, 70, 105; assertorically, 105; empirical(ly), 21, 23,
25, 45; a priori, 12 incl. br. n. 95, 21,
22, 26, 42, 44, 51, 53, 70, 72, 73, 78,
79, 90, 91, 93; theoretical(ly), 4 incl.
br. ns. 24 and 31, 5, 6 br. n. 59, 11 n.
93, 45, 49, 54-56, 132, 134-38 incl.
br. n. 221, 141; rational, 91, 92; speculative, 45, 108, 134, 135, 137 incl.
br. n. 236; practical, 4 br. ns. 24 and
31, 6, 20, 31, 57, 103; expansion of,
5, 12, 43 br. n. 173, 50, 56, 132-38,
142 n. 271; extravagant, 137; see also
Self-cognition, Cognizable, Knowledge, Acquaintance, Insight
Cognizable or recognizable {kenntlich,
kennbar), 45, 53, 90, 92 br. n. 444,
131 n. 178, 142 n. 271, see also Cognition
Coherence {Zusammenhang), 1 incl. br.
n. 68, 63, 145 br. n. 290, cf. 10, see
also Connection, Combination, Unity,
System
Combination or combine {Verbindung,
verbinden), 3 br. n. 14, 42, 93, 111 br.
n. 34, 112 incl. br. n. 42, 128, 144,
147, see also Connection, Linkage,
Synthesis, Assembled
Command {Gebot, gebieten), 16, 31, 32,
36, 37, 52, 65, 76, 81-86, 104, 114,
119, 122-24, 129, 131, 133-35,
143-47, 159 incl. br. n. 89, cf. 31 br.
n. 78, see also Order {Befehl), Enjoin,
Prescribe, Imperative
Common {gernein[sam]), 27, 35, 36, 43,
52, 70, 71, 77, 78, 87, 91, 92, 127 n.
151, 134, 155, 157, 163, cf. 9 n. 90,
112
Compassion(ate) {Teilnehmung, -nehmend),^, 118, 155 n. 52
Completeness or completion or complete^) {Vollständigkeit], Vollkom-

247

menheit], Vollendung, vollenden[-et]),
5, 7,8, 9 n. 90, 10, 11 n. 93, 33, 41,
45, 50, 123 n. 125, 143 n. 282, cf. 21,
see also Totality, Perfect
Compliance or comply {Befolgung, befolgen), 8 n. 83, 11 n. 93, 25, 33,
36-38, 77, 78-80, 84-86, 117, 123,
128,129,151,152,158,161,
Comprehend or comprehensible {begreifen, begreiflich), 47 incl. br. n.
190, 74, 99, 103, 106, 126, 145, see
also Knowledge, Grasp, Incomprehensibility
Conceit {Dünkel, Einbildung), 73-75
incl. br. n. 327, 77-79, 82, 85-87,
108, 154, see Self-conceit, Imagination
Concepts) {Begriffe]), 3-10 incl. n. 90
and br. ns. 15, 16, 64d and 73, 11 n.
93, 12, 13, 15, 16, 22, 25, 29-32 incl.
br. ns. 64, 66, 68 and 77, 35, 37-39,
41-43, 45-59 incl. n. 257 and br. ns.
190 and 240, 62-71 incl. br. ns. 276,
285, 292 and 298, 73 incl. br. n. 322,
79-81 incl. n. 377, 84, 89,90 incl. br.
n. 429, 92-96, 99-105, 107-14 incl.
br. n. 15, 120 incl. br. n. 102, 127-30
incl. n. 151, 131 n. 178, 132-41 incl.
br. n. 199, 214 and 218, 142 n. 271,
143, 144, 157, 158; of objects, see
Object; of nature, interest, morality,
duty, see these headings; of (the objects of) (pure) (theoretical, speculative, practical) reason, see Reason; of
a (pure) will, see Will; rational, practical, moral, see these headings; see
also Thought, Conception, Discursive
Conception or conceive (of) or conceivable {Vorstellung [sich] vorstellen,
denken, erdenklich), 6 br. n. 64d, 31,
38, 41, 47 br. n. 190, 81, 94, 95, 117,
118, 127 n. 151, 129, 145, 155-57
incl. br. ns. 65 and 72, cf. I l l , see

248

INDEX

also Concept, Presentation (Vorstellung), Thought
Concord (Eintracht), 28, see also Harmony, Agree
Concreto: in, 56, 67-69, see also Abstracto: in
Condemnation (Verdammung), see Selfcondemnation
Condition (Bedingung), 4 inch n. 25 and
br. n. 32, 9 n. 90, 12, 19-21, 24-30,
31, 33-34, 43, 48-50, 54, 55, 60,
62-64, 66, 68, 69, 73-75, 78, 86, 87,
90, 92, 94, 96, 97,101, 102,104,105,
107-11, 113, 119, 120, 122, 123,
125, 126, 129-33 incl. br. n. 174,
135, 138, 142, 143 incl. n. 282, 145,
162; natural, objective, practical,
supreme, see these headings; series
of, see Series; see also Conditioned
Conditioned or conditional (Bedingtes]),
15, 16, 19, 20, 31, 35, 37, 43, 48, 49,
55, 66, 69, 100, 101, 104, 105, 107,
108, 119, 120, see also Condition,
Unconditioned
Conduct (Verhalten), 37, 61 br. n. 270,
65, 77, 82, 86-88, 99, 100, 108, 111,
113, 127 n. 151, 129, 130, 140, 147,
154, see also Behavior
Confidence or confidently (Zuversicht,
getrost), 111 n. 151, 137, 157, see
also Faith, Trust, Hope
Conflict ([Widerstreit, widerstreiten),
11 n. 93, 13, 15, 19,28, 32, 35, 37,
99, 107, 114, 115, 120, 121, 147, see
also Dispute, Antinomy, Contradict
Confusion or confuse (Verwirrung, vermengen), 11 n. 93, 118
Conjecture (mutmaßen), 147
Connect(ion) (verknüpfen [Verknüpfung], zusammenhängen [Zusammenhang], 3 br. n. 14, 5, 26 n. 52, 49,
51-53 incl. br. n. 221, 57, 58, 68, 69,
97, 99, 100, 104-06, 111, 113-15,

121,124,125, 143,145, \62, see also
Linkage, Combination, Coherence
Conscience or conscientiousness (Gewissenhaftigkeit]), 98, 99
Conscious(ness) (Bewußtsein]), 4 br. n.
25b, 6 incl. n. 64, 12, 22, 24, 25,
29-31 incl. br. n. 68, 37, 38, 42, 44,
46, 47, 60, 65, 74, 75, 77, 79, 80, 81
incl. n. 377, 83, 84, 88, 97-99, 101,
106, 111-13, 115, 116-19 incl. br. n.
81, 123 incl. n. 125, 126-28 incl. n.
151, 133, 155, 157, 159-62, see also
Self-consciousness
Consent (einwilligen), 100, see also
Agree
Consistency or consistent (Konsequenz,
konsequent), 6, 7, 24, 44, 97, 98, 110,
126, 152, see also Inconsistency
Constitutive (konstitutiv), 135, see also
Regulative
Constrain(t) (zwingen, Zwang), 32, 80,
83, 92, 160, see also Self-constraint
Construct(ion) (Konstruktion, Wortfügung), l i n . 93, 92
Contempt (Verachtung), 75, 154, see
also Despise
Contingency or contingent (Zufällig
[keit]), 13, 20, 21,25, 26,28,61, 104,
115, 121, 123 n. 125, 129, 162, see
also Accidents
Contradict(ion) or (self-)contradictory
(widersprechen [Widerspruch], [sich]
widersprechend, kontradiktorisch), 4,
6 n. 64, 12, 14, 24, 39, 47, 48, 52, 53,
55, 83, 94, 97, 101, 102, 104, 109,
110, 117, 120, 121, 123, 127, 136,
161, see also Conflict
Contrapurposive (zweckwidrig), 157,
see also Purposive
Controversy (Streitigkeit), 110, see also
Dispute
Convert (verwandeln), 48, 49, 95, 104,
111, 147, see also Transform, Change

INDEX

249

Courage (Mut), 76, see also Mettle
br. n. 31, 25 br. n. 44, 31 br. n. 77, 42
Creation or creator or created (Schöpbr. n. 171, 43 br. n. 179, 47 br. ns. 190
fung, Schöpfen erschaffen), 72, 81,
and 191, 49, 50 incl. br. n. 204, 51 br.
87, 102, 130, 131 incl. n. 178, see
ns. 206 and 210, 52 incl. br. n. 214, 53
also Creature
br. n. 221, 54 incl. br. n. 222, 55 br. n.
Creature (Geschöpf), 6 br. n. 19, 82-84,
230, 59 br. n. 259, 65 br. ns. 285 and
87, 102, 123 incl. n. 125, 128, 129,
286, 69 br. n. 300, 78 br. n. 361, 89 br.
131 n. 178, 147, 162; rational, see
ns. 419 and 422, 90 br. n. 432,91 br. n.
Rational; see also Creation
435, 92 br. n. 448, 97 incl. br. n. 474,
103 br. n. 516,104 br. ns. 519 and 524,
Crime (Verbrechen), 37, 38,100, cf. 159
105 br. n. 530, 107 br. ns. 2 and 8, 108
incl. br. n. 89
incl. br. n. 11, 141, 111 br. n. 32, 112
Critical (kritisch), 7, 14, 53 br. n. 221,
br. n. 39, 114 br. n. 44, 115 br. n. 48,
89, 114, 163, see also Critique
117 br. n. 69, 119 br. n. 83, 122 br. n.
Critique (Kritik), 3 incl. br. ns. 1, 4 and
114,124br.n. 132,126br.ns. 142 and
8, 5-8 incl. br. ns. 49 and 80, 9 n. 90,
144, 129 br. n. 163, 132 br. ns. 189,
10, 15, 16, 42, 45 incl. br. n. 186, 46,
191 and 192, 133 br. ns. 196, 198 and
48, 50, 62, 77, 89,103,106,107, 109,
202,135 br. n. 223,137 br. ns. 233 and
141, 146, see also Critique of Practi235,138 br. n. 243,139 br. ns. 244 and
cal Reason, Critique of Pure Reason,
246, 140 br. n. 260, 141 br. n. 262,142
Critique of Judgment, Critical
br.
n. 269, 151 br. n. 4, see also CriCritique of Judgment (Kritik der Urtique, Reason, Pure
teilskraft), 6 br. n. 64d, 8 br. n. 84, 9
br. ns. 90d and 90e, 12 br. n. 105, 21 Crusius, Christian August, 40 incl. br. n.
br. n. 26, 22 br. n. 31, 31 br. n. 77, 35
60
br. n. 121, 76 br. n. 354, 112 br. n. 39, Cultivation or cultivating or cultivate
120 br. n. 93,126 br. n. 144, 129 br. n.
(Kultur, kultivieren), 24, 38, 78, 117,
163, 132 br. n. 189, 138 br. n. 243,
153, 159, 162
139 br. ns. 244 and 246, 160 br. ns. Custom (Gewohnheit), 12 br. n. 99, 51
102 and 106; First Introduction to
br. n. 209, see also Habit
that work, 9 br. ns. 90d and 90e, 112 Cynics: the (die Zyniker), 127 n. 151
br. n. 39; see also Critique, Judgment
Critique of Practical Reason (Kritik der Datum or data (Datum, Data), 31, 36,
42,43,91
praktischen Vernunft), 1, 3, 6, 7 br. n.
66, 8 br. ns. 83a and 84,9 n. 90,12 br. Deception or deceptive or deceive (Blendn. 95,15,17, 31 br. n. 77, 149,161 br.
werk, Betrug, trüglich, betrügen), 12,
n. 121, see also Critique, Reason,
13, 51, 53, 69, 94, 107, 154, see also
Practical
Illusion, Delusion
Critique of Pure Reason (Kritik der Deduction or deduce (Deduktion, deduzieren), 42,46-48, see also Justifireinen Vernunft), 3 br. ns. 4 and 18, 4
cation
br. n. 31, 6 incl. br. ns. 59, 63, 64d, 8
br. n. 84, 10, 12 br. ns. 95 and 96, 13 Deed (Tat), 3 incl. br. n. 11, 30, 42, 49,
br. ns. 110, 116, 199b, 15, 16 br. n.
77, 85, 95, 97-99, 118 incl. br. n. 81,
129,19 br. ns. 1 and 5, 21 br. n. 26, 22
137, 153, 159, see also Doing, Action

250

INDEX

Definition or define {Definition, defi- Destined (bestimmt), 61, 152, see also
nieren, bestimmen), 9 n. 90, 19 br. n.
Determination, Vocation
1, 26, 59, 94 incl. br. n. 457, 108, see Destruction (Zerstörung), 52, cf. 35, see
also Explication, Determination
also Annihilation
Degree (Grad), 20, 23, 38, 77, 98, 126, Determinability or determinable (Be129, 130, 131 n. 178, 140, 142, 153
stimmbarkeit]), 25, 28, 29, 38, 42,
Deity {Gottheit), 82,120, 127,139,142,
50, 55, 68, 74, 78, 87, 94-97, 100,
see also God, Divine
114, 117, 122, 133, see also Determination
Deliberate(ly) (überlegt [vorsätzlich, mit
Vorbedacht]), 44, 100, 106,118,145
Determinate(ness) (Bestimmtheit]), 6,
8,28,43,49, 50,54,55, 70,103, 105,
Deliberation or deliberate (Überlegung,
107, 140-42, 157, see also Determiüberlegen), 62, 118, 147, 163, see
nation, Indeterminate
also Reflect
Delight (Ergötzung, ergötzen), 24, 38, Determination or determine (Bestimmung, bestimmen), 4, 5, 7, 8 incl. n.
152, see also Enjoyment
83, 9 n. 90, 10, 12, 15, 16, 19-25, 26
Delusion (Täuschung, Wahn), 38, 51,
n.
52, 27, 29, 31-34, 38, 41-58 incl.
82, 85, 101, 117 br. n. 64, 152, see
br. n. 201, 60, 62-67 incl. br. n. 293,
also Illusion, Deception, Madness
68-75 incl. br. ns. 313 and 322, 78,
Demonstration (Demonstration), 13, 25,
80-82, 84, 85, 88-90, 94-99,
see also Justification
101-06, 108-11, 113, 115-20, 123,
Dependence or dependent (Abhängig127 n. 151, 132, 133-35, 137-43
keit]), 32-34,47, 82, 84, 88, 91, 102,
incl. n. 271, 145-46 incl. br. n. 300,
124, 131, 132, 137; see also Self-de154, 160-62; internal, objective,
pendent, Independence
practical, see these headings; of the
Derivation or derive or derivative (Abwill, see Will; of (by) reason, see
leitung, ableiten, abgeleitet), 10, 35,
Reason; see also Determinability,
38, 42, 58, 63, 91, 101, 109, 113,
Determinate, Determining basis, Pre125, 128, 142, see also Justification,
determined, Indeterminate, Vocation,
Original
Destined
Deserve or deserving (verdienen, Verdiensterwerben, verdienstvoll, -würdig),Determining basis (Bestimmungsgrund),
10, 37, 38, 60, 64, 88, 98, 100, 101,
4 br. n. 36, 11 n. 93, 15, 16, 20-32
109, cf. 59 br. n. 259, see also Worincl. br. n. 63, 34, 35 incl. br. n. 110,
thy, Merit
38, 39-41 incl. br. n. 161,43-45, 49,
50, 56-59 incl. n. 257,62-65, 67-75,
Desirable (wünschenswert), 110, see
78-82, 85, 86, 89-98, 101, 102, 105,
also Desire
108-10, 112-19, 124, 125, 127 n.
Desire (Begierde, Begehrung, begeh151, 130, 141, 143 n. 282, 151, 160;
ren), 20-23, 25, 26, 28 incl. br. n. 58,
objective, moral, rational, see these
31, 33,34, 37,55,59 n. 257 and br. n.
headings; of the Will, see Will; rea254, 60, 65, 83, 84, 90, 92, 96, 113,
son as, see Reason
116; power of, see Power; see also
Dialectic (Dialektik), 16, 64, 90 br. n.
Inclination, Desirable
429, 104, 107-10,
Despise (verachten), 37, 88, 152, see
Dignity
(Würde), 25, 71, 88, 147, 152
also Contempt

INDEX

Diligence or diligent (Fleiß[ig]), 55, 78
Direct(ness) (Unmittelbar[keit], direkt,
gerade), 12, 25, 29, 31, 38, 41, 44,
46, 48, 58-62 incl. br. n. 268, 64, 71,
72, 78-80, 84, 93, 115-17, 119 incl.
br. n. 85,132,134, 147,151,157,162,
163, cf. 6 br. n. 64d, see also Indirect
Disagreeable(ness) (unangenehm [Unannehmlichkeit]), 23, 24, 58, 60, 75, see
also Agreeable
Discipline (Disziplin, Zucht), 82, 86
Discursive (diskursiv), 137, see also
Concept
Displeasure (Unlust), 21, 22, 25-27, 58,
60, 62-64, 73, 77, 78, 80, see also
Pleasure
Disposition (Disposition), 44, cf. 33 br.
n.96
Dispute or disputed (Streit [bestreiten,
streitig), 9 n. 90, 111, 143 n. 282,
154, see also Conflict, Controversy,
Indisputable
Dissect(ion) (Zergliederung, zergliedern), 5, 9 n. 90, 32, 124, 163, see
also Synthesis
Disunity (Uneinigkeit), 111, see also
Unity
Divine (göttlich), 6, 24, 72, 79, 87, 101,
129, \52, see also Goù
Divisibility or divisible (Teilbar[keit]),
13
Doctrine (Lehre), 16, 17, 41, 90 br. n.
429, 92, 106, 108 incl. br. ns. 14 and
17, 112, 123 n. 125, 127, 130, 149,
151, 161, 163, cf. 8 br. n. 83a, see
also Theory
Documentation (Beweistümer), 153, see
also Proof
Dogma(tic) (Dogmatisch]), 9 n. 90, 67,
103, 132, cf. 13br.n. 109
Doing (Tun), 5, 100, see also Deed, Action, Refraining
Domain (Gebiet), 16, 121, see also
Sphere, Realm

251

Doubt (Zweifel, [bezweifeln), 11, 53,
54, 144, 156, 159, cf. 78 br. n. 361,
100, 155, see also Skepticism, Uncertain, Indubitable
Duration (Dauer), 132, 133, 137, 143
Duty (Pflicht), concept of, 38, 39, 81,
cf. 158; (dry and earnest) presentation (conception) of, 129, 153,
157; thought of, 11 n. 93, 82, 86, 155
n. 52; consciousness of, 81 n. 377,
126; fulfillment of, 93; conforming
to, 38, 81, 83, 86, 118, cf. 8 n. 83 and
br. n. 83f, 11 n. 93, 125, 128, 129,
157, 143 n. 282; in conformity with,
vs. from, 81, 82, 117, cf. 84, 85, 88,
147, 158, 160; contrary to (transgression of), 11 n. 93, 66, 93, cf. 88;
doctrine of, 41; principle (determinate formula) of (all), 8, 93; law of,
82, 85, 161; as such, 8; commonest,
157; true human, 35; as duty, 158; directly, 93; irrémissible, 158; moral
necessity as, 125; perfect and imperfect, 66; holy (holiness of), 35, 131,
159; importance of, 38; discipline of,
86; respect (reverence, high esteem,
venerability, submission of the heart)
for (of, to), 82, 85, 89, 155 n. 52,
156-57; moral feeling as belonging
to, 38; beyond, 32; see also Obligation, Observance
École, Jean, 59 br. n. 253
Edifice (Gebäude), 3, 163, see also
Building, Structure
Element (Element), 5, 10, 45 br. n. 188,
89, 106 br. n. 532,111,112, 117,119,
124, 127, 133,158 incl. br. n. 79,163,
see also Elements, doctrine of
Elements: doctrine of (Elementarlehre),
16, 90 br. n. 429
Elevation or elevate (Erhebung, erheben), 26, 35, 61, 71, 77, 79, 80, 81 br.
n. 373, 86, 115, 127 n. 151 and br.

252

INDEX

n. 151e, 155 n. 52, 156, 158-60, 162,
see also Exalted
Elucidate (erläutern), 67, 143 n. 282,
see also Explanation
Empirical (empirisch), 6 incl. n. 64, 9 n.
90, 12 br. n. 96, 13 incl. br. n. 114, 15,
16,21,23-31 incl. br. n. 63,34,35, 37,
39, 41-47, 53, 55, 56, 62-64, 67, 68,
71, 73, 87, 90-94, 97, 113, 137, 139,
141, 163; intuition, object, cognition,
interest, see these headings; see also A
posteriori, Empiricism, Law, Will
Empiricism or empiricist (Empirismus,
Empirist), 7, 13 incl. br. n. 109, 14,
51-53, 70, 71, 94, 97 br. n. 472, see
also Empirical
End (Zweck), see Purpose
Endeavor (Anstrengung, Bemühung, Bestreben, bestrebt sein), 10, 12, 47, 74,
77, 84, 108, 109, 111, 129, 147, 152,
154, 157, see also Strive
Enjoin (auflegen), 78, 135, see also Impose, Command, Order (Befehl)
Enjoyment (Genuß), 24, 88, 89, 115 br.
n. 53, 116-18, cf. 155 n. 52, see also
Delight, Joy, Gratification, Liking,
Agreeable
Enthusiasm (Enthusiasmus), 157
Entice(ment) (locken [Anlockung]), 88,
151, 152, see also Inducement
Entitle (berechtigen), 4 n. 25,47, 70, 94,
109, 120, 128, 132, 134, 140, 143
incl. n. 282, see also Justification
Epicurus or Epicureans (Epikur, Epikureer), 24,40 incl. br. n. 160,41, 88,
111, 112, 115, 116, 120, 126, 127 n.
151, 141
Erdmann, Benno, 5 br. n. 55
Error (Irrtum, Fehler), 8 n. 83,106,108,
116, cf. 163, see also Mistake
Essence or essential (Wesentlich]), 3,
37, 50, 53, 71, 72, 102,105 incl. br. n.
526, 111, 124, 129, 159, see also
Nonessential

Esteem (Schätzung, schätzen), 5, 23, 38,
73,75, 78, 79 incl. br. n. 367, 84, 128,
154, 157, 158, see also Self-esteem
Eternity or eternal (Ewig[keit]), 124,
129,140,147 incl. br. n. 305, see also
Unchangeable
Evident: be (einleuchtend, evident [erhellen]), 30, 91, 163, see also Selfevident, Manifest, Obvious, Plausible
Evil (böse), 37, 38, 58, 59 br. n. 259,
60-67 incl. br. n. 276, 69, 70, 75, 90,
100, 127 incl. br. n.149, 153, see also
Malice, Villainy, Bad
Exalted (erhaben), 11 br. n. 359, 82, 127
n. 151, see also Sublimity, Elevation
Example (Beispiel), 12, 19, 20, 24, 27,
34, 47, 48, 70, 77, 78, 81 br. n. 377,
85, 90-92, 96, 109, 120, 141, 143 n.
282, 154, 155, 158, 160-63
Excogitate (ausklügeln, aussinnen, ergrübeln), 111, 112,118, 153, see also
Meditate
Exhibit(ion) (darstellen [Darstellung]),
5, 6 br. n. 64d, 1, 10, 15, 16, 30, 34,
56, 67-69, 71, 83, 85, 94, 103, 119,
124, 151, 160, 162, 163
Exist(ence) (existieren [Existenz, Dasein]), 22, 25, 31, 34, 36, 42, 43, 46,
50-52, 54, 58, 61, 63, 67, 87-89,
94-104, 108, 109, 114, 116, 117,
122-26 incl. n. 125, 132-34, 137-39,
143 incl. n. 282, 146-48, 160, 162,
cf. 24 br. n. 41, 97 br. n. 475, 110 br.
n. 29, see also Existential, Actual
Existential (Existenzial-), 139, see also
Exist
Expansion or expand or expansive (Erweiterung, (sich) erweitern, erweiternd), 4, 5, 12, 35,43 incl. br. n. 173,
49, 50, 56, 103, 120, 121, 132-38,
141, 142 n. 271, 160, 162, 163; practical, see Practical; of cognition, see
Cognition; of Reason, see Reason
Experience (Erfahrung), 3 br. n. 4, 6

INDEX

incl. n. 64 and br. n. 59, 12 incl. br. n.
96, 14, 16 br. n. 129, 26, 2 9 - 3 1 , 36,
42, 44-49, 53, 54, 57, 58, 63, 68, 70,
104, 113, 120, 127 n. 151, 135, 136,
153, 157, 163; objects of, see Object;
objects beyond any possible, see Object; see also Experiential
Experiential {Erfahrungs-, der Erfahrung), 12 incl. br. n. 96, 13, 36, 70,
see also Experience
Experiment (Experiment, Versuch), 92,
110, 163, see also Test
Expert (Kenner), 8, see also Acquaintance
Explanation or explain (Erklärung, erklären), 6, 30, 45, 48, 93, 94, 99, 115,
126, 138; basis of, 126; see also Explication, Elucidate, Inexplicable
Explication or explicate (Erklärung,
erklären), 9 n. 90, 19 incl. br. n. 3, 24,
134 br. n. 215, cf. 59 br. n. 259, see
also Definition, Explanation, Inexplicable
Exposition (Exposition, Vortrag), 46,
151
External (äußer), perfection, 41 incl. br.
n. 164; legislation, 28; will, 31; determining bases (of the will), 39, 40; incentive, 35; promptings, 99; spur to
activity, 147; actions, 99; world, 162;
things, 13 n. 119 and br. n. 119a;
pushing, 96; see also Outer, Internal
Extravagant (überschwenglich), 48, 105,
120, 127 n. 151, 137, 141, 155, 162,
see also Transcendent, Overreach

Faculty (Vermögen), see Power
Fagan, Garrett G., 5 br. n. 50
Faith (Glaube), 4 br. n. 31, 126 incl. br.
n. 144, 142 br. n. 269, 143, 144, 146,
156, see also Believe, Confidence,
Trust, Lack of faith
Faithful (treu), 129, 156

253

Familiarity or (be) familiar (Kenntnis,
bekannt [kennen]), 5, 12, 13, 35 br. n.
120, 36 br. n. 131, 51, 77 incl. br. n.
357, 81 incl. br. n. 377a, 113 br. n. 43,
123, 161, cf. lObr. n. 91, see also Acquaintance, Unfamiliar
Fanaticism (Schwärmerei,
Fanatismus), 136, 162, see also Rove
Fantasy or fantastic or fantasist (Phantasterei, phantastisch, Phantast), 85,
114,153,157
Fatalism or fatalist (Fatalität, Fatalist),
98, 101
Favorable (glücklich), 100, see also Fortune
Feder, Johann Georg Heinrich, 12 br. n.
95, 13br.n. 119b
Feel(ing) (fühlen [Gefühl]), 9 n. 90, 13,
14, 22-27 incl. br. n. 31, 36 br. n. 127,
38 br. n. 154, 40, 58 incl. br. n. 249,
6 0 - 6 4 incl. br. n. 262, 71, 73, 74-81
incl. br. n. 346, 85, 90, 92 incl. br. n.
446, 98 br. n. 483, 112, 116-18 incl.
br. n. 60, 136, 152-58 incl. br. ns. 62
and 79, 160 incl. br. n. 106, 161; objects of, see Object; practical, see
Practical; moral, see Moral, Duty,
Law (moral); brought about by reason, see Reason; see also Touch,
Pleasure, Pain
Figure (Figur), 137 n. 239, 147
Final aim (Endabsicht), 38, see also
Aim
Final purpose (Endzweck), 120 br. n. 93,
129, see also Purpose
Finite (endlich), 25, 26, 32-34, 79, 80,
82, 86, 101, 105 br. n. 526, 110, 123,
see also Infinity
First Introduction to the Critique of
Judgment (Erste Einleitung zur Kritik
der Urteilskraft), see Critique of
Judgment
Flatt, Johann Friedrich, 8 br. n. 83a
Fondness or become fond (Zuneigung,

254

INDEX

Wohlgefallen, lieb gewinnen), 81, 84,
160, see also Liking, Love
Fontenelle, Bernard Le Bovier de, 75
incl. br. n. 355
Forbearance or forbearing (Nachsicht,
nachsichtlich), 122,123, see also Unforbearing
Forbid (verbieten), 11 br. n. 93b, 86
Force or forceful (Kraft, kräftig), 9 n.
90, 23, 25, 78, 88, 89, 151, 152 incl.
br. n. 18, 156-58, 162, 163, see also
Power, Strength
Form (Form), 13 n. 119, 24, 25, 27-29,
31-35, 41, 43, 48, 62-66, 68-70, 73,
74, 80, 89, 100, 109, 112, 114, 125,
136, 160, see also Formal
Formal (formal), 22, 32-34, 39, 41, 50,
64, 71, 75, 109, cf. 3 br. n. 2, see also
Form
Formula (Formel), 8 incl. n. 83, 59, 155
Fortitude (Stärke), 24, 25, 127 n. 151,
147, see also Strength
Fortune or (be) fortunate (Glück [haben],
glücklich), 59, 94, 116, 161, see also
Happiness, Favorable, Misfortune,
Infelicitously
Foundations of the Metaphysics of
Morals (Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten), see Grounding for
the Metaphysics of Morals
Francis I (Franz I), 28 incl. br. n. 62
Freedom or free (Freiheit, frei, befreien), 3-7 incl. ns. 25 and 64 and br.
ns. 11, 15 and 73, 13, 15, 16, 29-34
incl. br. ns. 64, 66 and 94, 38, 42,
44-49, 55-57, 65-70 incl. br. ns.
292 and 293, 72, 73, 75, 76, 78-82,
84, 87, 93-105 incl. br. n. 531, 113,
114, 117, 118, 124, 126, 127, 129,
132-34 incl. br. n. 192, 138, 142,
145, 156, 159-61; as a causality
(causality of [from, through, with]), 6
n. 64, 16, 47-49, 55, 56, 67 incl. br.
n. 293, 69, 70, 73, 78, 94, 95, 105,

132, 133, cf. 3, 6, 15, 65, 93, 100,
103, 104, 114; law of, see Law (of
freedom); and nature, see Nature (and
freedom); power of, see Power; see
also Liberation, Autonomy
Futile (vergeblich), 3, 39, 80, see also
Vain
Future (Zukunft, künftig), 21, 61, 99,
123 incl. n. 125, 140, 147, 155, 163
Garve, Christian, 12 br. n. 95, 13 br. n.
119b
General (allgemein), 16, 19, 22, 25, 35,
36, 41, 43, 55, 66, 67, 70, 71, 75, 85,
98, 109, 132, 151, 155, 161, see also
Universal, Particular
Genius (Genie), 163
Genuine (echt), 13, 14, 37, 79, 82, 85,
88, 98, 117, 123 n. 125, 153, 154,
157, see also Spurious
Geometry or geometric or geometrician
(Geometrie, geometrisch, Geometer),
11 n. 93, 13 br. n. 114, 31, 52, 92, 93,
see also Mathematics
Glory (Ehre), 131 incl. br. n. 179, see
also Honor
Goal (Ziel), 84, 109, 115, 123 n. 125,
141, 146, see also Aim
God (Gott), 4 incl. br. ns. 31 and 38, 5
incl. br. ns. 47 and 50, 11 n. 93,13, 24
br. n. 41, 34, 40, 41, 57, 64, 71, 83
incl. n. 391, 84, 94, 100-02 incl. br.
n. 513, 123-26 incl. n. 125, 128-32
incl. n. 178, 134, 137 incl. n. 239 and
br. n. 238, 138-40, 142, 143, 147
incl. br. n. 305, 158, see also Being
(supreme), Originator, Theology, Religion
Good(ness) ([das] Gut[e]), and (or) evil,
58, 59 n. 257, 60, 62-67 incl. br. n.
276, 69, 70, 75, 90, 153; touchstone
of, 63; general, 109; practical, 113;
practically possible, 90, 143, cf. 112;
as merely a means, 59; indirectly, 61;

INDEX

directly, 58, 59, 61; unconditionally,
69, 70; in (by) itself, 59, 62, 74; absolutely (in every respect), 60, 62, 64,
74, 90, 111; moral(ly), 38, 59 br. n.
259, 68-70, 72 n. 318, 79, 88, 131 n.
178, 152, 156; supreme, 110, 111,
119; whole (complete), 110, 111, cf.
112; highest (possible), 4 incl. br. ns.
28 and 33, 43, 64,108-15 incl. br. ns.
14 and 15, 119, 122-36 incl. br. ns.
197 and 200, 138-40, 142-47 incl.
n. 282 and br. ns. 277, 285 and 286,
157; highest derivative and highest
original, 125, cf. 129, 131; highest
self-dependent, 132; see also Perfect,
Benefaction
Görland, Albert, 73 br. n. 333
Gospel {Evangelium, evangelisch), 83,
84,86, 127 n. 151
Gram, Moltke S., 35 br. n. 121
Grasp or graspable {fassen, faßlich), 10,
12 br. n. 95, 47 br. n. 190, 103, see
also Comprehend
Gratification or gratify {Vergnügen,
vergnügen, befriedigen, genießen),
23-26, 30, 34, 35, 38, 58, 60, 62, 80,
91, 92, 115, 117, 118, 151, 152, 154,
see also Enjoyment
Greek {griechisch), 24, 40 br. n. 160, 73
br. n. 325, 108, 111, 126, 127 n. 151,
140, 159 br. n. 89, see also Ancients:
the
Grounding for the Metaphysics of
Morals {Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten), 8 incl. br. ns. 83a
and 83c, 20 br. ns. 18 and 20, 22 br.
ns. 31 and 32, 29 br. ns. 64 and 67, 30
br. n. 70, 31 br. n. 76, 32 br. ns. 82
and 85, 33 br. n. 93, 35 br. ns. 108 and
109, 36 br. ns. 124 and 129, 38 br. n.
149,42 br. n. 170,56 br. n. 232, 58 br.
n. 246, 59 br. ns. 252 and 253, 60 br.
n. 264, 62 br. ns. 272 and 274, 64 br.
ns. 280 and 282, 66 br. n. 291, 69 br.

255

n. 302, 70 br. n. 305, 71 br. n. 315, 72
br. ns. 317 and 319, 73 br. ns. 326 and
335, 75 br. n. 343,76 br. n. 352, 79 br.
ns. 365 and 366, 80 br. n. 370, 81 br.
n. 375, 83 br. n. 389, 85 br. n. 403, 87
br. ns. 413 and 416, 88 br. n. 417, 98
br. n. 481, 105 br. n. 527, 109 br. n.
21, 119 br. n. 91, 122 br. n. 109, 128
br. n. 152, 132 br. n. 192, 133 br. n.
208, 145 br. n. 288, 147 br. n. 304,
151 br. ns. 7 and 10, 158 br. n. 80,
159 br. n.91
Guilt {Schuld), 155 n. 52, cf. 100, see
also Innocent
Habit or habitual {Gewohnheit, gewöhnlich), 12, 13, 51-53, 98, 125 br. n.
140, 154, 155, 159, see also Custom
Happiness or happy {Glückseligkeit,
glücklich), 5 br. n. 50, 22, 24, 25, 28,
34-38 incl. br. n. 110, 41, 61, 64, 70,
73, 83 n. 391, 88, 92, 93, 110-20,
124-31, 144, 145, 147, 152, 156, see
also Fortune
Hargreaves, H. A., 76 br. n. 355
Harm {Schaden), 152, see also Harmless
Harmless {unschädlich), 87, see also
Harm
Harmony or harmonious or hamonize
{[Über]einstimmung, Harmonie [zusammen]stimmen[d], einstimmig sein),
19, 28, 33, 82, 84, 87, 106, 110, 124,
125, 128-31, 144, 145, 160, see also
Concord, Agree, Attune
Hartenstein, Gustav, 15 br. n. 124,36 br.
n. 127, 57 br. n. 239, 63 br. n. 276, 64
br. n. 279,70 br. n. 304, 100 br. n. 502,
Hartley, David, 8 br. n. 88
Henry VIII {Heinrich VIII), 155
Heterogeneous {ungleichartig), 111,
112, cf. 23, 24, see also Homogeneity
Highest {höchst), 4 incl. br. ns. 28 and
33, 22, 33, 41, 43, 64, 87, 101,

256

INDEX

108-15 incl. br. ns. 14 and 15, 119,
120 incl. br. n. 93,122-36 incl. n. 178
and br. ns. 167, 143 br. ns. 277 and
282, 144 br. ns. 285 and 286, 159 br.
n. 89, 197, 200 and 206, 138-40,
142-47, 157; good, see Good; see
also Supreme, Reason
Hinder (hindern), 79 incl. br. n. 363, see
also Obstacle
History or historical (Geschichte, historisch), 137 n. 239, 140
Holiness or holy (Heiligkeit, heilig), 11
n. 93, 32, 35, 77, 82-85, 7, 122, 123
incl. n. 125, 127 n. 151,128,129,131
incl. n. 178, 132, 156, 158, 159, see
also Sacred, Unholy
Homogeneity or homogeneous (Gleichartigkeit]), 104, see also Uniformity,
Heterogeneous
Honor (Ehre), 109, 131 incl. br. n. 179,
159 br. n. 89, cf. 88, see also Glory
Hope (Hoffnung \yer\hoffen), 20, 46,
74, 100, 103, 105, 122, 123 incl. n.
125, 127 n. 151, 128-30, 138, 147,
154, 157, 159, 163, cf. 9, see also
Confidence, Trust, Faith, Hopeless
Hopeless (hoffnungslos), 100, see also
Hope, 5 br. n. 50
Human (menschlich, Menschen-), 8
incl. br. n. 86,10, 13 n. 119, 15,24 br.
n. 41, 35, 36, 38, 41, 46, 72, 85, 87,
91 incl. br. n. 437, 92, 107, 117, 126,
127 incl. n. 151, 131, 133, 146, 151,
152, 154-58, 161-63; being, see
Human being; nature, cognition, reason, will, duty, see these headings;
see also Humanity
Human being (Mensch), 6 n. 64, 8 incl.
br. n. 87, 11 n. 93, 19 br. n. 6, 12, 21,
23, 31, 32, 34, 35, 37, 41, 49, 50 incl.
br. n. 201, 60, 61, 71, 74, 76, 77,
81-84 incl. n. 377, 86-88, 91 br. n.
437, 92, 95, 96, 98-101 incl. br. ns.
503 and 506,105 incl. br. n. 526, 107,

116, 127 incl. n. 151, 128, 131, 134,
137, 141, 142, 146-48, 152, 154-57
incl. n. 52, 159, 161, see also Human,
Person, Humankind, Man
Humanity (Menschheit), 71, 85, 87, 88,
131, 157, see also Human, Human
being
Humankind (Menschengeschlecht), 155
n. 52, 157, see also Human being
Hume, David, 13 incl. br. ns. 109 and
114,50,52-54
Humiliation or humble (Demütigung,
demütigen), 73-75 incl. br. n. 334,
77-79, 85, see also Humility
Humility (Demut), 86, 128, 154, see
also Humiliation
Hutcheson, Francis, 40 incl. br. n. 160
Hypocrisy or be hypocritical (Gleisnerei, heucheln), 72, 86, 152
Hypothesis or hypothetical (Hypothese,
hypothetisch), 5, 11 n. 93, 20, 126,
139, 140, 142, 143
Idea (Idee), 4 incl. br. n. 38, 6 br. n. 64d,
10, 11 n. 93, 15, 32, 37,41,43,44,
47, 48, 50, 59 n. 257, 65 br. n. 285,
68, 69, 80, 87, 100, 102, 103, 105
incl. br. n. 531, 107, 108, 119, 123 n.
125, 127 n. 151, 132, 133, 135-38
incl. br. ns. 218 and 228, 143 n. 282,
cf. 13 br. n. 114; natural, practical,
moral, transcendent, rational, see
these headings; of (speculative, practical) reason, see Reason; see also
Ideal (idealisch), Idealist
Ideal (Ideal), 83, 109, 133 incl. br. n.
202, 158; see also Archetype, Model
Idealist (Idealist), 13 n. 119, cf. 101 br.
n. 509, see also Ideal
Ideal(ity) (idealisch, [Idealität]), 100,
101, 123, see also Ideal, Idealist
Identity or identical (Identität, identisch), 27, 52, 70, 111, 112; see also
Sameness

INDEX

Ignoble (unedel), 161, see also Edel
Ignorance or ignorant (Unwissenheit,
unwissend), 8 n. 83, 12, 24, see also
Knowledge
Illegitimate (unrechtmäßig), 161, see
also Legitimate
Illusion (Schein, Illusion, Blendwerk,
Täuschung), 16, 53, 106-8,116, 117,
see also Delusion, Seeming, Deception
Image (Bild), 156, cf. 43 br. ns. 176 and
177, see also Imagination
Imaginary (eingebildet) 114, see also
Imagination
Imagination or imagining (power of)
(Einbildungskraft]), 51, 68, 69, 71,
120, 155 n. 52, 160; see also Conceit,
Imaginary, Image
Imitation or imitating (Nachahmung),
59, 78, 85, 158, 162, cf. 101 br. n.
506
Immanent (immanent), 16 incl. br. n.
129,48,105,133, 135, see also Transcendent
Immortality (Unsterblichkeit), 4 incl. br.
ns. 31 and 38, 5 incl. br. n. 47, 11 n.
93, 13, 122, 124, 132-34, 137, 138,
142
Immutability or immutable (Unwandelbar[keii\), 33, 100, 123 incl. n. 125,
see also Unchangeable, Eternal
Impartial (unparteiisch), 110, 124, 159
br. n. 89, see also Partial
Impenetrable (undurchdringlich),
36,
see also Penetrate
Imperative (Imperativ), 11 n. 93, 20, 32,
134; categorical, 20, 21, 30 br. n. 70,
41, 134, cf. 32, see also Categorical;
see Command
Imperfect(ion)
(Unvollkommen\heit\),
66, 157, see also Perfect
Impose (auferlegen), 76, 85, 130, 131,
see also Enjoin
Impossibility or impossible (Unmög-

257

lichkeit]), 3, 4, 6 n. 64, 11 n. 93, 28,
31, 42, 45, 48, 51, 54, 5 6 - 5 8 , 70,
75, 83, 94, 95, 113-15, 123 n. 125,
135, 138, 139, 143-45, see also Possibility
Impression (Eindruck), 154, 155 n. 52
Improbable (unwahrscheinlich), 151
Imprudence (Unklugheit), 37, see also
Prudence
Impulse (Antrieb), 25, 33, 72, 76, 85,
116, 117, 158, 161, see also Urge, Incentive
Impurity (Unlauterkeit), 11, 128, 153,
see also Purity
In abstracto, see Abstracto: in
In concreto, see Concreto: in
Inability (Unvermögen), 119, 122, see
also Ability
Incentive (Triebfeder), 35, 71, 72, 75,
76, 78, 79, 82, 83, 85, 86, 88, 94, 99,
116, 117, 124, 127 n. 151, 129, 151,
153, 156-60 incl. br. n. 110, see also
Inducement, Impulse, Urge
Inclination or inclined
(Neigung,
geneigt), 25-28, 30, 32-34, 37, 39,
44,62, 67, 71-81, 83, 84, 86, 92,108,
115, 117, 118, 120, 126, 131, 142 n.
271, 143 incl. n. 282, 146, 147, 153,
158, 160 incl. br. n. 110, 161, see also
Desire
Incomprehensibility or incomprehensible (Unbegreiflich[keit]), 1, 30, 48,
see also Comprehend
Inconsistency or inconsistent (Inkonsequenz, inkonsequent), 4 n. 25, 5, 10,
cf. 8 br. n. 83a, see also Consistency
Independence or independent (Unabhängigkeit]),
20, 25, 2 9 - 3 1 , 33,
41-43, 46, 49, 55, 57, 68, 82, 87, 94
incl. br. n. 457, 97, 98, 101, 112, 117,
118, 123 n. 125, 124, 126, 127, 132,
134, 136, 141, 142, 152, 161, 162,
see also Dependence
Indeterminate or undetermined (unbe-

258

INDEX

stimmt), 47, 56 incl. br. n. 235,
64-66, 104, 105, 133, 140, see also
Determinate
Indifference or indifferent (Gleichgültigkeit], indifferent), 21, 61, 69, 160
Indirect (mittelbar, indirekt), 61 incl. br.
n. 268, 62, 79, 115, 118, cf. 13 br. n.
114, see also Direct
Indispensability or indispensable (Unentbehrlichst]), 7, 127 n. 151, 128,
130br.n. 174
Indisputable (unstreitig), 6, see also
Dispute
Individual (einzeln, Individuum), 32, 58,
66, 157
Indubitable (unbezweifelt, ungezweifelt), 49, 60 incl br. n. 261, 78 incl.
br. n. 361, 109, 136, cf. 100, see also
Doubt
Inducement (Anreiz), 92, see also Incentive, Entice
Indulgence or indulgent (Gunst, Begünstigung, indulgent), 37, 52, 71, 73 br.
n. 323, 118, 122,
Inexplicable (unerklärlich), 43, 99, see
also Explanation
Infelicitously (unglücklich), 111, see also
Fortune
Infinity or infinite or ad infinitum (Unendlichkeit]), 13, 32, 33, 45, 49, 55,
70, 74, 83, 95, 101, 112, 122-24 incl.
n. 125 and br. n. 120, 128, 162 incl.
br. n. 129, see also Finite
Influence (Einfluß, einfließen), 28, 56,
61, 72, 74, 75-80, 90, 118, 151, 156,
157, 160 incl. br. n. 110, 161
Inhere (inharieren), 102
Innate (angeboren), 78, 141
Inner (inner), sense, 23, 58, 80, 97, 98,
114, 117; intuition, 6; freedom (ability), 161; necessitation, 83; constraint, 32; (spectacle of) self-examination, 80 br. n. 368, 88, 161; -most
attitudes, 140; tranquility, 88; respect,

76; refusal, 84; tribunal, 152; opinion, 157; see also Internal, Intrinsic,
Outer
Innocent (unschuldig, schuldfrei), 98,
155, cf. 38 br. n. 78, see also Guilt
Inscrutable (unerforschlich), 47, 148,
see also Investigation
Insensitive (unempfindlich), 156, incl.
br. n. 62
Insight (Einsicht), 4 incl. br. ns. 24 and
31, 5, 7, 8, 13, 19 br. n. 7, 26, 46, 49,
53, 54, 55 br. n. 227, 56, 58, 73 incl.
br. n. 321, 74 br. n. 339, 78, 80, 84,
91, 93, 94, 99, 119-21, 133, 139-41,
146, 163, cf. 5 br. n. 50, see also
Knowledge, Understanding
Insincerity (Unredlichkeit), 24, see also
Sincerity
Intellect or intellectual (Intellekt, Geist,
intellektuell), 24 incl. br. ns. 37 and
41, 31 incl. br. n. 77, 32,42 br. n. 169,
45 br. n. 187,49 br. n. 197,73, 75, 79,
80, 99, 104, 107 br. n. 4, 115, 117,
118, 123, 136 br. n. 226, 137 br. n.
234; determination of the will, see
Will; intuition, see Intuition; see also
Understanding, Intelligence, Spirit
Intelligence or intelligent (Intelligenz,
verständig), 28, 32, 56, 96 br. n. 469,
114, 125, 126, 162, see also Intellect
Intelligible (intelligibel), 42, 45, 46, 49,
50, 65, 67, 70, 75, 87, 94, 98-100;
object, see Object; world, see World,
Law (moral); (originator of) nature,
see Nature; see also Noumenon
Intent(ion) or intentional (Absicht, Meinung, absichtlich), 37, 66, 103, 134
br. n. 210, 153, 154-57, see also
Aim, Goal, Purpose, Uninentional
Interest(ed) (Interesse, Anteil [interessiert]), concept of, 79; as a principle, 119; all, is ultimately practical,
121; practical, 81, 121; (pure) moral,
79, 80, 145, 152, 159, cf. 90, 109, see

INDEX

also Law (moral); pure sense-free,
79; free, 145; respect as, 81; of (speculative, practical) reason, see Reason;
of all the mental powers, 119-20;
empirical, 71; sensible, 81; of the inclinations, 120; vulgar, 35, cf. 163;
see also Self-interest
Internal (inner), perfection, 41; legislation, 15; determining bases (of the
will), 39, 40, cf. 96; determining
causes, 101; actions, 99; obstacle, 79;
presentations, 96; determinations, 96;
see also Inner, Intrinsic, External
Intrinsic (inner), 28, 39-41, 79, 96, 99,
101, see also Internal
Intuition or intuit or intuitive (Anschauung, anschauen anschaulich), form(s)
of, 13 n. 119, 65; inner, 6; empirical,
6 n. 64, 12 br. n. 96, 55; (pure) sensible, 42, 65, 68, 69, 71, 89, 90, 100,
103, 136; different from the sensible,
49 incl. br. n. 197; special, 42; a priori, 45; intellectual (original), 31 incl.
br. n. 77, 42 br. n. 169, 99, 123, 137
br. n. 234; suprasensible, 45 incl. br.
n. 187,71, 136 incl. br. n. 226
Investigation or investigate (Nachforschung, Untersuchung [nach]forschen, untersuchen), 10, 26, 45, 46,
50, 53, 63, 64, 89, 94, 106, 140, 142,
162, 163, see also Study, Observation, Inscrutable
Inviolability or inviolable (Unverletzlich[keit]), 87, 157, see also Violate
Irrefutable (unwiderleglich), 52, see
also Refute
Irrémissible (unerläßlich), 5, 86, 158,
see also Unremitting, Remission
Irresistible (unwiderstehlich), 30, see
also Resistance
Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich, 101 br. n.
509, 143 br. n. 282b
Jenisch, Daniel, 8 br. n. 88

259

Joy (Freude), 24, 115-17, see also Enjoyment
Judgment or judge (Urteil, Beurteilung,
[beurteilen), 8 incl. br. n. 78, 9 n. 90,
12-14, 16, 30, 32, 36, 37, 41, 45, 52,
57, 58, 60-62, 67-71, 74-76, 78, 81
incl. n. 377, 91, 93, 95, 99, 110, 121,
128, 135, 143, 145, 146, 152-55,
157, 159, 160, 163; power of, see
Power; see also Proposition, Assert,
Principle, Critique of Judgment
Just(ice) (Gerechtigkeit]), 13 n. 119,
37, 38,49,61, 123, 131 n. 178
Justification or justify (Rechtfertigung,
rechtfertigen), 7, 8, 15, 35, 37,
46-48, 55, 56, 64, 89, 91, 99, 101,
123 n. 125, 143, see also Proof, Deduction, Logic, Demonstration, Derivation, Entitle
Jupiter (Jupiter), 5 br. n. 50
Juvenal (Juvenal), 31 br. n. 78, 158, 159
br. n. 89, 160 br. n. 103
Kästner, Abraham Gotthelf, 13 br. n.
118
Kingdom (Reich), 71, 82,128,130, 137,
145, 147, see also Realm
Knowledge or know (Wissen, Kenntnisse], wissen, kennen), 4 incl. br. n.
31, 8 n. 83, 10, 12, 24, 27, 35 incl. br.
n. 120, 36, 55, 57, 63, 67, 69, 81 n.
377, 83, 120, 126, 127 incl. n. 151,
131 n. 178, 154, 161, 162, cf. 142 br.
n. 269, see also Insight, Cognition,
Science, Acquaintance, Familiarity,
Understanding, Comprehend, Unknown
Lack of faith (Unglaube), 146, see also
Faith
Lack of worth (Unwert), 35, see also
Unworthiness, Worthless, Worth
Law(s) (Gesetz[e\), of (given by) (practical) reason, see Reason; as deter-

260

INDEX

mining (determining basis of) the
will, see Will; of the power of desire,
9 n. 90; rules as, 21, 31, 43; principle^) as, 27, 32, 62, 63, 132, cf. 31;
contrasted with precepts, 20, 33, 34,
77, 83; (practical,) related to maxims,
21, 26-30 incl. br. n. 59, 32, 34, 35,
44,45, 62, 63, 69, 76, 79, 81, 118,
126; basic, 30, 31, 43; (mere) (objective) form of (a universal,) (as such)
([merely] formal), 22, 28, 31, 32, 34,
64, 68, 69, 80, 109, cf. 25, 27, 29, 35,
70, 73; as (having the form of a) (categorical) imperative(s), 30 br. n. 30,
32, 41, cf. 20; (pure, a priori, categorical, unconditioned [-al], apodeictic,
necessary, objective, [objectively]
universal, objectively valid, supreme)
practical, 11 n. 93, 19-22, 25-30
incl. br. n. 68, 32-34, 36, 41, 43-46,
55, 58, 59, 62-65, 67, 68, 78, 81, 93,
cf. 31, 35, 57, 70, 72, 74, 76, 79, 80,
82, 87, 106, 122, 134, 138, 153; practically restricting, 32; pure practical,
actuality of, 46; (practical,) as apodeictic(ally certain), 3, 11 n. 93, 135,
142; pure practical, as practical postulates, 46; law (kernel) of all, 83;
(pure, supreme) moral (of morality
[morals]), 4 incl. n. 25 and br. n. 25f,
5 br. n. 44, 6 n. 64, 29-33 incl. br. n.
30, 36-38, 41, 43, 46-50, 55-57,
63-67, 69-80, 82-84, 87, 88, 92-97,
99, 105, 108-10, 114, 115, 121-24,
126, 128-30, 132, 133, 137, 140,
142-44 incl. n. 282, 147, 156-60,
162; moral (as such, practical), possibility of (thinking), 33, 34,46, 64, 97,
137; (moral, as such), (direct) presentation (conception) of, 55, 68, 118,
125, 127 n. 151, 151, 152, 157; moral
(pure practical), consciousness of, 30,
46,75, 121, cf. 31, 81 n. 377, 118 br.
n. 81, 126, 127, 155, 157,159; moral,

cognition (credential, sources) of, 47,
48, 84; moral, there can be no deduction of (needs no justifying grounds),
46, 47; moral, (proves) its (own) objective reality, 47, 48, cf. 65; (consciousness of) moral (practial, basic),
as given (as a fact [of reason]), 31
incl. br. n. 75, 32, 47, cf. 55, 91;
moral, subject of, 131; moral, guidance of, 70, cf. 73; moral (practical),
commands (unremittingly obligates),
32, 36, 65, 86, 114, 129, 133-35,
143, 144, cf. 20 incl. br. n. 11, 85, 93,
124, 143 n. 282, 147, 158, 159; as
providing merely a basis for obligation vs. as obligatory, 159; of obligation, 3 br. n. 11; of duty, 82, 85, 158,
161, cf. 89, 131, 142, 159; of virtue,
126-27, cf. 156; moral, as strict (serious, unforbearing), 127 n. 151, 154,
158; moral, letter and spirit of, 72, 83,
152, cf. 85; compliance with (observance of, obedience to, submission
to), 25, 37, 77, 79, 80, 84 incl. br. n.
398, 85, 92,128, 129, 158,161, cf. 38
incl. br. n. 153, 73, 78, 81-83, 114,
117, 122, 123, 128, 132, 133, 137,
138,159; moral, yoke of, 85; as hated
(despised), 152, cf. 157-58 incl. br. n.
77; moral, violation (transgression)
of, 127 n. 151, 147, 158; moral, acknowledgment of, 79; moral, love for,
84; moral, (subjective) effect (influence) of, 72, 78, 143, 156; moral,
free interest produced by, 81; moral
wish based on, 130; moral, as (yielding) an incentive (incentive of), 72,
77-79, 85, 86, 117, cf. 158; moral, as
producing a (negative) feeling (a
pain), 73; moral, as basis of a positive
feeling (respect), 73-75, 79, cf. 38,
76, 78-86, 128, 132, 147, 151;
moral, purity (authority, weight, dignity, rhajesty, sublimity, splendor) of,

INDEX

71, 76, 77, 79, 82, 127 n. 151, 147;
(moral,) as holy (in itself) (holy, of
holiness), 32, 77, 82, 83, 87, 128,
131, 158, cf. 156; of objects, 89;
moral, object of, 80, cf. 109, 129,
135, 140, 144, 147; moral, as
supreme condition of the highest
good, 109; moral, its relation to the
(an) intelligible world (pure world of
understanding, suprasensible nature),
43_47, 49, 50, 65, 94, 99, 105, 106,
132, 147, 162, cf. 75, 88, 115; (determinate,) of freedom (of the causality
from [through] freedom; of the
causality of the will), 16, 47, 49, 65,
68, cf. 50, 56, 66, 69, 105, 124, 132.
145; for the sake of the power of
judgment, 69; moral, (of nature,) type
of (as the type of a law of freedom),
69, 70; moral, leads to religion (determines the concept of the original
being as supreme being), 129, 140; as
commands of the supreme being,
129; divine, 152; Christian, 128;
(moral,) as empirically conditioned
(empirical conditions for), 43, 64;
matter of (a practical), 27, 29, 33, 34;
subjectively necessary, 25; moral, annulment of, 94; moral, as false (fantastic), 114, cf. 28; pathological, 33;
of appearances, 29; of (the) causality
(of sensible nature, according to natural laws), 28, 29,42, 47,68, 95,111,
114, cf. 96; (universal,) natural (of
nature, natural necessity), 6 n. 64, 19,
25, 26, 28, 33, 44, 50, 55, 68-71,
95-97, 113, 152, cf. 43, 115, 119,
144, 145; metaphysical, 47; physical,
44; dynamical, 42; mechanical, 26;
chemical, 26; of identity, 111; see
also Principle, Legislative, Lawful,
Legal, Lawyer, Objective
Lawful(ness) (Gesetzmäßigkeit]), 25,
32, 33 incl. br. n. 97, 45, 48, 70, 71,

261

72 n. 318, 73, 85, 98, 111, 128, 143,
147, see also Legal, Law, Unlawful
Lawyer (Advokat), 98, see also Law
Legal(ity) (gesetzlich [Legalität]), 5, 34,
62, 63, 71, 81, 118, 151, 152, cf. 25
br. n. 49, see also Lawful, Law, Legitimate
Legislation or legislative or legislating
(Gesetzgebung, gesetzgebend), 20
incl. br. n. 23, 25, 27-35 incl. br. n.
64, 37, 41, 46, 64, 74, 75, 80, 82 incl.
br. n. 387, 92, 109, 118 incl. br. n. 79,
124, 131 n. 178, 133, see also Law
Legitimate (rechtmäßig, bewähren), 51,
64, 91, cf. 59 br. n. 259, see also
Legal, Illegitimate
Leibniz, Baron Gottfried Wilhelm von,
13 br. n. 109, 97 incl. br. n. 472
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim 101 br. n.
509
Liberation (Befreiung), 160, 161 br. n.
112, see also Freedom
Life or living or live (Leben, leben), 9 n.
90, 20, 22, 23, 30, 35, 36, 41, 44, 61,
69, 79, 86, 88, 89, 99, 115, 116, 123
incl. n. 125, 127 incl. n. 151, 129,
147, 155,156,158, 159br.n. 89,162,
cf. 5 br. n. 50, see also Vital
Liking (Wohlgefallen), 24, 73 incl. br. n.
325, 85, 116-18, 160 incl. br. n. 106,
see also Fondness
Limit(ation) or limited(ness) (einschränken [Einschränkung, Schranke], beschränkt, [Eingeschränktheit]), 3 br.
n. 6, 8 br. n. 83a, 15, 16 br. n. 129, 59,
79, 86, 127, 147, cf. 45 br. n. 186,
see also Restriction, Boundary, Unlimited
Linkage or link (Verbindung, verbinden, zusammenhängen), 3 incl. br.
n. 14, 5, 6 br. n. 64d, 12, 21, 23, 33,
37, 38, 42 incl. br. n. 172, 51 incl. br.
n. 205, 53, 56, 58, 80, 82, 86, 88, 93
incl. br. n. 453, 111-17, 119-22,

262

INDEX

124-26, 128, 129, 138, 142, 152, 159,
see also Connection, Combination
Loathing or loathe (Abscheu, verabscheuen), 35, 58 incl. br. n. 247, 59
br. n. 254, 60, 61, 154, see also Aversion
Logic (Logik), 1 br. n. 66, see also Logic
Logic or logical (Logik, logisch), 4 br.
ns. 21 and 36, 5 br. n. 39, 13, 35, 49
incl. br. n. 196, 111, 112, 132 br. n.
191, 134 br. n. 213, cf. 90 incl. br. n.
429, see also Logical, Logic, Justification
Love (Liebe), 22, 25, 26, 30, 34-36, 38,
70, 73-76 incl. br. ns. 324 and 325,
81-86 incl. n. 391, 108, 131, 143 n.
282, 159, cf. 88, see also Love for
oneself, Fondness, Liking
Love for oneself (Eigenliebe), 73 incl.
br. n. 324, 83 incl. n. 391, 159, see
also Self-love, Love
Machine(ery) (Maschine[-nwerk, -nwesen]), 38, 97, 102, 152, cf. 101 br. n.
506, see also Mechanism
Madness (Wahnsinn), 120, see also
Delusion
Magnanimity or magnanimous (Großmut, großmütig), 84, 157, 158
Magnitude (Größe), 23, 76, 104, 131 n.
178, 137, 139, see also Quantity
Malice or malicious (Bösartigkeit, arg),
100, 153, see also Evil, Villainy
Man (Mann), 13, 30, 35, 38, 53, 76-78,
87, 99, 92, 108, 143 n. 282, 155, 156,
see also Human being
Mandeville, Bernard, 40 incl. br. n. 160
Manifest (offenbar, sichtbar, durch den
Augenschein, äußern, zeigen), 13, 39,
99, 107, 139, see also Evident, Obvious
Manifold(ness) ([das] Mannigfaltig[e]
[Mannigfaltigkeit]), 26 n. 52, 65, 68,
89, 104,151, 160, 161

Mathematics or mathematical (Mathematik, mathematisch), 8 n. 83, 11 n.
93, 13 incl. br. n. 114, 25, 26 n. 52,
51-53, 93, 104, 137 n. 239, 163, see
also Geometry
Matter or material (Materie, Stoff, Material), 21, 24, 25, 27, 29, 33, 34 incl.
br. n. 98,41, 64, 74, 97,109,115, 162
Maxim (Maxime), 19-21, 26-37 incl.
br. n. 59, 41, 44, 45, 46, 48, 56,
59-64, 66, 67, 69, 74, 76, 79, 81-84,
86, 90, 91, 106, 108, 109, 111-13,
115, 117, 118, 126, 146, 151, 152,
159,161, 163; and laws, see Law; see
also Rule, Principle
Mean(ing) (bedeuten, meinen, [gedenken, verstehen [Bedeutung, Verstand,
gesinnt]), 5, 8 n. 83, 11 n. 93, 12, 13,
21, 29, 32, 33, 43, 57, 58, 64, 72, 83,
85, 89, 97, 108, 110, 111, 115-19,
122, 125, 130, 131, 146, 151, 154,
163, see also Signification
Means (Mittel), 20, 26, 27, 35, 58, 59,
62, 63, 68, 87, 93,103, 112, 130, 131,
137, 143, 146, 152, see also Purpose
Mechanism or mechanical (Mechanismus, mechanisch), 6 n. 64, 11 n. 93,
26, 29, 30, 38, 39, 43, 49, 87, 96-98,
100, 102 incl. br. n. 515, 104, 114,
147, see also Machine
Meditation or meditate or meditative
(Nachdenken, grüblerisch), 12, 88,
116, 151, 153, 161, see also Thought,
Excogitate
Mendelssohn, Moses, 101 incl. br. n.
509, 143 br. n. 282b
Mental(ity) (Gemüts- [Sinnesart]), 34,
71, 120, see also Mind, Way of thinking
Merit(orious) (Verdienst[lich]), 1, 11,
78, 85, 140, 155 incl. n. 52, 157-59,
see also Deserve, Suprameritorious
Metaphysics or metaphysical (Metaphysik, metaphysisch), 24, 41, 47, 53,

INDEX

103, 131 n. 178, 138-40, 143, cf. 59
br. n. 253, see also Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science, Metaphysics of Morals, Prolegomena to
Any Future Metaphysics
Metaphysical Foundations of Natural
Science {Metaphysische Anfangsgründe der Naturwissenschaften), 13
br. n. 116, 19 br. n. 10, 26 br. n. 53,
see also Metaphysics
Metaphysics of Morals {Metaphysik der
Sitten), 3 br. n. 11, 8 br. ns. 83a and
86, 9 br. n. 90b, 20 br. n. 17, 21 br. ns.
26 and 28, 22 br. n. 31, 23 br. n. 33,
25 br. n. 45, 26 br. . 53, 33 br. n. 90,
34 br. n. 103, 35 br. n. 109, 37 br. n.
144, 38 br. ns. 155 and 157, 41 br. n.
166, 59 br. ns. 252, 253 and 257b, 66
br. n. 291, 71 br. ns. 306 and 315, 72
br. n. 320, 73 br. ns. 323, 326, 327,
330 and 335, 74 br. n. 336, 75 br. ns.
343 and 348, 76 br. n. 353, 79 br. n.
365, 80 br. n. 370, 81 br. n. 376, 83 br.
n. 394, 84 br. n. 399, 87 br. n. 416, 88
br. n. 417, 98 br. n. 482, 111 br. n. 33,
112 br. n. 39, 115 br. ns. 50 and 56,
116 br. n. 63, 118 br. n. 81, 122 br. n.
117, 125 br. n. 140, 128 br. n. 152,
129 br. n. 166, 132 br. n. 192, 143 br.
n. 276, 151 br. n. 7, 153 br. n. 21, 158
br. n. 82, 159 br. ns. 89, 91, 94 and
97,161 br. n. 121, see also Grounding
for the Metaphysics of Morals, Metaphysics
Method(ical) {Methode [methodisch]),
62,64,91, 111, 151, 153, 157, 159,
161, 163, see also Method: doctrine
of
Method: doctrine of {Methodenlehre),
16, 149, 151, see also Method
Mettle (Mut), 60, see also Courage
Mind {Gemüt, Kopf Sinn), 3 br. n. 7, 12,
13 n. 119, 36, 38, 72, 84-86, 100,
111, 116, 119, 120, 142 n. 282, 151,

263

152, 157, 160, 161, cf. 115, 118, see
also Soul, Spirit, Intellect, Mental,
Nonsense
Misfortune {Unglück), 88, see also Fortune
Mistake {Fehler), 9 n. 90, 24, 64, 116,
see also Error
Misunderstand(ing) {Mißverstand), 110,
115, see also Understand
Modality {Modalität), 11 n. 93, 66, 67
Model {Muster), 43, 154 br. n. 36, 157,
158, see also Ideal {Ideal)
Moderation or moderate {Mäßigung,
gemäßigt, mittelmäßig), 87, 126, 157,
see also Temperance
Modification {Modifikation), 25
Mohammed {Mahomet), 120
Moment {[das] Moment), 45, 106
Moment {[der] Moment, Augenblick),
156, 157
Montaigne, Michel Eyquem, 40 incl. br.
n. 160
Moral(ly) {moralisch, sittlich, Moral-,
Sitten-), import, 153-55; sphere, 154;
objects, 140; state, 84, 118 incl. br. n.
81; ability, 127; predispositions, 163;
investigations, 106; philosopher, 115;
teaching, 86; molding, 85, 117, 161;
discipline, 86; exercise, 161;
progress, 123 n. 124; level, 84; life,
89; vocation, 122; interest, see Interest; wish(es), 115, 130; aim, 146;
motive(s), 123 n. 125, 128, 152; incentive, 72, 78, 86, 117, cf. 85; effect,
157; feeling, 75, 76, 80, 85, 90, cf.
99; attitude, 33, 75, 82-84, 89, 98,
113, 116, 118 incl. br. n. 81, 125, 127
n. 151, 146, 147, 153, 157, 160, 161;
way of thinking, 127; fortitude of
soul, 147; faith, 4 br. n. 31; decisions,
161; determined will, 115, 138; determining basis, 92, 117; basis, 81 n.
377; use of reason, 5; ideas, 11 n. 93,
87, 127 n. 151; concepts, 71, 127 n.

264

INDEX

151; terms (meaning[s]), 59 br. n.
259; properties, 131 n. 178; judgments (judging), 81, 163; precepts,
83; maxim(s), 82,117, 118, 151, 152,
cf. 113; principle(s), 9, 69, 86, 90, 91,
93,109,140,156; law(s), 4 incl. n. 25
and br. n. 25f, 5 br. n. 44, 6 n. 64,
29-33 incl. br. n. 70, 36-38 incl. br.
n. 153, 69-80, 81 n. 377, 82-84 incl.
br. n. 398, 87, 88, 92-99, 105,
108-10, 114, 115, 117, 121-24, 126,
127 n. 151, 128-33, 137, 138, 140,
143 n. 282, 147, 157 br. n. 77,
159-62; legislation, 37, 124, 133,
142-44, 147, 156, 158; lawful conduct, 111; good conduct, 88; conduct,
127 n. 151, 130; actions, 160;
good(ness), 59 br. n. 259, 68-70, 72
n. 318, 79, 131 n. 178, 152, 156; improvement, 153; better, 123; correctness, 159, 160; perfect(ion[s]), 86,
123, 128, 129; originator of the
world, 145; genuine, 79; well-meaning, 116; worth, 71, 81, 93, 116, 129,
145,147,151,153, 157,159; (self-esteem, 79; self-condemnation, 116; evil,
37, 59 br. n. 259, 69; necessity (necessary), 81, 113, 125; necessitation, 32,
82, 84; impossible, 70; undetermined,
4; fanaticism, 84-86; catechism, 154;
reform, 8 br. n. 83a; sense, 38,40 br. n.
160; see also Morality
Moralist (Moralist), 7, see also Morality
Morality (Moral, Moralität, Sittlichkeit), pure, 155; concepts of, 6, 38;
consciousness of, 119; first reveals
the concept of freedom to us, 30;
(universal, supreme) principle(s) of, 8
n. 83, 32, 33, 35, 39-42, 63, 64, 67,
83 n. 391, 93, 105 incl. br. n. 526,
129, 132; law(s) of, see Law (moral);
(categorical) command of, 36, 37;
commanding it is unreasonable, 37;
contrasted with legality, 71, 118, 151;

of actions, 160; of the will, 33; of
morals, 125 incl. br. n. 140; of (in) attitude(s), 71, 115, 151, 152; as incentive (incentive to), 76; antecedent
feeling attuned to, 75; as subjectively
passing over into holiness, 84; consequence of, 119; consists in the
supreme good, 119, cf. 72, 81, 130; is
the foremost part of the highest good,
124, cf. 144; happiness related to,
110,112,115,119,124, 125, 130; the
concept of God as belonging to, 140,
cf. 138, 141; Christian, 127 n. 151,
128; supreme life-principle of all, 86;
as alone true wisdom, 111 ; pathological impulses as analogous to, 85;
prudence as tantamount to, 111;
boundaries of, 36; destruction of, 35;
inventing, 8 n. 83; see also Moral,
Virtue, Morals, Moralist
Morals (Sitten), (supreme vs. false)
principle of, 126; law of, 156; form
and morality of, 125 incl. br. n. 140;
holiness of, 128; kingdom of, 82,
145; harmony between nature and,
128, see also Nature (and morals);
started with human nature's noblest
property and ended with fanaticism
or superstition, 162; Christian precept
of, 127 n. 151; see also Morality,
Metaphysics of Morals, Grounding
for the Metaphysics of Morals
More, Henry, 24 br. n. 41
Mortification or mortifying (Kränkung,
kränkend), 152, 153
Motion or motive (Bewegung, bewegend), 19, 88, 96, 97, 101, 152, 153
br. n. 23, 156-58, 162, 163
Motivating cause (Bewegursache), 19
br. n. 5, 32 incl. br. n. 83, 41, 60, 88,
113, 117
Motive (Bewegungsgrund), 32 br. n. 83,
115, 123 n. 125, 125, 128, 152, 154,
156

INDEX

Mysticism or mystic (Mystizismus,
Mystiker), 70, 71 inch br. n. 310, 120
Natorp, Paul, 5 br. n. 57, 7 br. n. 73, 8 br.
n. 83a, 9 br. n. 90/, 34 br. ns. 98 and
106, 56 br. n. 233, 57 br. n. 240,62 br.
n. 273, 63 br. n. 276, 64 br. n. 279, 70
br. n. 304, 71 br. n. 308, 73 br. n. 333,
75 br. n. 345, 80 br. n. 372, 117 br. n.
66, 147br.n. 312, 159 br. n. 90
Natural (Natur[-], natürlich), order as
such, 128; law, see Law; connection
(linkage), 69, 100, 119, 143; causes,
140; mechanism, 6 n. 64, 102; possibility, 67 incl. br. n. 293; necessity,
34, 49, 94-99, 114; conditions, 66;
consequence, 37, 98; hints, 146; science, 26 n. 52 and br. n. 52a, 51, 53;
occupation, 159; ability (powers), 94,
127 n. 151; human reason, 91; idea,
87; thought, 140; point of view, 99;
need, 108; gratification, 34; moderate
vital motion of the heart, 157; basis,
determining an action, 96; aversion,
86; punishment, 38; constitution of
the minds of young villains, 99-100;
dialectic, 108; illusion, 108; member
in the chain of purposes, 120 br. n.
93; perfection, 123 n. 125; simplicity,
prudence, wisdom, and holiness, 127
n. 151; theologians, 137; see also Nature, Physical, Supranatural
Nature (Natur), in the most general
meaning, 43; as such, 97; concepts
of, 68; categories (pure form of understanding) of, 65, 70; of the world
of sense, 70; constitution of, 44 incl.
br. n. 183; as a whole (whole of), 44,
125; arrangements of, 138; path
(course) of, 139,145; steady chain of,
95; (possible) order of, 44,45; law of,
see Law (natural); mechanism of (all
of), 29, 30, 87, 97, 100, 114; events
in, 28; objects of, 69; contemplation

265

(investigation, study, observer) of,
141, 148, 160, 163; cognition of, 19,
45, 55, 146; our (human, animal), 8
incl. br. n. 87, 61, 74, 82, 87, 127 n.
151, 137, 146, 152, 158, 162, 163;
(our) finite, 25; pathologically affected, 88; of human cognition, 10; of
the (our) soul, 94, 133; moral vocation of (our), 122, cf. 87, 146; sublimity of our, 87, 117; possible, 46;
actuality of), 44, 45, cf. 46; sensible,
43, 47, 71; suprasensible, 43, 45, 47,
cf. 44; intelligible, 70, 152; archetypal and ectypal, 43 incl. br. n. 174;
and freedom, 67 br. n. 293, 97; and
morals, 128, 145, see also Morals;
purposiveness in, 142, 145; final purpose beyond, 120 br. n. 93; basis of,
125; (supreme) cause of, 124, 125;
(intelligible, wise) originator of (presiding over), 115, 145; see also Natural, World
Necessary (notwendig, nötig), 4, 5, 7-9
incl. n. 90, 11 n. 93, 13, 25,29, 32,
34-36, 42, 46, 48, 50-53 incl. br. n.
221, 56, 58, 63 72, 74, 84, 90-92,
94-96, 98, 100, 101, 104-06, 111,
113-17, 119-22, 124, 125, 128, 129,
130 br. n. 174,132-35, 139, 141, 142
n. 271, 143 incl. n. 282, 145, 146,
151, 155, 162; object, law, aim, see
these headings; subjectively, objectively, practically, morally, see Subjective, Objective, Practical, Moral;
determination (object) of the will, see
Will; see also Needed, Necessity, Necessitation, Unnecessary
Necessitation (Nötigung), 20, 32,
80-84, 96, 117, cf. 20 br. n. 17; practical, see Practical; moral, see Moral;
see also Necessary, Will
Necessity (Notwendigkeit), 4 incl. br. n.
38, 11 n. 93, 12-14 incl. br. n. 98, 20,
22, 26, 30, 32, 34, 42, 49, 51-54, 57,

266

INDEX

67, 73, 81, 93-99, 104, 114, 125,
132, 139; objective, natural, practical,
see Objective, Natural, Practical;
moral, see Moral, Duty; see also Necessary, Law
Needed {nötig), 8, 85, 109, 152, 163,
see also Necessary
Needless (unnötig), 110, see also Unnecessary, Needed, Necessary
Negative (negativ), 29, 33, 42, 47, 48,
72, 73, 75, 78, 88, 97 br. n. 477, 117,
118,132br.n. 192, 135, 160, see also
Affirmative, Positive
Newton, Sir Isaac, 24 br. n. 41
Noble (edel), 84-86, 155, 157, 158,
162, cf. 8 br. n. 83a, see also Ignoble
Nolte, Albert, 62 br. n. 273, 73 br. n.
333, 75 br. n. 345
Nonessential (außerwesentlich), 159,
see also Essential
Nonsense (Unsinn), 120, see also Mind
Noumenon or noumena (Noumenon,
Noumena), 6, 42, 48-50 incl. br. n.
198, 54-56 incl. brs. n. 228 and 230,
92, 98, 102, 114, 137 br. n. 233, see
also Intelligible
Obedience or obey (Befolgung, gehorchen), 37, 85, 92, 143, 158
Object(s) (Gegenstand, Objekt), as
such, 50, 54, 55, 65, 136, 141; undetermined, 56; determinate, 54; constitution of, 20, 46; concept(s) of, 57, 59
n. 257, 63 incl. br. n. 278, 64, 90, 127
n. 151, 135 br. n. 218, cf. 133 br. n.
199, 134, 135, 143; thought of, 50,
54, 63, 136; presentation s ) of (of
presentations), 9 n. 90, 13 n. 119, 21,
23, 64, cf. 15, 22, 57, 58, 60, 104;
(physical) possibility of, 11 n. 93, 57,
122, 134, 135, 138 br. n. 240; real
(objective reality of), 122, 143 n.
282; actuality of, 9 n. 90, 13 n. 119
and br. n. 119a, 21, 22, 37, 45, 57, 58,

60, 89, 135, 136, 143; existence of,
21, 34, 46, 58, 67, 104, 137, 143 n.
282; necessary, 4, 58, 135, cf. Il n.
93; of our direct awareness, 6 br. n.
64d; given, 45, 46, 55, 65, 135, 136,
141; empirical, 141; of the senses,
(sensible, of sensation), 28, 38, 42,
54, 56, 62, 68, 69, 80, 83, 115, cf. 50,
160; of inner sense, 97; of (sensible)
intuition (intuition of), 13 n. 119, 45,
68, 69, 89, 136; of (possible) experience, 3 br. n. 4, 6 incl. br. ns. 59 and
64d, 42, 44, 46, 50, 53, 54, 136; of
nature, 69; outside the understanding,
139; understandability of, 126; cognition of, 11 n. 93, 44, 46, 48, 49, 54,
56, 57, 89, 107, 120, 135-37 incl. br.
n. 236, cf. 55; of the cognitive power,
15; of the power of desire, 21, 45, 58,
61, 62, 110, 127, cf. 33, 60, 143; of
the power of choice, 34, 36; of the
will, see Will; of (pure speculative,
pure practical) reason, see Reason;
suprasensible (not sensible, beyond
[any possible] experience), 3 br. n. 4,
6, 54, 135, 137, cf. 6 br. n. 59, 9 n. 90,
50; intelligible, 70; of speculation,
153; unattainable, 15; production of,
9 n. 90, 15, 23, cf. 122; of our endeavor, 129; of inclination (hope,
love, fear, admiration), 74, 76, 129,
143 n. 282, cf. 160; of feelings (pleasure or displeasure), 26, 62-64, cf. 9
n. 90, 23; good (or evil), 59 n. 257, 63
incl. br. n. 278, 64, cf. 65, 109; of
loathing, 60, 61; of a maxim, 29;
moral (of the moral law), see Law
(moral); of respect, 73, 76; worth of,
87; sublimity of, 162; ultimate, of all
my conduct, 129; of worship (adoration), 131; of religion, 131 n. 178; see
also Objective
Objective(ly) (objektiv), in every respect, 74; possibility (possible), 11 n.

INDEX

93, 143 n. 282; reality, 3-6 incl. br.
ns. 16 and 38, 15, 44, 47-49, 53-56,
103, 115, 120, 132-35, 138, 142, 143
n. 282; necessity (necessitation, necessary), 12 incl. br. n. 98, 20, 22, 26,
36, 51, 52, 104, 125, 146, 151, cf. 13;
valid(ity), 4,12, 13, 21, 34,46, cf. 20,
36; principle, 105, cf. 66; law(s), 11
n. 93, 19, 25, 32, 72, 74, 76, 79, 145,
153, 157, cf. 26; see also Law; conform to the moral law, 159; practical,
see Practical; conditions, 26; basis
(-es), 26, 79, 142 n. 271, 145, cf. 143;
determination (determining basis) of
the will, see Will; demand, 81; decision, 145; one and the same, 11 n. 93;
see also Object, Subjective
Obligate or oblige or be obligated {verbinden, verbindlich, obliegen, be incumbent upon), 10, 36, 47, 83, 84,
143 incl. n. 282, 159 br. ns. 96 and
97, see also Obligation, Ought
Obligation or obligatory {Verbindlichkeit, Obliegenheit, verbindend), 3 br.
n. 11, 16,24,32, 33,35, 38, 81, 82
incl. br. n. 385, 85,125,155,159 incl.
br. n. 97, see also Duty, Obligate,
Ought, Observance
Observance {Beobachtung), 35, 114,
129, 131, 132, 155, 157, see also
Obligation, Duty
Observation or observe(r) {Beobachtung, beobachten [Beobachter]), 52,
53,105,106,137,152,153, 159,160,
163, see also Perception, Study, Investigation
Obstacle {Hindernis), 24,48, 75, 76, 79,
103, 136, 156, see also Hinder
Obvious {offenbar, augenscheinlich),
36, 37,41,44, 65, 105,120,137, 156,
see also Evident, Obvious, Manifest
Occasion {Gelegenheit), 9 n. 90, 88, cf.
5 br. n. 50, see also Opportunity
Offend or offender or offense {ver-

267

stoßen, Frevler, Vergehung), 38, 80,
98, 106, 160, see also Violate
Ontological {ontologisch), 138, 139 br.
n. 246
Opinion {Meinung), 9, 36, 78, 142, 143,
157, cf. 142 br. n. 269, see also Believe
Opportunity {Gelegenheit), 30, 35, 106,
cf. 5 br. n. 50, see also Occasion
Order {Befehlen]), 83, 84,158, see also
Command
Order {Ordnung), 16, 30, 42, 44, 45, 49,
66, 67, 69, 82, 86, 90, 95, 106, 107,
110, 121, 128, 131 incl. n. 178, 139,
142,143,160, see also System, Organization, Unity
Organ(ization) {Organization]), 156
incl. br. n. 62,160 incl. br. n. 102, see
also Order {Ordnung)
Origin(al) {Ursprung [urpsrünglich,
Ur-]\ 23, 25, 31, 53, 55, 56, 65 incl.
br. n. 286, 73-75, 86, 87, 91, 118,
120, 127 n. 151, 136, 140, 141; apperception, 65 br. n. 286; intuition, 31
br. n. 77; image, 43 br. n. 177; basis,
142 incl. n. 271, cf. 110 incl. br. n. 26;
being, 100-02 incl. br. n. 513, 133,
139, 140; good, 125, 131; see also
Derivation, Originator
Originator {Urheber), 102, 115, 125,
128-30, 138-40, 145, 146 incl. br. n.
296, see also God, Origin
Ought {sollen), 5, 20, 21, 30, 31 incl. br.
n. 72, 37,43, 71, 82 br. n. 385, 83, 93,
95,114,124 br. n. 136,125,130 br. n.
172, 147, 158-60, 163, see also Obligate, Obligation
Outer {äußer), sense, 97, see also External
Overreach {übersteigen), 3 incl. br. n. 8,
85, see also Extravagant
Pain(ful) {Schmerz[haft]), 26, 38, 58,
60, 62, 73, 80, 92, 98, 99, 152, 156,
160, see also Feeling

268

INDEX

Paradox(ical) {Paradoxon [paradox,
widersinnisch]), 6, 47, 62, 68
Paralogism (Paralogismus), 6 br. n. 63,
133incl.br. n. 196
Partial(ity) (parteiisch, Parteilichkeit),
106, 110, see also Impartial
Particular (besonder), 8 incl. br. n. 87,
10, 20, 25, 61, 161, see also General,
Universal
Pathological (pathologisch), 19, 20, 25,
32 incl. br. n. 87, 33, 44, 74-76, 79,
80, 83, 85, 88,117,120, see also Sensible
Perception or perceive or perceptible
(Wahrnehmung, wahrnehmen, vernehmlich), 6 br. n. 64d, 35, 12 br. n.
96, 51-53, 77, 105, see also Observation, Sensation
Perfect(ion) (Vollkommen[heit], Vollendung, vollenden, vollendet), 5 br. n.
43, 11 n. 93, 33 br. n. 92, 37, 40, 41,
55 br. ns. 223 and 226, 64, 66, 82-84,
86, 98, 106, 110 incl. br. ns. 24 and
27, 122, 123 incl. n. 125, 127 n. 151,
128, 129, 131 n. 178, 138-40, 143
incl. n. 282, 147, 155, 157, 158, 160,
see also Good, Completeness, Imperfect
Permanence (Beharrlichkeit), 133
Perplexity (Verlegenheit), 30
Perseverance or persevere (Beharrlichkeit, beharren), 123 n. 125
Person or personal(ity) (Person, Persönlichkeit]), 28, 36, 37, 38, 52, 59 br. n.
259, 60, 66, 67, 73, 76, 78, 81 n. 377,
87 incl. br. n. 412, 88, 93, 95, 106,
109, 110, 114, 116-18 incl. br. n. 65,
122, 127, 131, 137 br. n. 249f, 143,
147, 153, 155, 157, 162 incl. br. n.
124, see also Human being
Persuasion or persuade (Überredung,
überreden), 33, 115
Phalaris (Phalaris), 159 incl. br. n. 89
Phenomenon or phenomena (Phaeno-

menon, Phaenomena), 6, 55, 97-99,
see also Sensible
Philosophy or philosophical or philosopher (Philosophic philosophisch,
Philosoph), 9 n. 90, 10, 11 n. 93,
12-14, 24, 38, 47 incl. br. n. 190,
51-53, 58, 59, 63, 64, 67, 86, 92, 108
incl.br.n. 14,109,111,112,115,127
n. 151, 137 n. 239, 138, 140, 155,
163, cf. 8 br. n. 83a, 13 br. n. 109, 24
br. n. 41, 40 br. n. 160, 76 br. n. 355,
97 br. n. 472,101 br. n. 509,102 br. n.
512
Physics or physical (Physik, physisch),
15, 19 br. n. 5, 26, 31, 37, 40, 43, 44,
48,57,58,68, 84, 89,99, 113, 116,
138, 139, 140, 143, cf. 138 br. n. 243
Pistorius, Hermann Andreas, 8 br. n. 88
Plato (Plato), 93 incl. br. n. 455, 127 n.
151,141
Plausible (einleuchtend, scheinbar),
102,143, cf. 30 br. n. 68, see also Evident, Seeming
Plautus (Plautus), 12 br. n. 97
Pleasure (Lust), 9 n. 90, 21-23, 25-27,
58, 60, 62-64, 73, 77, 80, 82, 115 br.
n. 50, 116, 117, 160 br. n. 106, see
also Displeasure, Feeling
Pluhar, Werner Schrutka, 35 br. n. 121
Popular(ity) (popular [Popularität]), 10,
151, cf. 76 br. n. 355, see also Public
Positive (positiv), 29 incl. br. n. 66, 31,
33, 42, 43, 48, 73-75, 79, 118,
132-34 incl. br. n. 192, 137 n. 239,
\6\,see also Negative
Possibility or possible (Möglichkeit]),
3-8 incl. brs. ns. 4, 21, 39, 52, and
73, 10, 11 n. 93, 12 incl. br. n. 95, 13,
16 incl. br. n. 129, 21, 24, 25, 26 n.
52, 330, 31, 33, 34, 37, 39, 41-50,
52-54, 56-58, 61-65, 67-69 incl.
br. n. 293, 72, 74, 80-84 incl. br. n.
372, 87, 89-91, 93, 94, 97, 99, 102,
103, 105, 106, 109, 110, 112, 113,

INDEX

115-17, 119, 120, 122-26, 128, 129,
132-45 incl. n. 282 and br. ns. 191
and 213, 147, 161; objective(ly), see
Objective; of objects, see Object; natural, see Natural; (order of) nature,
see Nature, Reason; practical(ly), see
Practical; of laws, see Law; good, see
Good; see also Impossibility
Postulate {Postulat, postulieren), l i n .
93 and br. n. 93k, 31, 46, 94, 122,
124-26, 132-35 incl. br. n. 89, 140,
142, 143 incl. n. 282
Power(s) {Vermögen, Kraft [Kräfte]),
reason for using this term, 3 br. n. 7;
one's (our, my, his) (natural) 37, 57,
83, 87, 96, 124, 127 n. 151, 137, 142,
146; life as, 9 n. 90; basic, 47; physical, 15, 43; of the human soul, 10;
mental (of the mind), 119, 120, cf.
152; of (pure) reason (pure reason as;
pure, [of reason]), 3, 10, 44, 46, 50,
91,106-08, cf. 9 n. 90 and br. n. 90h,
159; of principles, 119; of speculation (speculative reason), 3, 5, 146,
cf. 108; of presentation, 160; of
thought (to think), 66, 136; understanding as, 137; (transcendental,) of
imagination, 51, 68, 69, 71; cognitive
(of cognition), 12, 15, 24, 65, 69, 89,
90, 91,146,160; of judgment, 67-71,
154,160, cf. 13 incl. br. n. 112; [pure]
practical (pure practical reason as; of
[pure] practical reason; practical, of
reason), 3, 8, 44, 47, 66, 89, 109 incl.
br. n. 19, 118 incl. br. n. 81, cf. 60;
pure practical, of judgment, 67, 68; of
desire, 9 n. 90, 12, 20-26, 34, 45, 55,
57-59, 61, 62, 72, 74, 110, 116, 117,
124, 127, see also Will; of freedom
(freedom as), 47, 48, 87, 94 incl. br.
n. 458, 105, 117, cf. 57; of purposes,
59; of choice, 3 br. n. 11, 21-23 incl.
br. n. 26, 26, 32-34, 36, 65, 67 br. n.
293, 74, 79, 100; of the will (the will

269

as), 15, 32,45, 137; will-, 9; conscience as, 98; virtue as, 33, 118 incl.
br. n. 81; of loathing, 58; a higher, 38;
see also Ability, Capacity, Force
Practical(ly) {praktisch), (power of)
reason, see Reason (practical); use of
reason, see Reason; power, see
Power; the, 54, 57, 80, 138, 159;
sphere (realm), 20, 42, 106, 132; nature, 43; action, 80; basis, 135; point
of view, 132; way of thinking, 152;
reference (respect), 4, 5, 25, 44, 56,
105, 137; signification, 41, 119;
proposition(s), 26 n. 52, 31; judging,
58; (use of a) (practical, a priori) concepts), 6, 50, 56, 65, 70, 133, 157;
idea, 32; questions, 154; problem, 25,
45, 124, 125; conflict, 35; considerations, 67; investigations, 26; proving,
42; philosophy, 9 n. 90, 12, 67; sciences, 8; cognition, 4 br. ns. 24 and
31, 6, 20, 31, 57, 103; expanding (expansion of) a cognition (pure reason),
134, 141 the pure understanding as,
55; use of understanding and will,
137; freedom, 93, 97; interest, see Interest; aim, 4, 41, 49, 54, 57, 105,
106, 121, 126, 133, 134, 136, 141,
143; necessary purpose, 143; perfection, 11 n. 93, 127 n. 155; (possible,
possibility of, highest) good, 90, 112,
113, 115, 122, 126, 143; use of objects, 135; form, 74; objectively
possible and impossible, 11 n. 93;
necessity (necessary, necessitation),
20, 26, 80, 104, 113, 122, 134, 146;
unconditionally, 29; a priori, 32; (a
priori) principle(s), 7, 16, 19, 21,
25-27, 32, 41, 46, 65, 67, 71, 74, 90,
91, 109, 112, 119, 125, 126, 151; (a
priori, universal, restricting) law(s),
11 n. 93, 19-22,25-30 incl. br. n. 68,
32, 34, 36, 41, 44, 46, 50, 59 incl. br.
n. 255, 62, 63, 65, 67, 68, 78, 81, 87,

270

INDEX

92, 93, 106, 122, 134, 135, 138, 153;
rule(s), 19-22, 24, 31-34, 36, 41, 55,
58, 66, 67, 114, see also Law; precepts), 11 n. 93, 20, 26, 34, 62, 115;
maxims, 59, 61; postulates, 46, 135;
conditioned, 108; determining (determination) (of the idea), 108, 116;
(material) determining bases, 40,108;
influence, 77; sufficient, 19; (necessary) condition, 74, 126, 132; connection of causes and effects, 113;
employing the pure rational relation,
57; feeling (sensation brought about),
75, cf. 80; esteem, 79; consideration
of wisdom, 130; advance, 122; applicability, 56; reality, 48, 49, 56; correct,
21; rational faith, 144, 146; vocation,
146; consequences, 119; pleasure, 22;
need, 140; attitudes, 144; love, 83;
impossibility of striving, 143; empty,
98; see also Theory
Praise(worthy) {preisen [anpreisungswürdig]), 52, 85, 106, 131, 155 n. 52,
160br.n. 103
Precept (Vorschrift), 11 n. 93, 20, 26,
31, 33, 34, 37, 62, 66, 67, 77, 83, 85,
107, 115, 127 n. 151, 132; contrasted
with laws, see Law; practical, see
Practical; moral (of morals), see
Moral, Morals, see also Prescribe,
Reason
Predetermined (vorherbestimmt) 95, see
also Determination
Predicate (Prädikat), 94, 137, 138, 141
Predilection (Vorliebe), 106, 158
Predisposition (Anlage), 160, 163
Prescribe (vorschreiben), 20, 30, 36, 63,
64, 74, 82, 124, 159, cf. 59 br. n. 259,
see also Precept, Command
Presentation (traditional rendering of
Darstellung), see Exhibition
Presentation or present(ing) (Vorstellungen], [sich] vorstellen), 6 n. 64, 7,
9 n. 90, 12 incl. br. n. 103, 13 n. 119,

15, 21-24, 26-28, 32, 38, 39, 44, 45,
54, 55, 57, 58, 59 n. 257, 60, 64, 65,
67, 68, 74, 75, 78-80, 82, 85, 94 br.
n. 462, 96, 97, 100, 102, 104, 109,
119, 125, 126, 129 incl. br. n. 159,
133, 134, 136, 137, 147, 151-53,
156-58 incl. br. n. 69,160; reason for
using this term, 6 br. n. 64d; power
of, 160; of reason, of objects, of laws,
of duty, see these headings; see also
Conception
Presupposition or presuppose (Voraussetzung, voraussetzen), 8, 9 n. 90, 12
incl. br. n. 98, 20, 21, 23-25, 31, 32,
34, 36, 46, 57, 62, 65, 70, 71, 76, 79,
95,100,101,104,107, 111, 116,120,
122, 124-26, 132, 134, 140, 142, 143
incl. n. 282, 145, 158
Pride or proud (Stolz, stolz), 52, 77, 82,
86, cf. 139 incl. br. n. 251
Priestley, Joseph, 98 incl. br. n. 484
Primacy (Primat), 119-21
Principle (Prinzip, Grundsatz), 7-9
incl. ns. 83 and 90 and br. n. 83a,
12-14, 16, 19-22, 24-27, 30-42
incl. br. ns. 68 and 110, 45-48,
50-52, 55, 58, 59, 62-67, 69, 71, 74,
81-83 incl. n. 391, 85, 86, 89-94
incl. br. n. 429, 100, 105-7 incl. br. n.
526, 109-13, 115, 116, 119-22, 123
n. 125, 125, 126, 129, 132-36,
138-40, 146, 151, 155 n. 52, 156,
157, 160, cf. 13 incl. br. ns. I l l and
113, 52 incl. br. n. 212; synonymity
of the two German terms, 7 br. n. 66;
as laws, see Law; objective, practical,
moral, of morality, of morals, see
these headings; power of, see Power;
of reason, see Reason; of duty, see
Duty; see also Rule, Maxim, Proposition, Theorem
Problem(atic) (Problem, Aufgabe [problematisch]), 3, 5, 7, 11 n. 93, 25 incl.
br. n. 48, 28-31, 44, 45, 49, 67,

INDEX

72, 89, 96, 105, 112, 124-26 incl.
n. 271 and br. ns. 128 and 143,
132-35, 139, 146, cf. 6 br. n. 64d, 59
br. n. 259
Progress(ion) (Fortschritt, Gang, Progressa), 7, 9 n. 90, 10, 32, 83, 122,
123 incl. n. 125, 128, 154, 157, see
also Regress
Project (Vorsatz), 24, see also Resolve
Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (Prolegomena zu einer jeden
künftigen Metaphysik), 12 br. ns. 95
and 96, 13 br. n. 119b, 47 br. n. 191,
50 br. n. 204, 52 br. n. 213, 53 br. n.
218, 57 br. n. 238, 122 br. n. 115, 136
br. n. 227
Proof or prove or provable (Beweis[en],
erweislich), 3-6, 12 incl. br. n. 95,
13, 15, 27, 39, 41, 42, 44, 46-49,
53-55, 65, 77, 91, 94, 104, 110, 113,
114, 122, 125, 133, 137, 138 incl. br.
n. 243, 139 br. ns. 244 and 246, 141,
142, 145-47, 152, 153, cf. 155 br. n.
54, see also Justification, Documentation, Syllogism
Propensity (Hang), 73, 74, 85, 128, 154
Proportion or proportionate (Verhältnis,
Proportion, proportioniert), 61, 78,
110, 115, 119, 124, 126, 129, 141 br.
n. 267, 144, 146, see also Relation
Proposition (Satz), 6, 8 br. n. 78, 12, 13
incl. br. n. 114, 19 incl. br. n. 2, 26 n.
52, 27, 31, 46, 52 incl. br. n. 212, 60,
90, 100, 106, 114, 120-22 incl. br. n.
102, 134, 139, see also Judgment,
Principle, Assert
Prove (beweisen), see Proof
Prudence or prudent (Klug[heit]), 35 -37,
88, 111, 126, 127 n. 151, 143, see
also Imprudence
Psychologie or psychological (Psychologie, psychologisch), 7, 9 n. 90, 60,
94, 96, 97, 133, 137, cf. 3 br. n. 7, see
also Soul

271

Public (Publikum, öffentlich), 5, 24,
163, see also Popular
Punishment or punish(able) (Strafe, Bestrafung, strafen, strafbar), 37 incl.
br. n. 142, 38, 60, 100
Pupil (Schüler, Zögling), 108, 154, 155
br. n. 47, see also Teach
Pure (rein), 3-8 incl. n. 64 and br. n. 4,
9n. 90, 10, 11 n. 93, 12 br. n. 95, 15
incl. br. n. 123, 16, 17, 19, 21, 23-25,
30-35 incl. br. n. 68, 37, 39, 41,
42-50 incl. br. n. 169, 52-57, 62-71
incl. br. ns. 295, 298 and 304, 73-79,
81, 82, 85, 87-94, 97, 103-10,
113-22 incl. br. n. 81, 124-27 incl. n.
151, 128 br. n. 154, 129, 132-44 incl.
br. n. 222, 146, 149, 151-53, 155,
156, 158, 159, 161, 163; interest, law,
morality, will, power, see these headings; see also Purity, Reason
Purity or purify (Lauterkeit, Reinigkeit,
läutern), 71, 77 br. n. 356, 79, 84, 86,
127 br. n. 151, 128 br. n. 154, 135,
153 incl. br. n. 34, 154, 156, 160; of
laws, see Law; of the will, see Will;
see also Pure, Impurity
Purpose (Zweck), 35-37, 41, 58, 59, 61,
62, 87 incl. br. n. 416, 108, 110, 114,
115, 117, 120 incl. br. n. 93, 124,
129-31 incl. br. n. 184, 133, 134,
143, 146, 147; reason for using this
term, 35 br. n. 121; final, see Final
purpose; ultimate, see Ultimate purpose; see also Intent, Aim, Goal,
Means
Purposive(ness) (Zweckmäßigkeit]), 35
br. n. 121, 139, 141 incl. br. n. 268,
142, 145, 157, 160, 162, see also Purpose, Contrapurposive, Means
Quality (Qualität), 66, 104
Quantity (Quantität), 66, 104 br. n. 518,
see also Magnitude

272

INDEX

Range (Umfang), 8, 12, 43, 90, 103,
162, see also Sphere, Realm
Rational {vernünftig, rational, Vernunft-), the, separation of it from the
empirical, 163; concept(s), 41, 62,
99, 103, 134; (a priori, pure) principle(s), 14, 41, see also Idea; idea,
107; (pure a priori) cognition, 91, 92;
sciences, 137 n. 239; conversations,
23; subject, 75; (all) (finite, created)
being(s), 12, 15, 19-22 incl. br. n. 6,
25-27, 32, 34, 36, 38, 42-46, 49, 67,
72, 76, 80-82, 87, 93, 98, 110, 114,
115, 118, 122-25, 128, 130, 131, 143
n. 282, 144; creature, 19 br. n. 6, 83,
84, 87, 147; (pure) will, 143; conduct,
108, cf. 8; precepts, 62; (practical)
compliance, 33; deliberation, 62; (objective) determining basis (bases), 39,
92; need, 143 n. 282; pursuit (condition) of happiness, 111, 130, cf. 112;
self-love, 73; relation, 57; (pure practical, moral) faith, 4 br. n. 31, 126,
144, 146; theology, 140; cause of the
world, 140; see also Reasonable,
Reason, Rationalism
Rationalism or rationalist (Rationalismus, Rationalist), 13 incl. br. n. 109,
40 br. n. 160, 71, 97 br. n. 472,101 br.
n. 509, 102 br. n. 512, cf. 59 br. n.
253, see also Rational
Real (real), 3 br. n. 9, 4 br. ns. 21 and
22, 5 br. ns. 39 and 52, 7, 111, 112,
122, 132 br. n. 191, 133, 134 incl. br.
n. 213; object, see Object; see also
Reality, Realization
Reality (Realität), 3-6 incl. br. ns. 9,
10, 16, 22 and 38, 15, 44, 47-49,
53-56, 70, 94 br. n. 460, 103, 115,
120, 132-36, 138, 142, 143 n. 282;
objective, of objects, of the moral
law, of pure (practical) reason, see
Object, Law, Reason; practical, see
Practical; see also Signification, Real

Realization or realize (Realisierung, realisieren), 49, 94, see also Real, Reality
Realm (Feld), 48, 52, 56, 103, 106, 145
br. n. 293, 147 br. n. 315, see also
Sphere, Domain, Kingdom, Range
Reason (Vernunft), (natural, common)
human (common use of), 36, 52, 72,
85, 87, 91 incl. br. n. 437, 155, cf. 92,
105; power of (pure, [pure] practical),
see Power; essence of, 105 br. n. 526;
highest vocation of, 108; cultivation
of, 159; subjective condition(s) of,
145; propensity of, 154; interest of,
120; need of, 142 n. 271 ; endeavor of,
147, cf. 108 br. n. 14; use of, 9 n. 90,
51-52, 63, 120, 136, 146, 161, 162;
transcendent and immanent use of,
48, cf. 133; purposive use of, 141
incl. br. n. 268; as investigating, 142;
(pure) ideas (concepts]) of, 65 br. n.
285, 136, 137, 142 n. 271, cf. 9 br. n.
90/; as such, law of, 11 n. 93; principle^) (assertions, judging, power of
judgment) of, 58, 68, 120, 143, 151,
cf. 91; assent of, 145; inference of,
12, 90 br. n. 434, see also Syllogism;
proving by, 12, 65, cf. 42, 47; pure
understanding as, 55; schema for, 68;
expansion of, 120, 134, 135; pure, 3,
4, 15 br. n. 123, 19, 62, 67 incl. br. n.
295, 133, 139; concept (thinking) of
pure (of its lawfulness as such), 45,
71; need of pure, 4, 142 incl. n. 271,
cf. 91; rights of pure, 50; unity of
pure, 91, cf. 106, 121; (pure) theoretical (speculative), 3-6, 12 br. n. 95,
30, 48, 80, 89, 91, 105, 106, 119-22
incl. br. n. 100, 126, 132, 133, 136,
140, 145, 146; realm of pure theoretical, 52; in its speculative use (theoretical [speculative] use of), 5, 7, 15, 16,
20, 43, 47, 50, 52, 55-56, 68, 107,
108, 125, 126, 136; as used theoreti-

INDEX

cally, categories of, 65; course of
speculative, 140; interest of speculative, 120 incl. br. n. 100, 121; theoretical (speculative) aim of, 121, 134,
136, cf. 9 n. 90; endeavor of theoretical, 47; need of (pure) speculative,
142 incl. n. 271; demand of (requirement of speculative), 5-6, 32, cf. 51;
critique of (pure) speculative (theoretical), 3 incl. br. n. 4, 8, 9 n. 90, 15,
16,42,45, 48, 50,103, 106,141, 146,
see also Critique of Pure Reason;
critical system of speculative, 7; ana«
lytical part (analytic) of (the critique
of) pure theoretical (speculative), 42,
89, 90; dialectic of pure theoretical
(speculative), 104, 107, 109; paralogisms of pure, 6 br. n. 63, 133 incl. br.
n. 196; antinomy of pure (speculative), 3 incl. br.n. 18, 13 br. n. 116,
107, 114, 133 incl. br. n. 198, cf. 6 n.
64, 30; ideal of pure, 133 incl. br. n.
202; ideas of speculative, 127 n. 151;
objects of pure speculative, 134; assumption^) of theoretical (speculative), 47, 48, 126; concepts and
principles (and restrictions) of pure
theoretical (speculative) (theoretical
principles of), 7, 42-43, 45; regulative principle of, 48, 135; cognition
of theoretical (speculative), 42,
44-45, 91, 108, 134, 135, cf. 49; theoretical insight of (insight of theoretical [speculative]), 49, 54, 120, 141,
cf. 56, 58; wavering of speculative,
145; speculative (pure theoretical), as
becoming extravagant (roving into
the transcendent), 48, 57, cf. 121,
142; speculative restriction of, 141;
as securing the concept of noumena
(of freedom), 42, 49, cf. 135, 145;
confirmation for theoretical, 6, 106,
cf. 132, 134; (idea [concept] of)
(pure) practical, 3, 6, 37, 47, 103, cf.

273

69; objective reality of pure practical,
55; pure practical (pure, as [able to
be] practical [a priori]), 3, 4, 12 br. n.
95, 15, 16, 24, 25, 31, 32, 42, 44-47,
62, 65, 70, 75, 76, 89-91, 105, 113,
118, 121, 136, cf. 11. 93, 112, 133 br.
n. 200, 135 br. n. 222, 144; practical
use of (pure) (use of pure practical),
4, 5 incl. br. n. 57, 7, 15, 16, 50, 55,
70, 90, 91, 107, 108, 120, 126, 135,
136, 142 n. 282, cf. 20; moral use of,
5; as unconditionally practical (as
seeking the unconditioned), 15, 108;
objectively and subjectively practical,
151; empirically limited (conditioned) (use of) (practical), 13, 15,
16, cf. 24, 38-39, 46; critique of
practical, 3, 6, 8, 9 n. 90, 15, 45 incl.
br. n. 186, 46, 62, 149, see also Critique of Practical Reason; system of
pure practical, 8; elements of pure
practical, 17; analytic of pure practical, 19, 5, 71, 89-92, 109, 110, cf.
42; dialectic of pure practical, 64,
107,109, 110; antinomy of pure practical, 113, cf. 107, 109, 114, 119, cf.
115; doctrine of method of pure practical, 149, 151; (self-)consciousness
of, 29, 118, 159; presentation(s) of,
23, 24, 28, 65, 78, 79, 82; practical
(in general), categories of, 11 n. 93,
66; domain of practical, 16; (concepts
of the) object(s) of pure practical, 5,
57, 58, 90, 108, 109, 115, 119, 129,
135, 140, cf. 70, 141; data of, 31; fact
of (pure), 6 incl. br. n. 61, 31 incl. br.
n. 75, 32, 42 incl. br. n. 168, 43, 47
incl. br. n. 193, 55 incl. br. n. 225, 91
incl. br. n. 439, 104 incl. br. n. 525;
product of, 20; activity of, 79; voice
of, 35, cf. 123 n. 125; authority of,
50; demand of practical, 128; instruction by, 60, cf. 61; assumption(s)
(thoughts) of, 120, 146; (pure, practi-

274

INDEX

cal, moral) judging of (power of judgment [ability to judge] of pure practical), 12,13,16, 61, 62, 68, 75, 76, 78,
163, cf. 36; (a priori) cognition of, 12,
26, 46, 73, 91, 93, 106, cf. 43, 61;
(practical) expansion of (expanding
of [pure practical]), 4, 50, 133, 134,
141; (formal, practical, supreme)
principle(s) (rule, precept, maxim,
condition, propositions) of (pure
[practical]), 19, 33,39,41,42,46,60,
62, 66, 67, 74, 91, 93, 106,122; (pure
practical), as (directly) legislative (as
giving a universal law), 20, 25, 31,
33, 92, 97, 118, 132, 160, cf. 65,
79-80, 124; as prescribing pure practical laws ([basic, pure, objective, objectively practical] law[s] of), 11 n.
93, 30, 32, 60, 68-70, 79, 82, 85, 87,
92, 93, 117, 145, 151, 153, cf. 44, 64;
as giving (exhibiting) the moral law,
30, 31, cf. 4 n. 25, 32, 49; as a law of
a possible order of nature, 45; pure,
as supreme legislator, 75; as commanding (imperative of practical),
20, 65, 76, 81, 119, 143, cf. 78, 123,
145, 159; pure (practical), autonomy
of, 33, 43, 126, 129, cf. 42, 65, 97; as
a higher power of desire (as distinct
from the lower [pathologically determinable] power of desire), 25;
practical, as entirely the same as the
positive concept of freedom, 29, cf.
30, 33; determinations of, 65; (pure,)
as determining (as able to determine
[directly]; as determining basis of; as
containing [dealing with] determining bases of) the will (the will's
maxim) (as related to the will), 15,
16, 19, 20, 23-25, 42, 45, cf. 35, 36,
41, 44, 46, 48, 49, 56-57, 64, 66, 67,
93, 105 incl. br. n. 526, 116, 132, cf.
112, 126; the form of a pure will as
given in, 66; as being the pure will,

32, 55, cf. 65; (pure,) as having
causality (being an efficient cause),
46, 48,49, 65, 80; practical, as giving
rise to a deed (determining an action),
49, 57, cf. 60, 118 br. n. 81, 139;
practical, testing of a maxim by, 44;
its mandate from the side of sensibility, 61-62, cf. 25; practical, empiricism (mysticism) concerning, 70, 71
incl. br. n. 310, cf. 72, 120; practical,
obstacle of (to [the use of]), 75, 76,
136; appendage of, 93; (practical,)
heteronomy of (for), 43, 65; pure
practical, influence of, 78; practical
pure, bounds set by, 85, cf. 92; discipline of, 82, cf. 85-86; as reproaching us, 78; resistance ([inner
intellectual] constraint) of, 32, 80, cf.
73, 75; fortitude and superiority of,
25; as incorruptible and self-constrained, 32; impartial, 110, 124;
practical aim of, 121, 133; (pure)
practical, (free) interest of, 61, 79,
118,146,121; (pure practical,) incentive^) of, 71, 76, 88; need of pure
practical, 142; feeling (sensation)
brought about by, 76, 92, 117, cf. 81;
pure practical, does not want us to
give up our claims to happiness, 93;
finite, highest result that can be
brought about by, 33, cf. 82; as aiming at the highest good, 43, 108, 109,
115, 119, 124, 125, 129, 136; final
purpose of pure practical, 129; whole
purpose of practical, 133; postulate(s)
of pure practical, 11 n. 93,122,132-35,
140, 142, cf. 131 n. 178; primacy of
pure practical in its linkage with speculative reason, 119-21; see also Rational, Reasonable, Reasoning: subtle
Reasonable (vernünftig), 37, 60, 88,
139, 140, 142, 147, see also Rational,
Reason
Reasoning: subtle (vernünfteln), 3, 91,

INDEX

120, 143, 153 inch br. n. 26, 154, cf.
59, 106, 111, 163; see also Reason
Rebuke (tadeln), 24, see also Censure,
Self-condemnation
Receptivity or receptive (Empfänglichkeit]), 21, 22, 58, 152, 153, 160, see
also Susceptible, Sensibility, Spontaneity
Reciprocal (wechselseitig), 10, 29 incl.
br. n. 64, 66
Recognizable, see Cognizable
Reference or refer (Beziehung, sich beziehen, zurückweisen), 6 n. 64, 16,
21, 22, 35, 36, 41, 42, 46, 49, 50, 53,
54, 56-58, 60, 62, 65, 66, 67 incl. br.
n. 293, 69, 70, 75, 87, 89, 99, 102,
107, 115, 126, 132, 133, 135,
137-39, 141, 143 n. 282, 157; practical, 4, 5, 25,44,56, cf. 16, 35, 36,46,
137; psychological, 7; transcendental, 7; particular, 8; reciprocal, 10, cf.
29; see also Relation
Reflect (upon) (nachsinnen [überdenken]), 155 n. 52, 163, see also Deliberation
Refraining (Lassen), 5, 100, see also
Doing
Refute (widerlegen), 9 n. 90, 127, 142,
cf. 138 br. n. 243, 139 br. ns. 244 and
246; see also Proof, Irrefutable
Regress (zurückgehen), 163, see also
Progress
Regulative (regulativ), 8 br. n. 84, 48,
135, see also Constitutive
Relation or relative (Verhältnis, Relation, Beziehung, relativ), l i n . 93, 13
br. n. 114, 16, 21, 27, 29 br. n. 65, 32,
49 incl. br. n. 196, 53, 55-58, 64, 66,
73, 76, 79, 82, 89, 90, 94, 115, 117,
119, 126, 137, 138, 141, 146 br. n.
301, 157, 158, cf. 4 br. n. 36, 6 br. n.
64d, 47 br. n. 190, 76 br. n. 350, 89 br.
n. 423, see also Reference, Proportion
Religion or religious (Religion, Reli-

275

gions-), 84, 122, 123 n. 125, 127,
129, 130, 131 n. 178, see also God,
Theology
Remission or remit (Erlassung, nachlassen), 123, see also Unremitting, Irrémissible
Repentance (Reue), 98
Reprehensible (verwerflich), 100, 161
Representation (traditional rendering of
Vorstellung), see Presentation (Vorstellung)
Reputation (Ruf), 11 n. 93
Resistance (Widerstand, Widerstrebung), 32, 75,78, 92, 147, see also Irresistible
Resolve (Vorsatz), 106, 123 incl. n. 125,
156, see also Project
Respect (Achtung), 8, 73-88 incl. n.
377,92,103,105, 117,128,131,132,
147, 151, 157, 158, 161 incl. br. n.
118, 162, see also Reverence, Authority
Responsible (verantwortlich), 100
Restrict(ion) or restricted (einschränken
[Einschränkung], eingeschränkt), 32,
34, 35,42,55,58, 73,75,78, 87, 108,
112, 121, 128, 130, 131, 137, 141,
145, 162, cf. 22 br. n. 31, 105 br. n.
526, see also Limit
Reverence or reverential (Ehrfurcht, ehrfurchtsvoll), 82, 84, 161, see also
Respect, Veneration
Right (Recht), 12, 50, 51, 159, 161
Right (recht), 8, 60, 126, 143 n. 282,
155, cf. 24, 32, 37, 41, 42, 53, 61, 87,
91, 98, 115, see also Wrong
Righteousness or righteous (Rechtschaffen[heit]), 11, 88, 116, 143, 154, 156
Root (Wurzel), 71 incl. br. n. 307, 86, cf.
21 br. n. 26
Rosenkranz, Karl, 51 br. n. 207
Rove (schwärmen), 57, 86, 123, see
also Fanaticism
Rule(s) (Regel[n]\ 16, 19-22, 24-28,

276

INDEX

31, 32, 34-36, 41, 51, 60, 63, 66, 67,
69, 71, 83, 111, 114, 126, 143; as
laws, see Law; practical (of the will,
of reason), see Practical, Will, Reason; see also Maxim, Principle

Select {wählen), 11 n. 93, 111, cf. 35,
see also Choice
Self {Selbst), 14, 162, see also Subject,
Soul; see also the speficic headings
below
Self-approval, Si, see also Self
Self-censure {Selbsttadel), 98, see also
Sacred {heilig), 35 br. n. 112, 131 br. n.
Self-condemnation, Censure, Self
181, see also Holy
Self-cognition {Selbsterkenntnis), 86,
123, cf. 162, see also Cognition, Self
Sacrifice {Opfer, Aufopferung), 83, 85,
Self-conceit or conceit for oneself (Ei152, 158
gendünkel), 73-75, 77-79, 82, 8 5 Sameness (Einerleiheit), 112, see also
87, 108, 154, see also Self
Identity
Self-condemnation (Selbstverdammung),
Scepticism, see Skepticism
116, see also Self-censure, Self
Schema or schemata {Schema, Schemata), 6 br. n. 64d, 68-70
Self-consciousness (Selbstbewußtsein),
Scholar(ship), {Gelehrter, Gelehrsam27, 74, 98, 116, 131, see also Conkeit), 52, 78, 137 n. 239 and br. n.
sciousness, Self
238, 153, see also School
Self-constraint (Selbstzwang), 83, cf.
Schöndörffer, Otto, 56 br. n. 233, 57 br.
32, see also Constrain, Self
Self-control (Beherrschung seiner selbst),
n. 240
109, see also Self
School {Schule), 11 n. 93, 24, 35, 40 br.
n. 160, 111, 112, 126, 127 n. 151, see Self-denial (Selbstverleugnung), 158,
also Scholar
see also Self
Schrecker, Anne Martin, 97 br. n. 472
Self-dependent (selbständig), 131, see
Schrecker, Paul, 97 br. n. 472
also Dependence, Self
Schütz, Christian Gottfried, 97 br. n. 472 Self-esteem or self-estimation (SelbstScience or scientific {Wissenschaft, wisschätzung), 73, 79, 108, 128, see also
senschaftlich), 1, 8 incl. br. n. 80, 12,
Esteem, Self
26 n. 52 and br. n. 52a, 30, 51-53,67, Self-evident (für sich klar), 27, see also
89, 91, 98, 103, 106, 108 incl. br. n.
Evident
14, 127 n. 151,131 br. n. 178b, 137 n. Self-examination (Selbstprüfung), 80
br. n. 368, 88, 154, 161, see also Self
239, 139, 141, 151, 163, cf. 40 br. n.
160, 76 br. n. 355; natural, practical, Self-interest(ed) (Eigennutz [eigennütrational, see Natural, Practical, Ratiozig]),^, 130, 155 n. 52, 161, cf. 115,
nal; see also Knowledge, Cognition
124, 129, 147, see also Interest,
Self
Seem {scheinen), 3, 10, 12 incl. br. n.
94, 26, 36, 63, 64, 68, 76, 78, 85, 95, Selfishness (Selbstsucht), 73, see also Self
99, 100, 106, 110, 115, 123 n. 125, Self-love (Selbstliebe, Philautie), 22,
126, 140,144,146,15,153,155,158,
25, 26, 34-36, 38, 73-76, 82, 85, 86,
see also Seeming
cf. 155 n. 52, see also Love for oneself, Love, Self
Seeming {scheinbar), 97, 104, 111, 115,
136, see also Seem, Specious, Illu- Self-respect (Selbstachtung), 161 br. n.
118
sion, Plausible

INDEX

Self-satisfaction (Selbstzufriedenheit),
117, 118 br. n. 81, see also Selbst
Self-sufficiency (Selbstgenügsamkeit),
25, 118, see also Self
Sensation (Empfindung), 6 br. n. 64d, 12
br n. 96, 22 incl. br. n. 31, 38, 58-63,
75 incl. br. n. 346, 76, 78, 92, 98, 99,
160; object of, see Object; see also
Sense (Sinn), Perception
Sense(s) (Sinn[e], empfinden), 16,
21-24 incl. br. n. 31, 28, 29, 36 br. n.
127, 42, 43, 47-50, 54, 56, 61, 65,
67-71 incl. br. n. 293, 80, 83, 86, 87,
94, 98-102, 104-6, 114-17, 119,
122, 127 n. 151, 132, 141, 159, 160,
162, cf. 59, 98; inner, 23, 58, 80, 97,
98, 114, 117; outer, 97; moral, 38, 40
br. n. 160; object of, see Object;
world of, see World; see also Sensing, Sensation, Sensible, Sensibility,
Sense-free
Sense-free (sinnenfrei), 79, see also
Sense (Sinn), Freedom
Sensibility (Sinnlichkeit), 16, 19 br. n. 5,
32 br. n. 83, 60-62, 66, 67, 69, 72,
75, 76, 79, 89, 90, 98, 159; mandate
from its side for reason, 61-62, cf.
25; see also Receptivity, Sensible,
Sense (Sinn)
Sensible (sinnlich, Sinnen-), 30, 32, 42,
43 incl. br. n. 174, 45, 47, 50, 54, 55,
57, 61, 62, 66, 68, 69, 71, 72, 74, 75,
79, 80, 88, 90, 91, 99, 100, 102-05,
107, 112 incl. br. n. 39, 116 br. n. 62,
117, 118br. n.71,120,124, 136, 137,
152; intuition, object, nature, world,
interest, see these headings; see also
Pathological, Sensibility, Phenomenon, Suprasensible
Sentimental(ity) (empfindsam, [Empfindelei)], 86, 155
Sequence (Reihenfolge), 98
Series (Reihe), time, 97; of events, 95;
of conditions, 48, cf. 107; of causes

277

(and effects), 3, 30, 101, cf. 3; of
bases, 142; endless, from lower to the
higher levels of moral perfection, 123
Shirley, Samuel, 102 br. n. 512
Signification or signify (Bedeutung, bedeuten), 3 incl. br. n. 15, 20, 41, 46,
49,50,56,57,60,66, 79, 83,97, 108,
119, 133, 136, 138, see also Reality,
Reference, Meaning, Significance
Simplicity (Einfalt), 111 n. 151
Sincerity or sincere (Aufrichtigkeit]),
103, 109, see also Insincerity
Skepticism (Skeptizismus, Zweifellehre), 3, 13, 14, 40 br. n. 160, 51-53,
103
Skill (Geschicklichkeit), 20, 25, 41, 78,
93
Smith, Robert, 13 br. n. 118
Sophistry (Sophisterei), 133, cf. 13 br.
n. 114
Soul (Seele), 4 br. n. 31, 10, 11 n. 93, 24
incl. br. n. 41, 28, 38, 72 br. n. 316,
77, 85, 89, 94, 96, 116, 122, 127 n.
151, 128, 130, 133, 147, 152, 155 n.
52, 156, 158; immortality of, see Immortality; see also Self, Subject,
Spirit, Mind, Psychological
Source (Quelle), 10, 24, 47, 51, 53, 84,
89, 117, 118,126, 135,141,161
Space (Raum), 13, 24 br. n. 41, 42, 65,
90 br. ns. 430 and 432, 97, 100,
101-04 incl. br. n. 509, see also Time
Specious (scheinbar), 30, see also Seeming
Speculation or speculative (Spekulation, spekulativ), 3-8 incl. br. n. 4,12
br. n. 95, 16, 30, 35, 42, 45, 47-50,
55, 65 br. n. 285, 80, 89, 103-08,
114, 119-22 incl. br. n. 100, 127 n.
151, 132-38 incl. br. n. 236, 140-43
incl. n. 271, 145, 146, 153, 154; cognition, see Cognition; power of, see
Power; object of, 26; aim (of reason),
see Aim, Reason; (use, ideas, cognition, interest, critique, restriction,

278

INDEX

etc.) of reason, see Reason; see also
Theory, Reason
Sphere {Sphäre), 34, cf. 20, 42, 132,
151, 154, see also Domain, Realm,
Range
Spinoza, Baruch (Benedict), 101 br. n.
509, 102br.n.512
Spirit or spiritual (Geist, geistig, Geistes-),
24 incl. br. n. 41, 72 incl. n. 318, 76,
77, 83, 85, 97 incl. br. n. 473, 111,
123 n. 125,152, see also Soul, Intelligence, Mind
Spontaneity (Spontaneität), 48, 99, 101,
see also Receptivity
Spurious (unecht), 117, 128, see also
Genuine
Standard (Maßstab, Richtmaß, Richtschnur), 16, 37, 63, 77, 108, 127 n.
151 and br. n. 151g, 128, 130, 163,
see also Touchstone
Stimulate (reizen), 83, 157, 162
Stoics: the (die Stoiker), 11 n. 93, 40
incl. br. n. 160, 86, 115, 126, 127 n.
151, cf. 60, 111, 112
Strength(en) or strong (Stärke[h], Kraft,
stark), 24, 41, 76, 147, 156-58, 160,
see also Fortitude, Power
Strive or striving (streben, endeavor),
83, 114, 12, 143, 146, 156, see also
Endeavor
Structure (Bau), 163 incl. br. n. 132, see
also Building, Edifice
Study (Studium), 148, see also Observation
Subject (Subjekt), 3 br. n. 11, 6 incl. n.
64 and br. n. 60, 8, 9 n. 90, 11 n. 93,
16, 19-23 incl. br. n. 6, 25, 28, 50,
58, 75, 78, 80, 82, 83, 87, 96, 97, 99,
100, 105, 112, 116, 131, 133; rational, see Rational; of moral laws, see
Law; of the will, see Will; see also
Self, Subjective
Subjective(ly) (subjektiv), 4 incl. br. n.
38, 9 n. 90, 11 n. 93, 12, 13, 19-21

incl. br. n. 5, 25-27, 31, 32, 34,
38-40, 41 br. n. 161, 51, 66, 72-76,
79, 81, 82, 84, 86, 88, 90, 109, 117,
125, 143 incl. n. 282, 145, 146, 151,
153, 157-60; necessary law (effect of
the moral law), see Law; differences
(determination, determining bases) of
the will, see Will; practical reason
(condition^] of reason), see Reason;
passing over into holiness, morality
as, 84; see also Subject, Objective
Sublimity or sublime (erhaben), 7, 71,
84-86, 117, 127 br. n. 151e, see also
Exalted
Subordination or subordinate ( Unterordnung, untergeordnet, Neben-),
25,30,64,110, 119,121
Subreption or surreptitious (Erschleichen, erschlichen), 51, 116 incl. br. n.
59
Subsist (bestehen), 8, 46
Substance (Substanz), 24 br. n. 41, 41,
100, 102, 133, 158
Substrate (Substrat), 99
Subsumption (Subsumtion), 68, 90
Subtle reasoning, see Reasoning: subtle
Sum (Inbegriff), 137 n. 239, see also
Totality, Whole
Supermeritorious, Supernatural, Supersensible, see Suprameritorious, Supranatural, Suprasensible
Superstition (Aberglaube), 136, 162
Suprameritorious (überverdienstlich),
155, see also Merit
Supranatural (übernatürlich), 88, see
also Suprasensible, Natural
Suprasensible (übersinnlich), 5, 6,
43-45, 47, 50, 55-57, 68, 71, 103,
106, 119, 135-37, 141, 147, see also
Supranatural, Sensible
Supreme (oberst, höchst), 9 n. 90,
31-33, 39, 41, 46, 62, 64, 66, 71,
74-76, 83 n. 391, 86, 88, 91, 93, 101,
102, 106, 109-12, 118-20, 122, 125,

INDEX

126, 129, 133, 137, 139, 140 incl. br.
n. 254, 158; principle(s) of reason,
see Reason; legislator, pure reason as,
75; law(s) (determining basis) of the
will, see Will; practical (moral) law,
see Law; (life-)principle(s) of morality (morals), see Morality, Morals;
(condition of) the highest good,
morality (the moral law) as, see
Morality, Law (moral); good, see
Good; being, see Being; cause of nature, see Nature; see also Highest,
Law, Reason
Surreptitious {erschlichen), see Subreption
Susceptible {empfänglich), see also Receptivity
Suspicion or suspect {Verdacht, verdächtig, vermuten), 15, 153
Syllogism {Vernunftschluß), 90, see also
Reason (inference of), Proof, Logic
Symbol {Symbol), 70
Sympathy or sympathetic {Mitleid, Sympathie, sympathetisch), 34, 85, 118,
156 inch br. n. 62
Synthesis {Synthesis), 103, 104, 114,
see also Combination, Synthetic, Assembled, Dissect
Synthetic {synthetisch), judgment, 13,
cf. 135; (a priori) proposition(s), 13
br. n. 114, 31, 46, 52, 134,139, cf. 10;
principles, 42; unity, 12 br. n. 96, 65,
111; linkage, 113, cf. 42; cognizing,
45; use of pure theoretical reason, 52;
see also Synthesis, Analytic
System or systematic {System, systematisch), 3, 7-10 incl. br. ns. 68 and 80,
12, 13, 24, 31 br. n. 77, 65, 73, 89,91,
98, 100, 112, 127 n. 151, 151, 162,
see also Unity, Order {Ordnung), Coherence, Organization, Whole, Architectonic
Teach(er) {lehren [Lehrer]), 86, 103,

279

108, 137 incl. n. 239, 148, 152, 155,
159, 163 incl. br. n. 138, see also
Pupil
Temperance {Enthaltsamkeit), 126, see
also Moderation
Temptation {Versuchung), 93, 127 n.
151
Test mark {Prüfungsmerkmal), 155, see
also Test
Test {Probe [er]prufen\ 5, 44, 69, 91,
116, 123, 155, see also Experiment,
Test mark
Testimony {Zeugnis), 30, 35, 44, see
also Witness
Theology or theological or theologian
{Theologie, theologisch, Gottesgelehrter), 40, 100, 129, 133, 137 incl.
n. 239, 140, 141, cf. 8 br. n. 83a, 40
br. n. 160, 138 br. n. 243, see also
God, Religion, Theosophist
Theorem {Lehrsatz), 21, 22, 27, 33, see
also Principle
Theory or theoretical {Theorie), 3 br. n.
4, 4-6 incl. br. ns. 24, 29, 31 and 59,
9 n. 90, 11 n. 93, 12, 15, 20, 26 incl.
n. 52, 30 incl. br. n. 68, 35 incl. br. n.
110, 41, 43, 45-50, 52, 54-57, 65,
66, 68, 89-91, 102, 104-06, 109,
115, 120-22 incl. br. n. 100, 126,
130, 132-38 incl. br. ns. 221 and 236,
141, 143-46, 151, 153, cf. 6 br. n.
64d, 40 br. n. 160; cognition, see
Cognition; aim (of reason), see Aim,
Reason; (use, cognition, critique, restriction, etc.) of reason, see Reason;
see also Doctrine, Theoretical, Speculation, Practical
Theosophist or theosophical {theosophisch, Theosoph), 120, 123, see also
Theology
Thing in itself or things in themselves
{Ding[e] an sich [selbst]), 6 incl. br.
ns. 59 and 64d, 53, 54, 56, 94, 95, 97,
99-102, 107 incl. br. n. 4, 115, cf. 6

280

INDEX

n. 64,42, 87, 110,131 incl. br. n. 184,
133
Think, see Thought
Thought or think(able) (Gedanke[n],
Denkungs-, denken [denkbar]), 3,4 n.
25 and br. n. 25f, 6, 7, 10, 11 n. 93,
12, 20, 24, 26, 27, 29, 31, 36, 38, 41,
42, 45, 48-50 incl. br. n. 201, 53, 54,
56, 62, 63, 65, 66, 71, 82, 85, 86, 92,
96, 97, 99, 101-06, 109 br. n. 22,
110, 113, 114, 116,118-20, 126, 127
incl. n. 151, 131-42, 144, 145, 152,
153, 155 n. 52, 157, 158, 160, cf. 24
br. n. 41, 143 br. n. 282b; power of
(to), see Power; natural, see Natural;
of objects, see Object; of duty, see
Duty; of the moral law, possibility of,
see Law (moral); see also Concept,
Meditation, Way of thinking
Time (Zeit), 42, 53, 65, 87, 90 br. ns.
430 and 432, 94-104 incl. br. n. 509,
114, 122,123,137,162, cf. 13 n. 119,
23, 35, 37,92, 111, 115,154,157, ^
also Space
Tittel, Gottlob August, 8 br. n. 83a, 10
br. n. 91
Totality (Totalität), 104, 107, 108, 123
n. 125, see also Sum, Whole
Touch (Gefühl), 13, see also Feeling
Touchstone (Probierstein), 14, 63, 155,
see also Standard
Tranquility (Ruhe, Beruhigung), 88,116
Transcendent (transzendent), thoughts,
135; ideas, 135, cf. 127 n. 151 andbr.
n. 151f, 162 incl. br. n. 122; cognition, 137 incl. br. n. 231, synthesis,
104; use of reason, 16 incl. br. n. 129,
48 incl. br. n. 195, cf. 57, 71, 120 br.
n. 97, 133; theoretical aim as, 105;
concept of freedom, 94, 103; see also
Extravagant, Immanent
Transcendental (transzendental), predicate^), 94, 137; meaning, 20, cf. 7;
power of imagination, 68; appercep-

tion, 65 br. n. 286; Aesthetic, 90;
Logic, 90 incl. br. n. 429; deduction,
113; part of metaphysics, 139; freedom, 3 incl. br. n. 15, 97; ideal, 133;
idealism, 101 br. n. 509; perfection,
41
Transform(ation) (verwandeln, umändern [Umänderung]), 84, 112, 146,
see also Convert, Change
Transgress(ion) (übertreten [Übertretung]), 37, 38, 82, 93, 116, 127 n.
151, 128, 147, 155, 158
Transitory (vorübergehend), 61, 155 n.
52
Treatise (Abhandlung), 3, 4 n. 25, 10,
143 n. 282, see also Work
Tribunal (Richterstuhl), 89, 152
True (wahr), 4 br. n. 36, 7, 10, 12 incl.
br. ns. 98 and 106, 25, 30, 35, 36, 55,
78, 111, 114, 115, 117, 123, 134, 142
br. n. 269, 145 br. n. 289, 160, 162,
163, see also Valid, Truth, Truthfulness, Truly, Untrue
Truly (wahrhaftig), 74, 106, 147, see
also True
Trust (Zutrauen), 35, see also Hope,
Confidence, Faith
Truth (Wahrheit), 8, 9, 16, 36; see also
True, Truthfulness
Truthfulness (Wahrhaftigkeit), 61, 93,
154, cf. 44, 86, see also Truth
Type (Typus), 69, 70, see also Typic, Archetype
Typic (Typic), 67, 70, see also Type

Ultimate purpose (letzter Zweck), 120
incl. br. n. 93, 130, see also Purpose
Unacquainted (unbekannt), 30, see also
Unfamiliar, Acquaintance
Unbounded (unbegrenzt), see Boundless
Uncertain (ungewiß), 60,78,127 n. 151,
159 br. n. 89, see also Doubt, Certain

INDEX

Unchangeable (unveränderlich), 107,
117, 152, 163, see also Immutability,
Eternity, Changeable
Unconditioned or unconditional(ly) (unbedingt), 3, 11 n. 93, 15, 16, 29-32
inch br. n. 73, 47-49, 56, 66, 69 incl.
br. n. 301, 74, 87, 103-08, 110, 122,
143; law, see Law; practical, see
Practical; good, see Good; see also
Conditioned, Condition
Understand (verstehen), 6, 35, 49, 118,
see also Understanding, Understandability, Comprehend, Mean, Insight,
Misunderstand
Understandability or understandable
(Verständlichkeit]), 67, 126, see also
Understand, Understanding
Understanding (Verstand), 6, 9 n. 90, 12
br. n. 96, 22, 24, 27, 30 incl. br. n. 68,
31 br. n. 77, 35, 36, 42 incl. br. n. 169,
43, 46, 48-50, 53-56 incl. br. n. 230,
65, 68-70 incl. br. n. 298, 86, 89, 91,
92. 103, 104, 106, 114, 115, 127 n.
151, 133, 136-41 incl. br. n. 234,
143, 160, 162, 163; as a power, 137;
pure, as practical, 55; practical use of,
137; pure, as reason, 55; objects outside, 139; and will, see Will; see also
Intellect, Understand, Understandability, see also Knowledge, Insight,
Mind
Undetermined (unbestimmt), 47, 56, 66,
104, 133, see Indeterminate
Unfamiliar (unbekannt), 50, see also
Unacquainted, Familiarity
Unfathomable (unergründlich), 80, cf.
133
Unforbearing (unnachsichtig), 123, 127
n. 151,128, 154, see also Forbearance
Unholy (unheilig), 87, see also Holy
Uniformity (Gleichförmigkeit), 100, see
also Unity, Homogeneity
Unintentional (unvorsätzlich), 98, see
also Intent

281

Unity (Einheit), analytic, 111; synthetic,
12 br. n. 96, 65, 111; of synthesis,
104; systematic, 91; absolute, 99; of
pure reason, 91; see also Coherence,
Order (Ordnung), Uniformity, Disunity
Universal (allgemein), 12, 13, 19 br. n.
3, 21, 25-31 incl. brn. 50, 33, 34, 36,
41, 44-46, 48, 52, 58, 63-65, 67, 69,
70, 74, 90, 100, 109, 115, 132, 138,
143, 145, 162; validity, see Valid;
(natural, practical) law, see Law,
Practical, Reason; principle(s) of
morality, see Morality; see also Universality, General, Particular
Universality (Allgemeinheit), 12 incl. br.
n. 98, 13 br. n. 107, 28, 32, 34, 35,44,
see also Universal
Universe (Weltall), 162, see also World
Unlawful (gesetzwidrig), 73, 98, see
also Law, Lawful
Unlimited(ness) (unbeschränkt [Uneingeschränktheit]), 13, 131 n. 178, see
also Limitless, Limit
Unnecessary (unnötig), 106, see also
Needless, Necessary
Unremitting (unnachläßlich), 123, 143,
see also Irrémissible, Remission
Untrue (unwahr), 38, 44, see also True
Unworthiness or unworthy (Unwiirdig[keit]), 11, 78, 130, see also Lack
of worth, Worthless
Urge (Trieb), 142 n. 271, see also Incentive, Impulse
Vain (vergeblich), 47, 96, see also Futile
Valid(ity) (Gültigkeit]), 4; 8,19, 34, 74,
143 n. 282; subjectively, 26; objective(ly), see Objective; universal(ly),
21, 45, 46, 52, cf. 36; law, see Law;
judgment, 13; inference, 12; basis (of
assent), 4, 8; see also True
Value (Wert), 23, 71 br. n. 311, 158, see
also Worth

282

INDEX

Vanity or vain (Eitel\keit\, 85, 86, 161
Vary (wechseln), 98, 118, see also
Change
Vaucanson, Jacques de, 101 br. n. 506,
cf. 101
Veneration or venerability (Verehrung,
Ehrwürdigkeit), 86, 87, 89, 148, 156,
see also Reverence
Vice or vicious (Laster, lasterhaft), 38,
88
Villainy or villain (Bosheit, Bösewicht),
99 incl. br. n. 493, see also Malice, Evil
Violate (verletzen), 158, see also Offend, Inviolability
Violence (Gewalttätigkeit), 61
Virtue or virtuous (Tugend, tugendhaft),
11 n. 93, 24, 33, 38, 56, 84, 87, 105,
110-18 incl. br. n. 81, 126, 127 n.
151, 128, 151-56, 160, see also
Morality
Vital (Lebens-), 23, 157, 162, see also
Life
Vocation (Bestimmung), 87, 88, 122,
146,162 br. n. 128, see also Determination, Destined
Volition (Wollen), 15, 21, 33, 34, 45, 59
n. 257, 92, 109, 110, see also Will,
Willing, Voluntary, Benevolence
Voltaire, 78
Voluntary (freiwillig), 84, 85, 100, 146,
see also Volition, Volunteer
Volunteer (Volontär), 82, cf. 143 br. n.
282b, see also Voluntary
Vorländer, Karl, 4 br. n. 32, 7 br. n. 73, 8
br. n. 83a, 34 br. n. 106, 38 br. n. 153,
41 br. n. 164, 43 br. n. 174, 55 br. n.
229,57 br. n. 240,63 br. n. 278,76 br.
n. 351, 80 br. n. 372, 92 br. n. 449, 99
br. n. 494, 117 br. n. 68, 127 br. n.
151/, 147 br. n. 312,156 br. n. 66,159
br. n. 90
Waver(ing) (wanken, Schwanken), 145,
146, 156

Way of thinking (Denkungsart), 1, 7,
71, 85, 99, 116, 127 incl. n. 151, 152,
160, see also Mental
Weakness or weaken (Schwäche, schwächen), 73, 79, 84, 127 n. 151, 158
Wealth (Reichtum), 93
Weariness (Überdruß), 69
Well-being (Wohl, Wohlbefinden, Wohlsein), 28, 34, 59 br. n. 259, 60-62,
88, 123 n. 125, 129, 158,
Well-meaning or well-meant (wohlgesinnt, wohlgemeint), 1, 146, 154
Whole (Ganzes), 8, 9 n. 90, 10, 43, 44,
51, 87, 110-12, 123-25, 129, 138,
cf. 3, 22, 24, 90, 92, 128, 133, see
also Totality, Sum, System
Will (Wille), concept of (a pure), 30 br.
n. 68, 55; constitution of, 28, 100;
power of, see Power; reason's relation to, see Reason; understanding
and, 125, 137, 138; power of desire
as, 55, cf. 59 n. 257; as power of purposes, 58-59, cf. 134; subject of, 50
incl. br. n. 201; human, 15, 38,41,72,
126, cf. 50; external (another's), 31,
129; subjective differences of, 31; of
every (all) (created, finite) rational
being(s), 15, 19, 72, 82, cf. 125, 129;
form of (a pure), 64, 66; (practical)
rule of (for, pertaining to, determining), 19, 21, 27, 31, 41; practical precept of, 20; maxim(s) of, 29, 30, 32,
44, 45, 48, 60, 62, 74, 115; (legislative) form of maxim[s] (of law, legislation) as law for (as determining
[basis of]), 28, 31, 41, cf. 29 incl. br.
n. 64, 35; (practical, formal, supreme)
law(s) of (for), 21, 22, 29, 34, 36, 58,
63, 91, 125, cf. 27, 87; causality of
(as a causality), 44, 45, 50, 89, 93,
125, cf. 55; influence on, 72, 75, 80;
incentive of, 72, 79, 94; motivating
cause (moving) of, 41, 86; (a priori,
formal, supreme, direct, sufficient,

INDEX

proper, essential, objective, subjective, empirical) determining basis
(bases) of, (the moral law as,) 15, 16,
20-25, 27-29, 34, 35 incl. br. n. 110,
39, 41, 42, 45, 49, 56, 62-64, 69,
71-74, 79, 81, 82, 92, 93, 108 incl.
br. n. 16, 109, 113, 124, 125, 127 n.
151, 130, 143 n. 282, 151; (a priori,
necessary, general, intellectual,
moral, direct, objective, subjective)
determination (necessitation, determinability) of (by the moral law
[principle of morality], by self-love),
4, 5, 15, 19, 20, 23-25, 26 n. 52, 28,
29, 31, 41-46, 48, 50, 55, 60, 62-72,
78, 80, 81, 90, 97,110, 113, 115,117,
118, 120, 122, 132, 134, 138, cf. 33;
purity of (pure, rational), 30-32 incl.
br. n. 68, 34, 55, 56, 62, 65, 66, 74,
82, 109, 110, 116, 132, 143, 160, cf.
84, 87; objective reality of pure, 55;
autonomy of, 29 br. n. 64, 33, 39, 87,
132, cf. 110; as obeying rather than
choosing, 143; free submission of, to
the law, 80; free (freedom of), 29
incl. br. n. 64,'34, 42, 44-46, 55, 72,
93-94 incl. br. n. 457, 97, 113, 126,
129, 132, cf. 31, 38, 118; consequences of, 70, cf. 65, 113, 124; actions) of, 49, cf. 57, 58, 69; ([a priori] necessary, real) object of (for), 4,
27, 28, 34, 41, 44, 58, 59, 63, 64, 67,
74,109,110,114,122, 124, 133,134,
142, 143 br. n. 277, cf. 45, 137, 139;
(moral) attitude(s) of, 66, 84, 113; intentions (aim) of, 62, 66; morality of,
33; harmony of, with the pure moral
law, 82, cf. 69, 87; negative perfection of, 160; as (the) (morally) good
(absolutely, in every respect, unconditionally), 62, 74, 79; (complete) adequacy of, to the moral law (to the
highest good), 122, 131, cf. 129; holy
(holiness of), 32, 82, 122, 129; har-

283

mony of, with (the holiness of) God's
will, 129, 131; divine (of God), 40,
41, 64, 72, 79, 87,123, 125, 129, 131,
cf. 82; empirically (pathologically)
affected (by sensibility), 19 incl. br.
n. 5, 76, 92, cf. 31 br. n. 78, 33, 82;
as encumbered, 137; matter of, 41;
mechanism of, 38, 98; refusal of, toward the law, 84; as reprehensible,
100; see also Willing, Volition,
Choice, Desire, Autonomy
Wille, Emil, 21 br. n. 29, 73 br. n. 333,
75 br. n. 345
Willing (wollen), 5 incl. br. n. 50, 15 br.
n. 122, 31 br. n. 78, 37 incl. br. n. 136,
57, 84, 142, 143, see also Volition,
Will
Wisdom or wise (Weisheit, weise), l i n .
93, 86, 108 incl. br. n. 17, 109, 111,
127 n. 151,128,130, 131 incl. n. 178,
139, 141, 145-47 incl. br. n. 296,
148, 163 incl.br. n. 134
Witness (Zeuge), 52, 159 br. n. 89, see
also Testimony
Wizenmann, Thomas, 143 n. 282 and br.
n. 282b
Woe (Weh), 59 br. n. 259, 60-62
Wolff, Baron Christian von, 13 br. n.
109, 40 incl. br. n. 160, 59 br. n. 253
World(s) (Welt[en\\ edifice (structure),
163 incl. br. n. 132; external, see External; visible, 162; of sense, 21, 29,
42, 43, 47-50, 61, 65, 67 incl. br. n.
293, 68, 70, 71, 86, 87, 94, 100-02,
104-06, 114, 115, 119, 122, 132,
159, 162; intelligible, 45, 46, 49, 50,
87, 94, 104, 105, 115, 132, 133, 137,
cf. 42, 49, 70, 105; (pure,) of understanding, 42 br. n. 169, 43, 106, 114,
143, see also Law (moral); possible,
110,139; the best, 125; rational cause
(moral originator) of, 140, 145; see
also Universe, Nature
Worth (Wert, wert), 10, 35, 38, 60, 61,

284

INDEX

71, 73, 78, 81, 85-88, 93, 110, 116, Worthless (nichtswürdig), 37, 93, 152,
127-29, 145, 147, 151, 153-57, 159,
see also Unworthiness, Lack of
161, 162, cf. 159 br. n. 89; moral, see
Worth, Worthiness
Moral; see also Value, Worthiness, Wrong (Unrecht, unrecht), 60, 98, 161,
Lack of worth
see also Right (recht)
Worthiness ör worthy (Würdig[keit])> 8,
86, 110, 129-31, 144, 147, 148, 154,
158, see also Worth, Worthless

