PHILOSOPHICAL TROUBLES

This page intentionally left blank

Philosophical Troubles
Collected Papers, Volume I
SAUL A. KRIPKE

1

3
Oxford University Press

Oxford University Press, Inc., publishes works that further
Oxford University’s objective of excellence
in research, scholarship, and education.
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With ofﬁces in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam

Copyright # 2011 Saul A. Kripke
Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
www.oup.com
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Kripke, Saul A., 1940–
[Selections. 2011]
Philosophical troubles : collected papers / Saul A. Kripke.
p. cm.
"Includes a selection of published and unpublished papers"–Introd.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-19-973015-5 (alk. paper)
1. Philosophy. I. Title.
B945.K79 2011
191—dc22

1 3 5 7 9 8 6 4 2
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper

To Netta

This page intentionally left blank

Contents
Introduction
Acknowledgments
1. Identity and Necessity

ix
xiii
1

2. On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

27

3. Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

52

4. Outline of a Theory of Truth

75

5. Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

99

6. A Puzzle about Belief

125

7. Nozick on Knowledge

162

8. Russell’s Notion of Scope

225

9. Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference: Some Exegetical Notes

254

10. The First Person

292

11. Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the
Philosophy of Language

322

12. Presupposition and Anaphora: Remarks on the Formulation
of the Projection Problem

351

13. A Puzzle about Time and Thought

373

Index

381

This page intentionally left blank

Introduction
The present volume includes a selection of published and unpublished papers.
I have not followed a single criterion for making the selections. In fact, I have
followed several different and perhaps even conﬂicting criteria. This may amount
to saying that I have followed no criterion at all, but a number of considerations
have crossed my mind (or my editors’ minds) in arriving at a ﬁnal list. Some of
them might be worth mentioning.
One of the ﬁrst decisions we made was to exclude my published papers on
modal logic, thinking that with some new additions they might make a nice
volume on their own. This decision led us to a more general attitude of favoring
philosophically oriented papers over work that is predominantly technical.
Among my previously published papers we have selected a group of older papers
that have already been the subject of a great deal of discussion: “Identity and
Necessity” (1971), “Outline of a Theory of Truth” (1975), “Speaker’s Reference
and Semantic Reference” (1977), and “A Puzzle about Belief ” (1979). To these
we have added my more recent publications: “Russell’s Notion of Scope” (2005),
“Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference: Some Exegetical Notes” (2008), and
“Presupposition and Anaphora: Remarks on the Formulation of the Projection
Problem” (2009). “Outline” is, of course, an exception to the “no-technicalpapers” rule, but it is an old favorite of mine and I felt it also belongs among my
more strictly philosophical papers. It was, in fact, originally published in a
general philosophical journal (The Journal of Philosophy) and was intended to
make some sense to a general philosophical audience.
The selection of the unpublished papers is meant to be in keeping with the
principle of excluding technical work. But this hardly simpliﬁed the process
of coming up with a ﬁnal list. The papers chosen represent a very small portion of
the unpublished work I have accumulated over the years, and I am sure many of
the omitted manuscripts would have been equally appropriate for the present
volume. But size and length of preparation time were also important factors in
the selection process, and decisions had to be made. I had to content myself with
the thought that the numerous manuscripts that were passed over will ﬁnd a
home in a future collection. Of the papers chosen, some originated in relatively
recent talks and lectures, addressing topics that for some reason or other I found
myself thinking about again. These include “The First Person” and “Unrestricted
Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy of Language.” Some of the
older unpublished papers, such as “On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge” and
“Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities,” reﬂect the preferences of people
working with me in this project. And still others, such as “Nozick on

x

Introduction

Knowledge,” were included because the original manuscripts seemed to need
little work. Or so we thought then, anyway.
As has become usual with my work, most of the selected unpublished papers
are based on transcriptions of lectures. Only two of them have been essays since
their conception—“A Puzzle about Time and Thought” and “Nozick on Knowledge” (originally commissioned, by Hector Castañeda, as a review of Robert
Nozick’s Philosophical Explanations for Noûs). Strangely enough, the only paper
especially written for this volume—“A Puzzle about Time and Thought”—is
also, at least in a loose and elementary sense of “technical,” arguably an exception
to the “no technical papers” policy. I ﬁrst thought of the paradox presented there
several decades ago, and found myself thinking about it again in connection with
Kaplan’s paradox about possible world semantics.
All the unpublished papers underwent considerable rewriting (or writing!),
and I have only very rarely pointed out that an addition or change has been made.
Sometimes, even though not explicitly stated, such modiﬁcations will be obvious
to the reader, but in most cases they will not. Having said that, I should add that
the basic ideas have not been altered, and the core of each paper remains the same
as when it was originally presented or written. Those who heard me give the
lectures or have had access to the manuscripts will no doubt be familiar with the
main ideas of the papers.
Indeed, even though the unpublished papers had not, alas, been published,
some of them have been widely circulated. This remark applies more to the older
material, such as “Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities,” a precursor to my
John Locke Lectures at Oxford, and “On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge.” Both
papers have in fact been discussed in print; many writers, including such
distinguished philosophers as Gilbert Harman, David Lewis, and Robert Nozick,
have tried to give a solution to the dogmatism paradox presented in “On Two
Paradoxes of Knowledge.” The “red barn” counterexample given in “Nozick on
Knowledge” has also become a standard criticism of counterfactual theories of
knowledge, though the paper as whole, a quite long and detailed analysis of
Nozick’s views, is not nearly as well known.
In general, I have not tried to reply to criticisms or alternative proposals. “On
Two Paradoxes of Knowledge” is, however, an exception. I have added an
appendix that contains a discussion of the self-referential approach to the surprise
exam and a letter I wrote to Frederick Fitch in 1972 concerning these issues
(come to think of it, another exception to the “no-technical papers” rule). Also,
since many people learned of the dogmatism paradox from Gilbert Harman’s
presentation of it in Thought, I thought I should add a comment as to why his
treatment does not seem to me to settle the matter.
In contrast to my unpublished manuscripts, I have adopted a very conservative
policy regarding my previously published papers. They all appear here in their
original form, and I have only occasionally added a note or footnote making
speciﬁc additions. The fact that I have not tried to make corrections doesn’t, of

Introduction

xi

course, mean that I have no corrections to make. One of my excuses is that some
of the published papers, especially the earlier ones, have generated an enormous
amount of commentaries and replies, and it seemed to me unfair to my readers
and commentators to introduce modiﬁcations to the original texts. The truth is
that I would not dare tamper with them. And adding postscripts discussing
reactions and my own modiﬁcations seemed to me to threaten to prolong a
project long delayed—not to mention the added danger of their becoming longer
than the original papers, separate pieces in their own right (or at least that has
been my experience with a several-hundred-page transcription of a seminar
recording reactions and modiﬁcations to “Outline of a Theory of Truth”).
I hope my readers won’t be disappointed with the decision to concentrate my
efforts on the unpublished material. I can say that even though I would now
perhaps change an emphasis here or there, try to be clearer in certain passages, or
make certain corrections, I do stand with the main ideas presented in my
previously published papers. As I said before, I would probably have something
to add to each paper, published or unpublished. The process, however, can
certainly go on and, indeed, did go on much longer than we had originally
anticipated. Some of the papers had to wait too long to come to an end, and there
was a certain sense of urgency, shared with the people working with me, that they
ﬁnally appear.
The result is a volume with papers ranging over many topics: epistemology,
linguistics, pragmatics, philosophy of language, history of analytic philosophy,
theory of truth, metaphysics, and so on. People have noted that a signiﬁcant part
of the selection reﬂects a certain fondness for philosophical puzzles and paradoxes. In general, thinking about philosophy and logic has always been for me
the fun part of my work. I can get gripped by certain problems. Writing them up
is, unfortunately, neither as much fun nor as gripping, though I do ﬁnd that
sometimes one does not really know one’s own thoughts precisely until they have
been either properly presented in lectures or even written down. I hope that it has
been worth the effort and that others will ﬁnd the philosophical problems
discussed in these pages as engaging as I have.
Many people have helped, directly or indirectly, bring this volume to light.
The establishment of the Saul Kripke Center (SKC) at the City University of
New York, Graduate Center, was crucial to its realization. For that reason I want
to thank in the ﬁrst place Chancellor Matthew Goldstein, President Bill Kelly,
and Provost Chase Robinson for their enthusiasm for my work and for making
the Center a reality. Michael Devitt, John Greenwood, Brian Schwartz, and
Iakovos Vasiliou also deserve special thanks for their work in the establishment
and continuing progress of the Center. I deeply appreciate their support.
The SKC team has provided invaluable help. Gary Ostertag, the Center’s
director, and Jeff Buechner have carefully read, commented on, and edited
several versions of the previously unpublished papers. Monique Whitaker and
Ben Phillips helped with the proofreading and checked references. Michael

xii

Introduction

Devitt has closely followed the book’s progress, giving advice and suggesting
deadlines, depending on what the situation called for, at several points. Finally,
Romina Padró had the original idea for this book and pushed for it all the way,
doing most of the editorial work, providing comments, suggestions, and encouragement throughout the selection and rewriting processes; it is indeed very
doubtful that this book would exist without her help. I am extremely thankful
for having been able to work with this excellent group of people and hope to
continue doing so in the future.
The papers included in this volume were conceived and written or presented
during a period spanning more than forty years. Many colleagues and friends
who may not have been directly involved in the production of this book have
made contributions to the individual papers contained here. I have tried to thank
and give credit to them in the relevant papers, but I also want to stress my thanks
to them here. Special thanks go to Harold Teichman, who has kindly given many
hours of his time to edit the original manuscripts, and to Fernando Birman and
Pegg Nadler for suggesting the title of the book. I am grateful to my editor at
Oxford University Press, Peter Ohlin, and his staff, especially Natalie Johnson,
for their support and helpfulness.
Finally I want to thank my family and especially my father, Rabbi Myer S.
Kripke, for his generous support of me and the Center.
Saul Kripke
October 12, 2010

Acknowledgments
The author gratefully acknowledges the editors and publishers who have granted
permission to reprint the following papers:
Chapter 1, “Identity and Necessity.” First published in Identity and Individuation, edited by Milton K. Munitz (New York: New York University Press, 1971),
135–64.
Chapter 4, “Outline of a Theory of Truth.” First published in Journal of
Philosophy 72 (1975):690–716.
Chapter 5, “Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference.” First published in
Midwest Studies in Philosophy 2 (1977):255–76.
Chapter 6, “A Puzzle About Belief.” First published in Meaning and Use, edited
by A. Margalit (Dordrecht, Netherlands: D. Reidel, 1979), 239–83.
Chapter 8, “Russell’s Notion of Scope.” First published in Mind 114 (2005):
1005–37 (Special Edition on the 100th anniversary of “On Denoting”).
Chapter 9, “Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference: Some Exegetical Notes.”
Theoria 74 (2008):181–218.
Chapter 12, “Presupposition and Anaphora: Remarks on the Formulation of the
Projection Problem.” Linguistic Inquiry 40 (2009):367–86.
Chapters 2, 3, 7, 10, 11, and 13 are previously unpublished and appear here for
the ﬁrst time.

This page intentionally left blank

1
Identity and Necessity

A problem which has arisen frequently in contemporary philosophy is: “How are
contingent identity statements possible?” This question is phrased by analogy
with the way Kant phrased his question “How are synthetic a priori judgments
possible?” In both cases, it has usually been taken for granted in the one case by
Kant that synthetic a priori judgments were possible, and in the other case in
contemporary philosophical literature that contingent statements of identity are
possible. I do not intend to deal with the Kantian question except to mention this
analogy: After a rather thick book was written trying to answer the question how
synthetic a priori judgments were possible, others came along later who claimed
that the solution to the problem was that synthetic a priori judgments were, of
course, impossible and that a book trying to show otherwise was written in vain.
I will not discuss who was right on the possibility of synthetic a priori judgments.
But in the case of contingent statements of identity, most philosophers have felt
that the notion of a contingent identity statement ran into something like the
following paradox. An argument like the following can be given against the
possibility of contingent identity statements:1
First, the law of the substitutivity of identity says that, for any objects x and y,
if x is identical to y, then if x has a certain property F, so does y:

1

This paper was presented orally, without a written text, to a New York University lecture series
on identity. The lecture was taped, and the present paper represents a transcription of these tapes,
edited only slightly with no attempt to change the style of the original. If the reader imagines the
sentences of this paper as being delivered, extemporaneously, with proper pauses and emphases, this
may facilitate his comprehension. Nevertheless, there may still be passages which are hard to follow,
and the time allotted necessitated a condensed presentation of the argument. (A longer version of
some of these views, still rather compressed and still representing a transcript of oral remarks,
appeared in Semantics of Natural Language, ed. by Donald Davidson and Gilbert Harman,
[Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1972]; it subsequently appeared as a monograph, titled Naming and
Necessity [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1980].) Occasionally, reservations, ampliﬁcations
and gratiﬁcations of my remarks had to be repressed, especially in the discussion of theoretical
identiﬁcation and the mind-body problem. The footnotes, which were added to the original, would
have become even more unwieldy if this had not been done.

Identity and Necessity

2

ð1Þ ðxÞðyÞ½ðx ¼ yÞ  ðFx  FyÞ
On the other hand, every object surely is necessarily self-identical:
(2) (x)☐(x = x)
But
ð3Þ ðxÞðyÞðx ¼ yÞ  ½☐ðx ¼ xÞ  ☐ðx ¼ yÞ
is a substitution instance of (1), the substitutivity law. From (2) and (3), we can
conclude that, for every x and y, if x equals y, then, it is necessary that x equals y:
ð4Þ ðxÞðyÞððx ¼ yÞ  ☐ðx ¼ yÞÞ
This is because the clause ☐(x = x) of the conditional drops out because it is
known to be true.
This is an argument which has been stated many times in recent philosophy.
Its conclusion, however, has often been regarded as highly paradoxical. For
example, David Wiggins, in his paper, “Identity-Statements,” says,
Now there undoubtedly exist contingent identity-statements. Let a = b be one of them.
From its simple truth and (5) [= (4) above] we can derive ‘☐(a = b)’. But how then can
there be any contingent identity-statements?2

He then says that ﬁve various reactions to this argument are possible, and rejects
all of these reactions, and reacts himself. I do not want to discuss all the possible
reactions to this statement, except to mention the second of those Wiggins
rejects. This says,
We might accept the result and plead that provided ‘a’ and ‘b’ are proper names nothing
is amiss. The consequence of this is that no contingent identity-statements can be made
by means of proper names.

And then he says that he is discontented with this solution and many other
philosophers have been discontented with this solution, too, while still others
have advocated it.
What makes the statement (4) seem surprising? It says, for any objects x and y,
if x is y, then it is necessary that x is y. I have already mentioned that someone
might object to this argument on the grounds that premise (2) is already false,
that it is not the case that everything is necessarily self-identical. Well, for
example, am I myself necessarily self-identical? Someone might argue that in
some situations which we can imagine I would not even have existed and
therefore the statement “Saul Kripke is Saul Kripke” would have been false or
it would not be the case that I was self-identical. Perhaps, it would have been
neither true nor false, in such a world, to say that Saul Kripke is self-identical.
2

R. J. Butler, ed., Analytical Philosophy, Second Series (Oxford: Blackwell, 1965), p. 41.

Identity and Necessity

3

Well, that may be so, but really it depends on one’s philosophical view of a topic
that I will not discuss, that is, what is to be said about truth values of statements
mentioning objects that do not exist in the actual world or any given possible
world or counterfactual situation. Let us interpret necessity here weakly. We can
count statements as necessary if whenever the objects mentioned therein exist, the
statement would be true. If we wished to be very careful about this, we would
have to go into the question of existence as a predicate and ask if the statement
can be reformulated in the form: For every x it is necessary that, if x exists, then x
is self-identical. I will not go into this particular form of subtlety here because it is
not going to be relevant to my main theme. Nor am I really going to consider
formula (4). Anyone who believes formula (2) is, in my opinion, committed to
formula (4). If x and y are the same things and we can talk about modal
properties of an object at all, that is, in the usual parlance, we can speak of
modality de re and an object necessarily having certain properties as such, then
formula (1), I think, has to hold. Where x is any property at all, including a
property involving modal operators, and if x and y are the same object and x had
a certain property F, then y has to have the same property F. And this is so even if
the property F is itself of the form of necessarily having some other property G, in
particular that of necessarily being identical to a certain object. Well, I will not
discuss the formula (4) itself because by itself it does not assert, of any particular
true statement of identity, that it is necessary. It does not say anything about
statements at all. It says for every object x and object y, if x and y are the same
object, then it is necessary that x and y are the same object. And this, I think, if we
think about it (anyway, if someone does not think so, I will not argue for it here),
really amounts to something very little different from the statement (2). Since x,
by deﬁnition of identity, is the only object identical with x, (y)(y = x Fy)
seems to me to be little more than a garrulous way of saying ‘Fx’, and thus
(x)(y)(y = x Fx) says the same as (x)Fx no matter what ‘F ’ is—in particular, even
if ‘F ’ stands for the property of necessary identity with x. So if x has this property
(of necessary identity with x), trivially everything identical with x has it, as (4)
asserts. But, from statement (4) one may apparently be able to deduce that
various particular statements of identity must be necessary and this is then
supposed to be a very paradoxical consequence.
Wiggins says, “Now there undoubtedly exist contingent identity-statements.”
One example of a contingent identity statement is the statement that the ﬁrst
Postmaster General of the United States is identical with the inventor of bifocals,
or that both of these are identical with the man claimed by the Saturday Evening
Post as its founder (falsely claimed, I gather, by the way). Now some such
statements are plainly contingent. It plainly is a contingent fact that one and
the same man both invented bifocals and took on the job of Postmaster General
of the United States. How can we reconcile this with the truth of statement (4)?
Well, that, too, is an issue I do not want to go into in detail except to be very
dogmatic about it. It was I think settled quite well by Bertrand Russell in his

Identity and Necessity

4

notion of the scope of a description. According to Russell, one can, for example,
say with propriety that the author of Hamlet might not have written Hamlet, or
even that the author of Hamlet might not have been the author of Hamlet. Now
here, of course, we do not deny the necessity of the identity of an object with
itself; but we say it is true concerning a certain man that he in fact was the unique
person to have written Hamlet and secondly that the man, who in fact was the
man who wrote Hamlet, might not have written Hamlet. In other words, if
Shakespeare had decided not to write tragedies, he might not have written
Hamlet. Under these circumstances, the man who in fact wrote Hamlet would
not have written Hamlet. Russell brings this out by saying that in such a statement,
the ﬁrst occurrence of the description “the author of Hamlet” has large scope.3
That is, we say “The author of Hamlet has the following property: that he might
not have written Hamlet.” We do not assert that the following statement might
have been the case, namely that the author of Hamlet did not write Hamlet, for
that is not true. That would be to say that it might have been the case that someone
wrote Hamlet and yet did not write Hamlet, which would be a contradiction.
Now, aside from the details of Russell’s particular formulation of it, which
depends on his theory of descriptions, this seems to be the distinction that any
theory of descriptions has to make. For example, if someone were to meet the
President of Harvard and take him to be a Teaching Fellow, he might say: “I took
the President of Harvard for a Teaching Fellow.” By this he does not mean that he
took the proposition “The President of Harvard is a Teaching Fellow” to be true.
He could have meant this, for example, had he believed that some sort of
democratic system had gone so far at Harvard that the President of it decided to
take on the task of being a Teaching Fellow. But that probably is not what he
means. What he means instead, as Russell points out, is “Someone is President of
Harvard and I took him to be a Teaching Fellow.” In one of Russell’s examples
someone says, “I thought your yacht is much larger than it is.” And the other man
replies, “No, my yacht is not much larger than it is.”
Provided that the notion of modality de re, and thus of quantifying into modal
contexts, makes any sense at all, we have quite an adequate solution to the
problem of avoiding paradoxes if we substitute descriptions for the universal
quantiﬁers in (4) because the only consequence we will draw,4 for example, in the
bifocals case, is that there is a man who both happened to have invented bifocals
3

The second occurrence of the description has small scope.
In Russell’s theory, F( xGx) follows from (x) Fx and (∃!x) Gx, provided that the description in
F( xGx) has the entire context for its scope (in Russell’s 1905 terminology, has a ‘primary
occurrence’). Only then is F( xGx) ‘about’ the denotation of ‘ xGx ’. Applying this rule to (4), we
get the results indicated in the text. Notice that, in the ambiguous form ☐( xGx = xHx), if one or
both of the descriptions have ‘primary occurrences’ the formula does not assert the necessity of xGx
= xHx; if both have secondary occurrences, it does. Thus in a language without explicit scope
indicators, descriptions must be construed with the smallest possible scope—only then will A be
the negation of A, ☐A the necessitation of A, and the like. See Chapter 8.
Ø

Ø

Ø

Ø

Ø

Ø

4

Ø

Ø

Identity and Necessity

5

and happened to have been the ﬁrst Postmaster General of the United States, and
is necessarily self-identical. There is an object x such that x invented bifocals, and
as a matter of contingent fact an object y, such that y is the ﬁrst Postmaster
General of the United States, and ﬁnally, it is necessary, that x is y. What are x
and y here? Here, x and y are both Benjamin Franklin, and it can certainly be
necessary that Benjamin Franklin is identical with himself. So, there is no problem
in the case of descriptions if we accept Russell’s notion of scope.5 And I just
dogmatically want to drop that question here and go on to the question about
names which Wiggins raises. And Wiggins says he might accept the result and plead
that, provided a and b are proper names, nothing is amiss. And then he rejects this.
Now what is the special problem about proper names? At least if one is not
familiar with the philosophical literature about this matter, one naively feels
something like the following about proper names. First, if someone says “Cicero
was an orator,” then he uses the name ‘Cicero’ in that statement simply to pick
out a certain object and then to ascribe a certain property to the object, namely,
in this case, he ascribes to a certain man the property of having been an orator. If
someone else uses another name, such as, say, ‘Tully’, he is still speaking about
the same man. One ascribes the same property, if one says “Tully is an orator,” to
the same man. So to speak, the fact, or state of affairs, represented by the
statement is the same whether one says “Cicero is an orator” or one says “Tully
is an orator.” It would, therefore, seem that the function of names is simply to
refer, and not to describe the objects so named by such properties as “being the
inventor of bifocals” or “being the ﬁrst Postmaster General.” It would seem that
Leibniz’ law and the law (1) should not only hold in the universally quantiﬁed
form, but also in the form “if a = b and Fa, then Fb,” wherever ‘a’ and ‘b’ stand in
5
An earlier distinction with the same purpose was, of course, the medieval one of de dicto-de re.
That Russell’s distinction of scope eliminates modal paradoxes has been pointed out by many
logicians, especially Smullyan.
So as to avoid misunderstanding, let me emphasize that I am of course not asserting that Russell’s
notion of scope solves Quine’s problem of ‘essentialism’; what it does show, especially in
conjunction with modern model-theoretic approaches to modal logic, is that quantiﬁed modal
logic need not deny the truth of all instances of (x)(y)(x = y    Fx  Fy), nor of all instances of ‘(x)
(Gx  Ga)’ (where ‘a ’ is to be replaced by a nonvacuous deﬁnite description whose scope is all of
‘Ga ’), in order to avoid making it a necessary truth that one and the same man invented bifocals and
headed the original Postal Department. Russell’s contextual deﬁnition of description need not be
adopted in order to ensure these results; but other logical theories, Fregean or other, which take
descriptions as primitive must somehow express the same logical facts. Frege showed that a simple,
non-iterated context containing a deﬁnite description with small scope, which cannot be interpreted
as being ‘about’ the denotation of the description, can be interpreted as about its ‘sense’. Some
logicians have been interested in the question of the conditions under which, in an intensional
context, a description with small scope is equivalent to the same one with large scope. One of the
virtues of a Russellian treatment of descriptions in modal logic is that the answer (roughly that the
description be a ‘rigid designator’ in the sense of this lecture) then often follows from the other
postulates for quantiﬁed modal logic: no special postulates are needed, as in Hintikka’s treatment.
Even if descriptions are taken as primitive, special postulation of when scope is irrelevant can often
be deduced from more basic axioms. (See Chapter 11.)

6

Identity and Necessity

place of names and ‘F’ stands in place of a predicate expressing a genuine
property of the object:
ða ¼ b  FaÞ  Fb
We can run the same argument through again to obtain the conclusion where ‘a’
and ‘b’ replace any names, “If a = b, then necessarily a = b.” And so, we could
venture this conclusion: that whenever ‘a ’ and ‘b’ are proper names, if a is b, that
it is necessary that a is b. Identity statements between proper names have to be
necessary if they are going to be true at all. This view in fact has been advocated,
for example, by Ruth Barcan Marcus in a paper of hers on the philosophical
interpretation of modal logic.6 According to this view, whenever, for example,
someone makes a correct statement of identity between two names, such as, for
example, that Cicero is Tully, his statement has to be necessary if it is true. But
such a conclusion seems plainly to be false. (I, like other philosophers, have a habit
of understatement in which “it seems plainly false” means “it is plainly false.”
Actually, I think the view is true, though not quite in the form defended by Mrs.
Marcus.) At any rate, it seems plainly false. One example was given by Professor
Quine in his reply to Professor Marcus at the symposium: “I think I see trouble
anyway in the contrast between proper names and descriptions as Professor
Marcus draws it. The paradigm of the assigning of proper names is tagging.
We may tag the planet Venus some ﬁne evening with the proper name ‘Hesperus’. We may tag the same planet again someday before sun rise with the proper
name ‘Phosphorus’.” (Quine thinks that something like that actually was done
once.) “When, at last, we discover that we have tagged the same planet twice, our
discovery is empirical, and not because the proper names were descriptions.”
According to what we are told, the planet Venus seen in the morning was
originally thought to be a star and was called “the Morning Star,” or (to get
rid of any question of using a description) was called ‘Phosphorus’. One and the
same planet, when seen in the evening, was thought to be another star, the
Evening Star, and was called “Hesperus.” Later on, astronomers discovered that
Phosphorus and Hesperus were one and the same. Surely no amount of a priori
ratiocination on their part could conceivably have made it possible for them to
deduce that Phosphorus is Hesperus. In fact, given the information they had, it
might have turned out the other way. Therefore, it is argued, the statement
‘Hesperus is Phosphorus’ has to be an ordinary contingent, empirical truth, one
which might have come out otherwise, and so the view that true identity
statements between names are necessary has to be false. Another example
which Quine gives in Word and Object is taken from Professor Schrödinger,
the famous pioneer of quantum mechanics: A certain mountain can be seen from
6
“Modalities and Intensional Languages,” Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 1
(New York: Humanities Press, 1963), pp. 71ff. See also the “Comments” by Quine and the ensuing
discussion.

Identity and Necessity

7

both Tibet and Nepal. When seen from one direction it was called ‘Gaurisanker’;
when seen from another direction, it was called ‘Everest’; and then, later on, the
empirical discovery was made that Gaurisanker is Everest. (Quine further says
that he gathers the example is actually geographically incorrect. I guess one
should not rely on physicists for geographical information.)
Of course, one possible reaction to this argument is to deny that names like
‘Cicero’, ‘Tully’, ‘Gaurisanker’, and ‘Everest’ really are proper names. Look,
someone might say (someone has said it: his name was ‘Bertrand Russell’), just
because statements like “Hesperus is Phosphorus” and “Gaurisanker is Everest”
are contingent, we can see that the names in question are not really purely
referential. You are not, in Mrs. Marcus’ phrase, just ‘tagging’ an object; you
are actually describing it. What does the contingent fact that Hesperus is
Phosphorus amount to? Well, it amounts to the fact that the star in a certain
portion of the sky in the evening is the star in a certain portion of the sky in the
morning. Similarly, the contingent fact that Guarisanker is Everest amounts to
the fact that the mountain viewed from such and such an angle in Nepal is the
mountain viewed from such and such another angle in Tibet. Therefore, such
names as ‘Hesperus’ and ‘Phosphorus’ can only be abbreviations for descriptions.
The term ‘Phosphorus’ has to mean “the star seen . . . ,” or (let us be cautious
because it actually turned out not to be a star), “the heavenly body seen from such
and such a position at such and such a time in the morning,” and the name
‘Hesperus’ has to mean “the heavenly body seen in such and such a position at
such and such a time in the evening.” So, Russell concludes, if we want to reserve
the term “name” for things which really just name an object without describing
it, the only real proper names we can have are names of our own immediate sense
data, objects of our own ‘immediate acquaintance’. The only such names which
occur in language are demonstratives like “this” and “that.” And it is easy to see
that this requirement of necessity of identity, understood as exempting identities
between names from all imaginable doubt, can indeed be guaranteed only for
demonstrative names of immediate sense data; for only in such cases can an
identity statement between two different names have a general immunity from
Cartesian doubt. There are some other things Russell has sometimes allowed as
objects of acquaintance, such as one’s self; we need not go into details here. Other
philosophers (for example, Mrs. Marcus in her reply, at least in the verbal
discussion as I remember it—I do not know if this got into print, so perhaps
this should not be ‘tagged’ on her7) have said, “If names are really just tags,
genuine tags, then a good dictionary should be able to tell us that they are names
of the same object.” You have an object a and an object b with names ‘John’ and
‘Joe’. Then, according to Mrs. Marcus, a dictionary should be able to tell you
whether or not ‘John’ and ‘Joe’ are names of the same object. Of course, I do not
7
It should. See her remark on p. 115, Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 1, in the
discussion following the papers.

8

Identity and Necessity

know what ideal dictionaries should do, but ordinary proper names do not seem
to satisfy this requirement. You certainly can, in the case of ordinary proper
names, make quite empirical discoveries that, let’s say, Hesperus is Phosphorus,
though we thought otherwise. We can be in doubt as to whether Gaurisanker is
Everest or Cicero is in fact Tully. Even now, we could conceivably discover that
we were wrong in supposing that Hesperus was Phosphorus. Maybe the astronomers made an error. So it seems that this view is wrong and that if by a name we
do not mean some artiﬁcial notion of names such as Russell’s, but a proper name
in the ordinary sense, then there can be contingent identity statements using
proper names, and the view to the contrary seems plainly wrong.
In recent philosophy a large number of other identity statements have been
emphasized as examples of contingent identity statements, different, perhaps,
from either of the types I have mentioned before. One of them is, for example,
the statement “Heat is the motion of molecules.” First, science is supposed to
have discovered this. Empirical scientists in their investigations have been supposed to discover (and, I suppose, they did) that the external phenomenon which
we call “heat” is, in fact, molecular agitation. Another example of such a
discovery is that water is H2O, and yet other examples are that gold is the
element with such and such an atomic number, that light is a stream of photons,
and so on. These are all in some sense of “identity statement” identity statements.
Second, it is thought, they are plainly contingent identity statements, just
because they were scientiﬁc discoveries. After all, heat might have turned out
not to have been the motion of molecules. There were other alternative theories
of heat proposed, for example, the caloric theory of heat. If these theories of heat
had been correct, then heat would not have been the motion of molecules, but
instead, some substance suffusing the hot object, called “caloric.” And it was a
matter of course of science and not of any logical necessity that the one theory
turned out to be correct and the other theory turned out to be incorrect.
So, here again, we have, apparently, another plain example of a contingent
identity statement. This has been supposed to be a very important example
because of its connection with the mind-body problem. There have been many
philosophers who have wanted to be materialists, and to be materialists in a
particular form, which is known today as “the identity theory.” According to this
theory, a certain mental state, such as a person’s being in pain, is identical with a
certain state of his brain (or, perhaps, of his entire body, according to some
theorists), at any rate, a certain material or neural state of his brain or body. And
so, according to this theory, my being in pain at this instant, if I were, would be
identical with my body’s being or my brain’s being in a certain state. Others have
objected that this cannot be because, after all, we can imagine my pain existing
even if the state of the body did not. We can perhaps imagine my not being
embodied at all and still being in pain, or, conversely, we could imagine my body
existing and being in the very same state even if there were no pain. In fact,
conceivably, it could be in this state even though there were no mind ‘back of it’,

Identity and Necessity

9

so to speak, at all. The usual reply has been to concede that all of these things
might have been the case, but to argue that these are irrelevant to the question of
the identity of the mental state and the physical state. This identity, it is said, is
just another contingent scientiﬁc identiﬁcation, similar to the identiﬁcation of
heat with molecular motion, or water with H2O. Just as we can imagine heat
without any molecular motion, so we can imagine a mental state without any
corresponding brain state. But, just as the ﬁrst fact is not damaging to the
identiﬁcation of heat and the motion of molecules, so the second fact is not at
all damaging to the identiﬁcation of a mental state with the corresponding brain
state. And so, many recent philosophers have held it to be very important for our
theoretical understanding of the mind-body problem that there can be contingent identity statements of this form.
To state ﬁnally what I think, as opposed to what seems to be the case, or what
others think, I think that in both cases, the case of names and the case of the
theoretical identiﬁcations, the identity statements are necessary and not contingent. That is to say, they are necessary if true; of course, false identity statements
are not necessary. How can one possibly defend such a view? Perhaps I lack a
complete answer to this question, even though I am convinced that the view is
true. But to begin an answer, let me make some distinctions that I want to use.
The ﬁrst is between a rigid and a nonrigid designator. What do these terms mean?
As an example of a nonrigid designator, I can give an expression such as ‘the
inventor of bifocals’. Let us suppose it was Benjamin Franklin who invented
bifocals, and so the expression, ‘the inventor of bifocals’, designates or refers to a
certain man, namely, Benjamin Franklin. However, we can easily imagine that
the world could have been different, that under different circumstances someone
else would have come upon this invention before Benjamin Franklin did, and in
that case, he would have been the inventor of bifocals. So, in this sense, the
expression ‘the inventor of bifocals’ is nonrigid: Under certain circumstances one
man would have been the inventor of bifocals; under other circumstances,
another man would have. In contrast, consider the expression ‘the square root
of 25’. Independently of the empirical facts, we can give an arithmetical proof
that the square root of 25 is in fact the number 5, and because we have proved
this mathematically, what we have proved is necessary. If we think of numbers as
entities at all, and let us suppose, at least for the purpose of this lecture, that we
do, then the expression ‘the square root of 25’ necessarily designates a certain
number, namely 5. Such an expression I call ‘a rigid designator’. Some philosophers think that anyone who even uses the notions of rigid or nonrigid designator
has already shown that he has fallen into a certain confusion or has not paid
attention to certain facts. What do I mean by ‘rigid designator’? I mean a term
that designates the same object in all possible worlds. To get rid of one confusion
which certainly is not mine, I do not use “might have designated a different
object” to refer to the fact that language might have been used differently. For
example, the expression ‘the inventor of bifocals’ might have been used by

10

Identity and Necessity

inhabitants of this planet always to refer to the man who corrupted Hadleyburg.
This would have been the case, if, ﬁrst, the people on this planet had not spoken
English, but some other language, which phonetically overlapped with English;
and if, second, in that language the expression ‘the inventor of bifocals’ meant the
‘man who corrupted Hadleyburg’. Then it would refer, of course, in their
language, to whoever in fact corrupted Hadleyburg in this counterfactual situation. That is not what I mean. What I mean by saying that a description might
have referred to something different, I mean that in our language as we use it in
describing a counterfactual situation, there might have been a different object
satisfying the descriptive conditions we give for reference. So, for example, we use
the phrase ‘the inventor of bifocals’, when we are talking about another possible
world or a counterfactual situation, to refer to whoever in that counterfactual
situation would have invented bifocals, not to the person whom people in that
counterfactual situation would have called ‘the inventor of bifocals’. They might
have spoken a different language which phonetically overlapped with English in
which ‘the inventor of bifocals’ is used in some other way. I am not concerned
with that question here. For that matter, they might have been deaf and dumb, or
there might have been no people at all. (There still could have been an inventor
of bifocals even if there were no people—God, or Satan, will do.)
Second, in talking about the notion of a rigid designator, I do not mean to
imply that the object referred to has to exist in all possible worlds, that is, that it
has to necessarily exist. Some things, perhaps mathematical entities such as the
positive integers, if they exist at all, necessarily exist. Some people have held that
God both exists and necessarily exists; others, that He contingently exists; others,
that He contingently fails to exist; and others, that He necessarily fails to exist:8
all four options have been tried. But at any rate, when I use the notion of rigid
designator, I do not imply that the object referred to necessarily exists. All I mean
is that in any possible world where the object in question does exist, in any
situation where the object would exist, we use the designator in question to
designate that object. In a situation where the object does not exist, then we
should say that the designator has no referent and that the object in question so
designated does not exist.
As I said, many philosophers would ﬁnd the very notion of rigid designator
objectionable per se. And the objection that people make may be stated as
follows: Look, you’re talking about situations which are counterfactual, that is
to say, you’re talking about other possible worlds. Now these worlds are
completely disjoint, after all, from the actual world which is not just another
possible world; it is the actual world. So, before you talk about, let us say, such an
object as Richard Nixon in another possible world at all, you have to say which
object in this other possible world would be Richard Nixon. Let us talk about a
8
If there is no deity, and especially if the nonexistence of a deity is necessary, it is dubious that we
can use “He” to refer to a deity. The use in the text must be taken to be non-literal.

Identity and Necessity

11

situation in which, as you would say, Richard Nixon would have been a member
of SDS. Certainly the member of SDS you are talking about is someone very
different in many of his properties from Nixon. Before we even can say whether
this man would have been Richard Nixon or not, we have to set up criteria of
identity across possible worlds. Here are these other possible worlds. There are all
kinds of objects in them with different properties from those of any actual object.
Some of them resemble Nixon in some ways, some of them resemble Nixon in
other ways. Well, which of these objects is Nixon? One has to give a criterion of
identity. And this shows how the very notion of rigid designator runs in a circle.
Suppose we designate a certain number as the number of planets. Then, if that is
our favorite way, so to speak, of designating this number, then in any other
possible worlds we will have to identify whatever number is the number of
planets with the number 9, which in the actual world is the number of planets.
So, it is argued by various philosophers, for example, implicitly by Quine, and
explicitly by many others in his wake, we cannot really ask whether a designator is
rigid or nonrigid because we ﬁrst need a criterion of identity across possible
worlds. An extreme view has even been held that, since possible worlds are so
disjoint from our own, we cannot really say that any object in them is the same as
an object existing now but only that there are some objects which resemble things
in the actual world, more or less. We, therefore, should not really speak of what
would have been true of Nixon in another possible world but, only of what
‘counterparts’ (the term which David Lewis uses9) of Nixon there would have
been. Some people in other possible worlds have dogs whom they call ‘Checkers’.
Others favor the ABM but do not have any dog called Checkers. There are
various people who resemble Nixon more or less, but none of them can really be
said to be Nixon; they are only counterparts of Nixon, and you choose which one
is the best counterpart by noting which resembles Nixon the most closely,
according to your favorite criteria. Such views are widespread, both among the
defenders of quantiﬁed modal logic and among its detractors.
All of this talk seems to me to have taken the metaphor of possible worlds much
too seriously in some way. It is as if a ‘possible world’ were like a foreign country,
or distant planet way out there. It is as if we see dimly through a telescope various
actors on this distant planet. Actually David Lewis’ view seems the most reasonable if one takes this picture literally. No one far away on another planet can be
strictly identical with someone here. But, even if we have some marvelous
methods of transportation to take one and the same person from planet to planet,
we really need some epistemological criteria of identity to be able to say whether
someone on this distant planet is the same person as someone here.
All of this seems to me to be a totally misguided way of looking at things.
What it amounts to is the view that counterfactual situations have to be described
9
David K. Lewis, “Counterpart Theory and Quantiﬁed Modal Logic,” Journal of Philosophy, LXV
(1968), 113ff.

12

Identity and Necessity

purely qualitatively. So, we cannot say, for example, “If Nixon had only given a
sufﬁcient bribe to Senator X, he would have gotten Carswell through” because
that refers to certain people, Nixon and Carswell, and talks about what things
would be true of them in a counterfactual situation. We must say instead “If a
man who has a hairline like such and such, and holds such and such political
opinions had given a bribe to a man who was a senator and had such and such
other qualities, then a man who was a judge in the South and had many other
qualities resembling Carswell would have been conﬁrmed.” In other words, we
must describe counterfactual situations purely qualitatively and then ask the
question, “Given that the situation contains people or things with such and such
qualities, which of these people is (or is a counterpart of ) Nixon, which is
Carswell, and so on?” This seems to me to be wrong. Who is to prevent us from
saying “Nixon might have gotten Carswell through had he done certain things”?
We are speaking of Nixon and asking what, in certain counterfactual situations,
would have been true of him. We can say that if Nixon had done such and such,
he would have lost the election to Humphrey. Those I am opposing would
argue, “Yes, but how do you ﬁnd out if the man you are talking about is in fact
Nixon?” It would indeed be very hard to ﬁnd out, if you were looking at the
whole situation through a telescope, but that is not what we are doing here.
Possible worlds are not something to which an epistemological question like this
applies. And if the phrase ‘possible worlds’ is what makes anyone think some
such question applies, he should just drop this phrase and use some other
expression, say ‘counterfactual situation,’ which might be less misleading. If
we say “If Nixon had bribed such and such a Senator, Nixon would have gotten
Carswell through,” what is given in the very description of that situation is that
it is a situation in which we are speaking of Nixon, and of Carswell, and of such
and such a Senator. And there seems to be no less objection to stipulating that
we are speaking of certain people than there can be objection to stipulating that
we are speaking of certain qualities. Advocates of the other view take speaking of
certain qualities as unobjectionable. They do not say, “How do we know that
this quality (in another possible world) is that of redness?” But they do ﬁnd
speaking of certain people objectionable. But I see no more reason to object in
the one case than in the other. I think it really comes from the idea of possible
worlds as existing out there, but very far off, viewable only through a special
telescope. Even more objectionable is the view of David Lewis. According to
Lewis, when we say “Under certain circumstances Nixon would have gotten
Carswell through,” we really mean “Some man, other than Nixon but closely
resembling him, would have gotten some judge, other than Carswell but closely
resembling him, through.” Maybe that is so, that some man closely resembling
Nixon could have gotten some man closely resembling Carswell through. But
that would not comfort either Nixon or Carswell, nor would it make Nixon kick
himself and say “I should have done such and such to get Carswell through.”
The question is whether under certain circumstances Nixon himself could have

Identity and Necessity

13

gotten Carswell through. And I think the objection is simply based on a
misguided picture.
Instead, we can perfectly well talk about rigid and nonrigid designators. Moreover, we have a simple, intuitive test for them. We can say, for example, that the
number of planets might have been a different number from the number it in fact is.
For example, there might have been only seven planets. We can say that the inventor
of bifocals might have been someone other than the man who in fact invented
bifocals.10 We cannot say, though, that the square root of 81 might have been a
different number from the number it in fact is, for that number just has to be 9. If
we apply this intuitive test to proper names, such as for example ‘Richard Nixon’,
they would seem intuitively to come out to be rigid designators. First, when we talk
even about the counterfactual situation in which we suppose Nixon to have done
different things, we assume we are still talking about Nixon himself. We say, “If
Nixon had bribed a certain Senator, he would have gotten Carswell through,” and
we assume that by ‘Nixon’ and ‘Carswell’ we are still referring to the very same
people as in the actual world. And it seems that we cannot say “Nixon might have
been a different man from the man he in fact was,” unless, of course, we mean it
metaphorically: He might have been a different sort of person (if you believe in free
will and that people are not inherently corrupt). You might think the statement true
in that sense, but Nixon could not have been in the other literal sense a different
person from the person he, in fact, is, even though the thirty-seventh President of
the United States might have been Humphrey. So the phrase “the thirty-seventh
President” is nonrigid, but ‘Nixon’, it would seem, is rigid.
Let me make another distinction before I go back to the question of identity
statements. This distinction is very fundamental and also hard to see through. In
recent discussion, many philosophers who have debated the meaningfulness of
various categories of truths, have regarded them as identical. Some of those who
identify them are vociferous defenders of them, and others, such as Quine, say
they are all identically meaningless. But usually they’re not distinguished. These
10
Some philosophers think that deﬁnite descriptions, in English, are ambiguous, that sometimes
‘the inventor of bifocals’ rigidly designates the man who in fact invented bifocals. I am tentatively
inclined to reject this view, construed as a thesis about English (as opposed to a possible hypothetical
language), but I will not argue the question here.
What I do wish to note is that, contrary to some opinions, this alleged ambiguity cannot replace
the Russellian notion of the scope of a description. Consider the sentence, “The number of planets
might have been necessarily even.” This sentence plainly can be read so as to express a truth; had
there been eight planets, the number of planets would have been necessarily even. Yet without scope
distinctions, both a ‘referential’ (rigid) and a non-rigid reading of the description will make the
statement false. (Since the number of planets is nine, the rigid reading amounts to the falsity that
nine might have been necessarily even.)
The ‘rigid’ reading is equivalent to the Russellian primary occurrence; the non-rigid, to innermost
scope—some, following Donnellan, perhaps loosely, have called this reading the ‘attributive’ use.
The possibility of intermediate scopes is then ignored. In the present instance, the intended reading
of ⃟☐ (the number of planets is even) makes the scope of the description ☐ (the number of planets
is even), neither the largest nor the smallest possible. (See also Chapter 8, section 2a.)

14

Identity and Necessity

are categories such as ‘analytic’, ‘necessary’, ‘a priori’, and sometimes even
‘certain’. I will not talk about all of these but only about the notions of a
prioricity and necessity. Very often these are held to be synonyms. (Many
philosophers probably should not be described as holding them to be synonyms;
they simply use them interchangeably.) I wish to distinguish them. What do we
mean by calling a statement necessary? We simply mean that the statement in
question, ﬁrst, is true, and, second, that it could not have been otherwise. When
we say that something is contingently true, we mean that, though it is in fact the
case, it could have been the case that things would have been otherwise. If we
wish to assign this distinction to a branch of philosophy, we should assign it to
metaphysics. To the contrary, there is the notion of an a priori truth. An a priori
truth is supposed to be one which can be known to be true independently of all
experience. Notice that this does not in and of itself say anything about all
possible worlds, unless this is put into the deﬁnition. All that it says is that it can
be known to be true of the actual world, independently of all experience. It may,
by some philosophical argument, follow from our knowing, independently of
experience, that something is true of the actual world, that it has to be known to
be true also of all possible worlds. But if this is to be established, it requires some
philosophical argument to establish it. Now, this notion, if we were to assign it to
a branch of philosophy, belongs, not to metaphysics, but to epistemology. It has
to do with the way we can know certain things to be in fact true. Now, it may be
the case, of course, that anything which is necessary is something which can be
known a priori. (Notice, by the way, the notion a priori truth as thus deﬁned has
in it another modality: it can be known independently of all experience. It is a
little complicated because there is a double modality here.) I will not have time to
explore these notions in full detail here, but one thing we can see from the outset
is that these two notions are by no means trivially the same. If they are coextensive, it takes some philosophical argument to establish it. As stated, they belong
to different domains of philosophy. One of them has something to do with
knowledge, of what can be known in certain ways about the actual world. The
other one has to do with metaphysics, how the world could have been; given that it
is the way it is, could it have been otherwise, in certain ways? Now I hold, as a
matter of fact, that neither class of statements is contained in the other. But, all
we need to talk about here is this: Is everything that is necessary knowable a priori
or known a priori? Consider the following example: the Goldbach conjecture.
This says that every even number is the sum of two primes. It is a mathematical
statement and if it is true at all, it has to be necessary. Certainly, one could not say
that though in fact every even number is the sum of two primes, there could have
been some extra number which was even and not the sum of two primes. What
would that mean? On the other hand, the answer to the question whether every
even number is in fact the sum of two primes is unknown, and we have no
method at present for deciding. So we certainly do not know, a priori or even a
posteriori, that every even number is the sum of two primes. (Well, perhaps we

Identity and Necessity

15

have some evidence in that no counterexample has been found.) But we certainly
do not know a priori anyway, that every even number is, in fact, the sum of two
primes. But, of course, the deﬁnition just says “can be known independently of
experience,” and someone might say that if it is true, we could know it independently of experience. It is hard to see exactly what this claim means. It might be
so. One thing it might mean is that if it were true we could prove it. This claim is
certainly wrong if it is generally applied to mathematical statements and we have
to work within some ﬁxed system. This is what Gödel proved. And even if we
mean an ‘intuitive proof in general’ it might just be the case (at least, this view is
as clear and as probable as the contrary) that though the statement is true, there is
just no way the human mind could ever prove it. Of course, one way an inﬁnite
mind might be able to prove it is by looking through each natural number one by
one and checking. In this sense, of course, it can, perhaps, be known a priori, but
only by an inﬁnite mind, and then this gets into other complicated questions.
I do not want to discuss questions about the conceivability of performing an
inﬁnite number of acts like looking through each number one by one. A vast
philosophical literature has been written on this: Some have declared it is logically
impossible; others that it is logically possible; and some do not know. The main
point is that it is not trivial that just because such a statement is necessary it can be
known a priori. Some considerable clariﬁcation is required before we decide that it
can be so known. And so this shows that even if everything necessary is a priori in
some sense, it should not be taken as a trivial matter of deﬁnition. It is a
substantive philosophical thesis which requires some work.
Another example that one might give relates to the problem of essentialism.
Here is a lectern. A question which has often been raised in philosophy is: What
are its essential properties? What properties, aside from trivial ones like selfidentity, are such that this object has to have them if it exists at all,11 are such that
if an object did not have it, it would not be this object?12 For example, being
11

This deﬁnition is the usual formulation of the notion of essential property, but an exception
must be made for existence itself: on the deﬁnition given, existence would be trivially essential. We
should regard existence as essential to an object only if the object necessarily exists. Perhaps there are
other recherché properties, involving existence, for which the deﬁnition is similarly objectionable.
(I thank Michael Slote for this observation.)
12
The two clauses of the sentence footnoted give equivalent deﬁnitions of the notion of essential
property, since ☐ ((∃x)(x=a)  Fa) is equivalent to ☐(x)(Fx  x=a). The second formulation,
however, has served as a powerful seducer in favor of theories of ‘identiﬁcation across possible
worlds’. For it suggests that we consider ‘an object b in another possible world’ and test whether it is
identiﬁable with a by asking whether it lacks any of the essential properties of a. Let me therefore
emphasize that, although an essential property is (trivially) a property without which an object
cannot be a, it by no means follows that the essential, purely qualitative properties of a jointly form a
sufﬁcient condition for being a, nor that any purely qualitative conditions are sufﬁcient for an object
to be a. Further, even if necessary and sufﬁcient qualitative conditions for an object to be Nixon may
exist, there would still be little justiﬁcation for the demand for a purely qualitative description of all
counterfactual situations. We can ask whether Nixon might have been a Democrat without
engaging in these subtleties.

16

Identity and Necessity

made of wood, and not of ice, might be an essential property of this lectern. Let
us just take the weaker statement that it is not made of ice. That will establish it as
strongly as we need it, perhaps as dramatically. Supposing this lectern is in fact
made of wood, could this very lectern have been made from the very beginning of
its existence from ice, say frozen from water in the Thames? One has a considerable feeling that it could not, though in fact one certainly could have made a
lectern of water from the Thames, frozen it into ice by some process, and put it
right there in place of this thing. If one had done so, one would have made, of
course, a different object. It would not have been this very lectern, and so one
would not have a case in which this very lectern here was made of ice, or was
made from water from the Thames. The question of whether it could afterward,
say in a minute from now, turn into ice is something else. So, it would seem, if an
example like this is correct—and this is what advocates of essentialism have
held—that this lectern could not have been made of ice, that is in any counterfactual situation of which we would say that this lectern existed at all, we would
have to say also that it was not made from water from the Thames frozen into ice.
Some have rejected, of course, any such notion of essential property as meaningless. Usually, it is because (and I think this is what Quine, for example, would say)
they have held that it depends on the notion of identity across possible worlds, and
that this is itself meaningless. Since I have rejected this view already, I will not deal
with it again. We can talk about this very object, and whether it could have had
certain properties which it does not in fact have. For example, it could have been
in another room from the room it in fact is in, even at this very time, but it could
not have been made from the very beginning from water frozen into ice.
If the essentialist view is correct, it can only be correct if we sharply distinguish
between the notions of a posteriori and a priori truth on the one hand, and
contingent and necessary truth on the other hand, for although the statement
that this table, if it exists at all, was not made of ice, is necessary, it certainly is not
something that we know a priori. What we know is that ﬁrst, lecterns usually are
not made of ice, they are usually made of wood. This looks like wood. It does not
feel cold and it probably would if it were made of ice. Therefore, I conclude,
probably this is not made of ice. Here my entire judgment is a posteriori. I could
ﬁnd out that an ingenious trick has been played upon me and that, in fact, this
lectern is made of ice; but what I am saying is, given that it is in fact not made of
ice, in fact is made of wood, one cannot imagine that under certain circumstances
it could have been made of ice. So we have to say that though we cannot know a
priori whether this table was made of ice or not, given that it is not made of ice, it
is necessarily not made of ice. In other words, if P is the statement that the lectern
is not made of ice, one knows by a priori philosophical analysis, some conditional
of the form “if P, then necessarily P.” If the table is not made of ice, it is
necessarily not made of ice. On the other hand, then, we know by empirical
investigation that P, the antecedent of the conditional, is true—that this table is
not made of ice. We can conclude by modus ponens:

Identity and Necessity

17

P  ☐P
P
☐P
The conclusion—‘☐P’—is that it is necessary that the table not be made of
ice, and this conclusion is known a posteriori, since one of the premises on which
it is based is a posteriori. So, the notion of essential properties can be maintained
only by distinguishing between the notions of a priori and necessary truth, and I
do maintain it.
Let us return to the question of identities. Concerning the statement ‘Hesperus is Phosphorus’ or the statement ‘Cicero is Tully’, one can ﬁnd all of these out
by empirical investigation, and we might turn out to be wrong in our empirical
beliefs. So, it is usually argued, such statements must therefore be contingent.
Some have embraced the other side of the coin and have held “Because of this
argument about necessity, identity statements between names have to be knowable a priori, so, only a very special category of names, possibly, really works as
names; the other things are bogus names, disguised descriptions, or something of
the sort. However, a certain very narrow class of statements of identity are known
a priori, and these are the ones which contain the genuine names.” If one accepts
the distinctions that I have made, one need not jump to either conclusion. One
can hold that certain statements of identity between names, though often known
a posteriori, and maybe not knowable a priori, are in fact necessary, if true. So,
we have some room to hold this. But, of course, to have some room to hold it
does not mean that we should hold it. So let us see what the evidence is. First,
recall the remark that I made that proper names seem to be rigid designators, as
when we use the name ‘Nixon’ to talk about a certain man, even in counterfactual situations. If we say, “If Nixon had not written the letter to Saxbe, maybe he
would have gotten Carswell through,” we are in this statement talking about
Nixon, Saxbe, and Carswell, the very same men as in the actual world, and what
would have happened to them under certain counterfactual circumstances. If
names are rigid designators, then there can be no question about identities being
necessary, because ‘a’ and ‘b’ will be rigid designators of a certain man or thing x.
Then even in every possible world, a and b will both refer to this same object x,
and to no other, and so there will be no situation in which a might not have been
b. That would have, to be a situation in which the object which we are also now
calling ‘x’ would not have been identical with itself. Then one could not possibly
have a situation in which Cicero would not have been Tully or Hesperus would
not have been Phosphorus.13

13
I thus agree with Quine, that “Hesperus is Phosphorus” is (or can be) an empirical discovery;
with Marcus, that it is necessary. Both Quine and Marcus, according to the present standpoint, err
in identifying the epistemological and the metaphysical issues.

18

Identity and Necessity

Aside from the identiﬁcation of necessity with a priority, what has made
people feel the other way? There are two things which have made people feel
the other way.14 Some people tend to regard identity statements as metalinguistic
statements, to identify the statement “Hesperus is Phosphorus” with the metalinguistic statement, “‘Hesperus’ and ‘Phosphorus’ are names of the same heavenly body.” And that, of course, might have been false. We might have used the
terms ‘Hesperus’ and ‘Phosphorus’ as names of two different heavenly bodies.
But, of course, this has nothing to do with the necessity of identity. In the same
sense “2 + 2 = 4” might have been false. The phrases “2 + 2” and “4” might have
been used to refer to two different numbers. One can imagine a language, for
example, in which “+”, “2”, and “=” were used in the standard way, but “4” was
used as the name of, say, the square root of minus 1, as we should call it, “i.”
Then “2 + 2 = 4” would be false, for 2 plus 2 is not equal to the square root of
minus 1. But this is not what we want. We do not want just to say that a certain
statement which we in fact use to express something true could have expressed
something false. We want to use the statement in our way and see if it could have
been false. Let us do this. What is the idea people have? They say, “Look,
Hesperus might not have been Phosphorus. Here a certain planet was seen in
the morning, and it was seen in the evening; and it just turned out later on as a
matter of empirical fact that they were one and the same planet. If things had
turned out otherwise, they would have been two different planets, or two
different heavenly bodies, so how can you say that such a statement is necessary?”
Now there are two things that such people can mean. First, they can mean that
we do not know a priori whether Hesperus is Phosphorus. This I have already
conceded. Second, they may mean that they can actually imagine circumstances
that they would call circumstances in which Hesperus would not have been
Phosphorus. Let us think what would be such a circumstance, using these terms
here as names of a planet. For example, it could have been the case that Venus did
indeed rise in the morning in exactly the position in which we saw it, but that on
the other hand, in the position which is in fact occupied by Venus in the evening,
Venus was not there, and Mars took its place. This is all counterfactual because in
fact Venus is there. Now one can also imagine that in this counterfactual other
14
The two confusions alleged, especially the second, are both related to the confusion of the
metaphysical question of the necessity of “Hesperus is Phosphorus” with the epistemological
question of its a prioricity. For if Hesperus is identiﬁed by its position in the sky in the evening,
and Phosphorus by its position in the morning, an investigator may well know, in advance of
empirical research, that Hesperus is Phosphorus if and only if one and the same body occupies
position x in the evening and position y in the morning. The a priori material equivalence of the two
statements, however, does not imply their strict (necessary) equivalence. (The same remarks apply to
the case of heat and molecular motion below.) Similar remarks apply to some extent to the
relationship between “Hesperus is Phosphorus” and “‘Hesperus’ and ‘Phosphorus’ name the same
thing.” A confusion that also operates is, of course, the confusion between what we say of a
counterfactual situation and how people in that situation would have described it; this confusion,
too, is probably related to the confusion between a prioricity and necessity.

Identity and Necessity

19

possible world, the earth would have been inhabited by people and that they
should have used the names ‘Phosphorus’ for Venus in the morning and
‘Hesperus’ for Mars in the evening. Now, this is all very good, but would it be
a situation in which Hesperus was not Phosphorus? Of course, it is a situation in
which people would have been able to say, truly, “Hesperus is not Phosphorus”;
but we are supposed to describe things in our language, not in theirs. So let us
describe it in our language. Well, how could it actually happen that Venus would
not be in that position in the evening? For example, let us say that there is some
comet that comes around every evening and yanks things over a little bit. (That
would be a very simple scientiﬁc way of imagining it: not really too simple—that
is very hard to imagine actually.) It just happens to come around every evening,
and things get yanked over a bit. Mars gets yanked over to the very position
where Venus is, then the comet yanks things back to their normal position in the
morning. Thinking of this planet which we now call ‘Phosphorus’, what should
we say? Well, we can say that the comet passes it and yanks Phosphorus over so
that it is not in the position normally occupied by Phosphorus in the evening. If
we do say this, and really use ‘Phosphorus’ as the name of a planet, then we have
to say that, under such circumstances, Phosphorus in the evening would not be in
the position where we, in fact, saw it; or alternatively, Hesperus in the evening
would not be in the position in which we, in fact, saw it. We might say that under
such circumstances, we would not have called Hesperus ‘Hesperus’ because
Hesperus would have been in a different position. But that still would not
make Phosphorus different from Hesperus; but what would then be the case
instead is that Hesperus would have been in a different position from the
position it in fact is and, perhaps, not in such a position that people would
have called it ‘Hesperus’. But that would not be a situation in which Phosphorus
would not have been Hersperus.
Let us take another example which may be clearer. Suppose someone uses
‘Tully’ to refer to the Roman orator who denounced Cataline and uses the name
‘Cicero’ to refer to the man whose works he had to study in third-year Latin in
high school. Of course, he may not know in advance that the very same man who
denounced Cataline wrote these works, and that is a contingent statement. But
the fact that this statement is contingent should not make us think that the
statement that Cicero is Tully, if it is true, and it is in fact true, is contingent.
Suppose, for example, that Cicero actually did denounce Cataline, but thought
that this political achievement was so great that he should not bother writing any
literary works. Would we say that these would be circumstances under which he
would not have been Cicero? It seems to me that the answer is no, that instead we
would say that, under such circumstances, Cicero would not have written any
literary works. It is not a necessary property of Cicero—the way the shadow
follows the man—that he should have written certain works; we can easily
imagine a situation in which Shakespeare would not have written the works of
Shakespeare, or one in which Cicero would not have written the works of Cicero.

20

Identity and Necessity

What may be the case is that we ﬁx the reference of the term ‘Cicero’ by use of
some descriptive phrase, such as ‘the author of these works’. But once we have
this reference ﬁxed, we then use the name ‘Cicero’ rigidly to designate the man
who in fact we have identiﬁed by his authorship of these works. We do not use it
to designate whoever would have written these works in place of Cicero, if
someone else wrote them. It might have been the case that the man who wrote
these works was not the man who denounced Cataline. Cassius might have
written these works. But we would not then say that Cicero would have been
Cassius, unless we were speaking in a very loose and metaphorical way. We
would say that Cicero, whom we may have identiﬁed and come to know by his
works, would not have written them, and that someone else, say Cassius, would
have written them in his place.
Such examples are not grounds for thinking that identity statements are
contingent. To take them as such grounds is to misconstrue the relation between
a name and a description used to ﬁx its reference, to take them to be synonyms. Even
if we ﬁx the reference of such a name as ‘Cicero’ as the man who wrote such and
such works, in speaking of counterfactual situations, when we speak of Cicero,
we do not then speak of whoever in such counterfactual situations would have
written such and such works, but rather of Cicero, whom we have identiﬁed by
the contingent property that he is the man who in fact, that is, in the actual
world, wrote certain works.15
I hope this is reasonably clear in a brief compass. Now, actually I have been
presupposing something I do not really believe to be, in general, true. Let us
suppose that we do ﬁx the reference of a name by a description. Even if we do so,
we do not then make the name synonymous with the description, but instead we
use the name rigidly to refer to the object so named, even in talking about
counterfactual situations where the thing named would not satisfy the description in question. Now, this is what I think in fact is true for those cases of naming
where the reference is ﬁxed by description. But, in fact, I also think, contrary to
most recent theorists, that the reference of names is rarely or almost never ﬁxed
by means of description. And by this I do not just mean what Searle says: “It’s not
15
If someone protests, regarding the lectern, that it could after all have turned out to have been
made of ice, and therefore could have been made of ice, I would reply that what he really means is
that a lectern could have looked just like this one, and have been placed in the same position as this
one, and yet have been made of ice. In short, I could have been in the same epistemological situation
in relation to a lectern made of ice as I actually am in relation to this lectern. In the main text, I have
argued that the same reply should be given to protests that Hesperus could have turned out to be
other than Phosphorus, or Cicero other than Tully. Here, then, the notion of ‘counterpart’ comes
into its own. For it is not this table, but an epistemic ‘counterpart’, which was hewn from ice; not
Hesperus-Phosphorus-Venus, but two distinct counterparts thereof, in two of the roles Venus
actually plays (that of Evening Star and Morning Star), which are different. Precisely because of
this fact, it is not this table which could have been made of ice. Statements about the modal
properties of this table never refer to counterparts. However, if someone confuses the
epistemological and the metaphysical problems, he will be well on the way to the counterpart
theory Lewis and others have advocated.

Identity and Necessity

21

a single description, but rather a cluster, a family of properties which ﬁxes the
reference.” I mean that properties in this sense are not used at all. But I do not
have the time to go into this here. So, let us suppose that at least one half of
prevailing views about naming is true, that the reference is ﬁxed by descriptions.
Even were that true, the name would not be synonymous with the description,
but would be used to name an object which we pick out by the contingent fact
that it satisﬁes a certain description. And so, even though we can imagine a case
where the man who wrote these works would not have been the man who
denounced Cataline, we should not say that that would be a case in which Cicero
would not have been Tully. We should say that it is a case in which Cicero did
not write these works, but rather that Cassius did. And the identity of Cicero and
Tully still holds.
Let me turn to the case of heat and the motion of molecules. Here surely is a
case that is contingent identity! Recent philosophy has emphasized this again and
again. So, if it is a case of contingent identity, then let us imagine under what
circumstances it would be false. Now, concerning this statement I hold that the
circumstances philosophers apparently have in mind as circumstances under
which it would have been false are not in fact such circumstances. First, of
course, it is argued that “Heat is the motion of molecules” is an a posteriori
judgment; scientiﬁc investigation might have turned out otherwise. As I said
before, this shows nothing against the view that it is necessary—at least if I am
right. But here, surely, people had very speciﬁc circumstances in mind under
which, so they thought, the judgment that heat is the motion of molecules would
have been false. What were these circumstances? One can distill them out of the
fact that we found out empirically that heat is the motion of molecules. How was
this? What did we ﬁnd out ﬁrst when we found out that heat is the motion of
molecules? There is a certain external phenomenon which we can sense by the
sense of touch, and it produces a sensation which we call “the sensation of heat.”
We then discover that the external phenomenon which produces this sensation,
which we sense, by means of our sense of touch, is in fact that of molecular
agitation in the thing that we touch, a very high degree of molecular agitation.
So, it might be thought, to imagine a situation in which heat would not have
been the motion of molecules, we need only imagine a situation in which we
would have had the very same sensation and it would have been produced by
something other than the motion of molecules. Similarly, if we wanted to
imagine a situation in which light was not a stream of photons, we could imagine
a situation in which we were sensitive to something else in exactly the same way,
producing what we call visual experiences, though not through a stream of
photons. To make the case stronger, or to look at another side of the coin, we
could also consider a situation in which we are concerned with the motion of
molecules but in which such motion does not give us the sensation of heat. And it
might also have happened that we, or, at least, the creatures inhabiting this
planet, might have been so constituted that, let us say, an increase in the motion

22

Identity and Necessity

of molecules did not give us this sensation but that, on the contrary, a slowing
down of the molecules did give us the very same sensation. This would be a
situation, so it might be thought, in which heat would not be the motion of
molecules, or, more precisely, in which temperature would not be mean molecular kinetic energy.
But I think it would not be so. Let us think about the situation again. First, let
us think about it in the actual world. Imagine right now the world invaded by a
number of Martians, who do indeed get the very sensation that we call “the
sensation of heat” when they feel some ice which has slow molecular motion, and
who do not get a sensation of heat—in fact, maybe just the reverse—when they
put their hand near a ﬁre which causes a lot of molecular agitation. Would we
say, “Ah, this casts some doubt on heat being the motion of molecules, because
there are these other people who don’t get the same sensation”? Obviously not,
and no one would think so. We would say instead that the Martians somehow
feel the very sensation we get when we feel heat when they feel cold and that they
do not get a sensation of heat when they feel heat. But now let us think of a
counterfactual situation.16 Suppose the earth had from the very beginning been
inhabited by such creatures. First, imagine it inhabited by no creatures at all: then
there is no one to feel any sensations of heat. But we would not say that under
such circumstances it would necessarily be the case that heat did not exist; we
would say that heat might have existed, for example, if there were ﬁres that heated
up the air.
Let us suppose the laws of physics were not very different: Fires do heat up the
air. Then there would have been heat even though there were no creatures around
to feel it. Now let us suppose evolution takes place, and life is created, and there
are some creatures around. But they are not like us, they are more like the
Martians. Now would we say that heat has suddenly turned to cold, because of
the way the creatures of this planet sense it? No, I think we should describe this
situation as a situation in which, though the creatures on this planet got our
sensation of heat, they did not get it when they were exposed to heat. They got it
when they were exposed to cold. And that is something we can surely well
imagine. We can imagine it just as we can imagine our planet being invaded
by creatures of this sort. Think of it in two steps. First there is a stage where there
are no creatures at all, and one can certainly imagine the planet still having both
heat and cold, though no one is around to sense it. Then the planet comes
through an evolutionary process to be peopled with beings of different neural
16
Isn’t the situation I just described also counterfactual? At least it may well be, if such Martians
never in fact invade. Strictly speaking, the distinction I wish to draw compares how we would speak
in a (possibly counterfactual) situation, if it obtained, and how we do speak of a counterfactual
situation, knowing that it does not obtain—i.e., the distinction between the language we would
have used in a situation and the language we do use to describe it. (Consider the description:
“Suppose we all spoke German.” This description is in English.) The former case can be made vivid
by imagining the counterfactual situation to be actual.

Identity and Necessity

23

structure from ourselves. Then these creatures could be such that they were
insensitive to heat; they did not feel it in the way we do; but on the other hand,
they felt cold in much the same way that we feel heat. But still, heat would be
heat, and cold would be cold. And particularly, then, this goes in no way against
saying that in this counterfactual situation heat would still be the molecular
motion, be that which is produced by ﬁres, and so on, just as it would have been if
there had been no creatures on the planet at all. Similarly, we could imagine that the
planet was inhabited by creatures who got visual sensations when there were sound
waves in the air. We should not therefore say, “Under such circumstances, sound
would have been light.” Instead we should say, “The planet was inhabited by
creatures who were in some sense visually sensitive to sound, and maybe even
visually sensitive to light.” If this is correct, it can still be and will still be a necessary
truth that heat is the motion of molecules and that light is a stream of photons.
To state the view succinctly: we use both the terms ‘heat’ and ‘the motion of
molecules’ as rigid designators for a certain external phenomenon. Since heat is
in fact the motion of molecules, and the designators are rigid, by the argument I
have given here, it is going to be necessary that heat is the motion of molecules.
What gives us the illusion of contingency is the fact we have identiﬁed the heat by
the contingent fact that there happen to be creatures on this planet—(namely,
ourselves) who are sensitive to it in a certain way, that is, who are sensitive to the
motion of molecules or to heat—these are one and the same thing. And this is
contingent. So we use the description, ‘that which causes such and such sensations, or that which we sense in such and such a way’, to identify heat. But in
using this fact we use a contingent property of heat, just as we use the contingent
property of Cicero as having written such and such works to identify him. We
then use the terms ‘heat’ in the one case and ‘Cicero’ in the other rigidly to
designate the objects for which they stand. And of course the term ‘the motion of
molecules’ is rigid; it always stands for the motion of molecules, never for any
other phenomenon. So, as Bishop Butler said, “everything is what it is and not
another thing.” Therefore, “Heat is the motion of molecules” will be necessary,
not contingent, and one only has the illusion of contingency in the way one could
have the illusion of contingency in thinking that this table might have been made
of ice. We might think one could imagine it, but if we try, we can see on
reﬂection that what we are really imagining is just there being another lectern in
this very position here which was in fact made of ice. The fact that we may
identify this lectern by being the object we see and touch in such and such a
position is something else.
Now how does this relate to the problem of mind and body? It is usually held
that this is a contingent identity statement just like “Heat is the motion of
molecules.” That cannot be. It cannot be a contingent identity statement just like
“Heat is the motion of molecules” because, if I am right, “Heat is the motion of
molecules” is not a contingent identity statement. Let us look at this statement.
For example, “My being in pain at such and such a time is my being in such and

24

Identity and Necessity

such a brain state at such and such a time,” or, “Pain in general is such and such a
neural (brain) state.”
This is held to be contingent on the following grounds. First, we can imagine
the brain state existing though there is no pain at all. It is only a scientiﬁc fact that
whenever we are in a certain brain state we have a pain. Second, one might
imagine a creature being in pain, but not being in any speciﬁed brain state at all,
maybe not having a brain at all. People even think, at least prima facie, though
they may be wrong, that they can imagine totally disembodied creatures, at any
rate certainly not creatures with bodies anything like our own. So it seems that we
can imagine deﬁnite circumstances under which this relationship would have
been false. Now, if these circumstances are circumstances, notice that we cannot
deal with them simply by saying that this is just an illusion, something we can
apparently imagine, but in fact cannot in the way we thought erroneously that we
could imagine a situation in which heat was not the motion of molecules.
Because although we can say that we pick out heat contingently by the contingent
property that it affects us in such and such a way, we cannot similarly say that we
pick out pain contingently by the fact that it affects us in such and such a way.
On such a picture there would be the brain state, and we pick it out by the
contingent fact that it affects us as pain. Now that might be true of the brain
state, but it cannot be true of the pain. The experience itself has to be this
experience, and I cannot say that it is a contingent property of the pain I now have
that it is a pain.17 In fact, it would seem that both the terms, ‘my pain’ and ‘my
being in such and such a brain state’ are, ﬁrst of all, both rigid designators. That
is, whenever anything is such and such a pain, it is essentially that very object,
namely, such and such a pain, and wherever anything is such and such a brain
17
The most popular identity theories advocated today explicitly fail to satisfy this simple
requirement. For these theories usually hold that a mental state is a brain state, and that what
makes the brain state into a mental state is its ‘causal role’, the fact that it tends to produce certain
behavior (as intentions produce actions, or pain, pain behavior) and to be produced by certain
stimuli (e.g., pain, by pinpricks). If the relations between the brain state and its causes and effects are
regarded as contingent, then being such-and-such-a-mental-state is a contingent property of the brain
state. Let X be a pain. The causal-role identity theorist holds (1) that X is a brain state, (2) that the
fact that X is a pain is to be analyzed (roughly) as the fact that X is produced by certain stimuli and
produces certain behavior. The fact mentioned in (2) is, of course, regarded as contingent; the brain
state X might well exist and not tend to produce the appropriate behavior in the absence of other
conditions. Thus (1) and (2) assert that a certain pain X might have existed, yet not have been a pain.
This seems to me self-evidently absurd. Imagine any pain: is it possible that it itself could have
existed, yet not have been a pain?
If X = Y, then X and Y share all properties, including modal properties. If X is a pain and Y the
corresponding brain state, then being a pain is an essential property of X, and being a brain state is an
essential property of Y. If the correspondence relation is, in fact, identity, then it must be necessary of
Y that it corresponds to a pain, and necessary of X that it correspond to a brain state, indeed to this
particular brain state, Y. Both assertions seem false; it seems clearly possible that X should have
existed without the corresponding brain state; or that the brain state should have existed without
being felt as pain. Identity theorists cannot, contrary to their almost universal present practice,
accept these intuitions; they must deny them, and explain them away. This is none too easy a thing
to do.

Identity and Necessity

25

state, it is essentially that very object, namely, such and such a brain state. So both
of these are rigid designators. One cannot say this pain might have been
something else, some other state. These are both rigid designators.
Second, the way we would think of picking them out—namely, the pain by its
being an experience of a certain sort, and the brain state by its being the state of a
certain material object, being of such and such molecular conﬁguration—both of
these pick out their objects essentially and not accidentally, that is, they pick
them out by essential properties. Whenever the molecules are in this conﬁguration, we do have such and such a brain state. Whenever you feel this, you do have
a pain. So it seems that the identity theorist is in some trouble, for, since we have
two rigid designators, the identity statement in question is necessary. Because
they pick out their objects essentially, we cannot say the case where you seem to
imagine the identity statement false is really an illusion like the illusion one gets
in the case of heat and molecular motion, because that illusion depended on the
fact that we pick out heat by a certain contingent property. So there is very little
room to maneuver; perhaps none.18 The identity theorist, who holds that pain is
the brain state, also has to hold that it necessarily is the brain state. He therefore
cannot concede, but has to deny, that there would have been situations under
which one would have had pain but not the corresponding brain state. Now
usually in arguments on the identity theory, this is very far from being denied. In
fact, it is conceded from the outset by the materialist as well as by his opponent.
He says, “Of course, it could have been the case that we had pains without the
brain states. It is a contingent identity.” But that cannot be. He has to hold that
we are under some illusion in thinking that we can imagine that there could have
been pains without brain states. And the only model I can think of for what the
illusion might be, or at least the model given by the analogy the materialists
18
A brief restatement of the argument may be helpful here. If “pain” and “C-ﬁber stimulation”
are rigid designators of phenomena, one who identiﬁes them must regard the identity as necessary.
How can this necessity be reconciled with the apparent fact that C-ﬁber stimulation might have
turned out not to be correlated with pain at all? We might try to reply by analogy to the case of heat
and molecular motion; the latter identity, too, is necessary, yet someone may believe that, before
scientiﬁc investigation showed otherwise, molecular motion might have turned out not to be heat.
The reply is, of course, that what really is possible is that people (or some rational or sentient beings)
could have been in the same epistemic situation as we actually are, and identify a phenomenon in the
same way we identify heat, namely, by feeling it by the sensation we call “the sensation of heat,”
without the phenomenon being molecular motion. Further, the beings might not have been
sensitive to molecular motion (i.e., to heat) by any neural mechanism whatsoever. It is impossible
to explain the apparent possibility of C-ﬁber stimulations not having been pain in the same way.
Here, too, we would have to suppose that we could have been in the same epistemological situation,
and identify something in the same way we identify pain, without its corresponding to C-ﬁber
stimulation. But the way we identify pain is by feeling it, and if a C-ﬁber stimulation could have
occurred without our feeling any pain, then the C-ﬁber stimulation would have occurred without
there being any pain, contrary to the necessity of the identity. The trouble is that although ‘heat’ is a
rigid designator, heat is picked out by the contingent property of its being felt in a certain way; pain,
on the other hand, is picked out by an essential (indeed necessary and sufﬁcient) property. For a
sensation to be felt as pain is for it to be pain.

26

Identity and Necessity

themselves suggest, namely, heat and molecular motion, simply does not work in
this case. So the materialist is up against a very stiff challenge. He has to show that
these things we think we can see to be possible are in fact not possible. He has to
show that these things which we can imagine are not in fact things we can
imagine. And that requires some very different philosophical argument from the
sort which has been given in the case of heat and molecular motion. And it would
have to be a deeper and subtler argument than I can fathom and subtler than has
ever appeared in any materialist literature that I have read. So the conclusion of
this investigation would be that the analytical tools we are using go against the
identity thesis and so go against the general thesis that mental states are just
physical states.19
The next topic would be my own solution to the mind-body problem, but that
I do not have.

19
All arguments against the identity theory which rely on the necessity of identity, or on the
notion of essential property, are, of course, inspired by Descartes’ argument for his dualism. The
earlier arguments which superﬁcially were rebutted by the analogies of heat and molecular motion,
and the bifocals inventor who was also Postmaster General, had such an inspiration: and so does my
argument here. R. Albritton and M. Slote have informed me that they independently have
attempted to give essentialist arguments against the identity theory, and probably others have
done so as well.
The simplest Cartesian argument can perhaps be restated as follows: Let ‘A ’ be a name (rigid
designator) of Descartes’ body. Then Descartes argues that since he could exist even if A did not,
⃟(Descartes 6¼ A), hence Descartes 6¼ A. Those who have accused him of a modal fallacy have
forgotten that ‘A ’ is rigid. His argument is valid, and his conclusion is correct, provided its (perhaps
dubitable) premise is accepted. On the other hand, provided that Descartes is regarded as having
ceased to exist upon his death, “Descartes 6¼ A” can be established without the use of a modal
argument; for if so, no doubt A survived Descartes when A was a corpse. Thus A had a property
(existing at a certain time) which Descartes did not. The same argument can establish that a statue is
not the hunk of stone, or the congery of molecules, of which it is composed. Mere non-identity,
then, may be a weak conclusion. (See D. Wiggins, Philosophical Review, LXXVII [1968], 90ff.) The
Cartesian modal argument, however, surely can be deployed to maintain relevant stronger
conclusions as well.

2
On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge*

I suppose that we have all heard the puzzle about the surprise execution or the
surprise examination. I will state the paradox in terms of the examination; the
execution, of course, puts the situation in more dramatic colors.1
The paradox can be stated in the following way. A teacher announces that
he will give an examination within the month. Examinations are always given
at noon. He also announces that the exam will be a surprise exam: no student
will know on the day before the exam is given that it will be given the next day.
A student can then reason as follows:
The teacher, if he intends to fulﬁll his announced promise, cannot give the exam on the
very last day. If he did, after noon had passed on the previous day, we (the students)
would know that only the last day was left and that it had to be the day of the
examination. This would be a plain contradiction of the announcement that it was to
be a surprise exam, so that day can be crossed off the calendar. But then it cannot be given
on the second-to-last day either because, after noon of the day before has passed and the
exam still has not been given, we will realize that only two days are left, and that since the
* The present paper is based on a transcript of a recorded lecture given at Cambridge University
to the Moral Sciences Club in 1972. The transcript appears to be known at least to B. Phil. students
at Oxford, where it has been listed as part of their syllabus. The conversational tone of the paper, as
in some other publications of mine, may sometimes reﬂect its origins. I have made changes and
additions and included an appendix, but my solution to the surprise-exam paradox remains as it was
presented in 1972 (and probably even earlier elsewhere).
1
We now have in Sorensen (1988a: ch. 7) a history of the origins of this puzzle. Sorensen goes
through much of the philosophical literature on the subject, including early occurrences. But also,
basing himself on others whom he cites in the beginning of the chapter, Sorensen traces it to an
actual civil defense exercise in Sweden during World War II (sometime in 1943–44) that was to be
held within the week on a day not to be known in advance. A Swedish mathematician, Lennart
Ekbom, detected a problem. His role in originating the paradox has been lost to the subsequent
philosophical literature, but it is mentioned in some sources Sorensen cites.
Although when I gave the talk I appear to have been aware only of the hanging and examination
versions, in Quine (1953) a surprise air-raid drill version is explicitly mentioned in the ﬁrst
paragraph, and this may have its origin in the actual event. More important, the date 1943–44
would appear to establish the surprise paradox as the earliest “backward induction” paradox, earlier
than the (ﬁnitely) iterated prisoner’s dilemma and Selten’s chain-store paradox, both well-known to
game theorists and probably to economists in general. I don’t make any claims here as to how to
analyze these.

28

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

last day is ruled out, the exam must be given on the second-to-last day. But then we would
know in advance that that is the day of the exam, which is again a contradiction.

The student can continue the same reasoning backward: as soon as she crosses
out one day from the calendar, the last remaining day is as if it were the last day,
and so it can be ruled out by the same type of reasoning. There will, ﬁnally, be no
days left. The student is then in a position to conclude that either the exam will
not be given or it will not be a surprise.
As I said before, this problem is sometimes presented in terms of the hangman or
judge who announces the execution of a prisoner under the same conditions.
I wanted to present the puzzle as concerned with teachers and examinations because
it should be realized that this is an everyday occurrence. Teachers do announce
surprise examinations and no such contradictions seem to arise: it does not seem
impossible for a teacher to fulﬁll his or her promise to give a surprise examination.2
It is interesting that this kind of problem is discussed as if it were a philosophical problem at all. How philosophical it actually is depends on whatever philosophical morals we may draw from it. Graham Greene classiﬁes his works into
novels, entertainments, and some other works: a novel is supposed to be a more
serious work, but the entertainments are often the best. A problem like this might
be classiﬁed as an entertainment in this sense. But it can have aspects of a “novel” if
conclusions concerning our basic concepts of knowledge may be drawn from it.
Here, more so than with typical philosophical problems, we are in the kind of
“intellectual cramp” that Wittgenstein describes—one in which all the facts seem
to be before us, there does not seem to be any new information to be gained, and
yet we don’t quite know what is going wrong with our picture of the problem.
I once did the following “scientiﬁc experiment,” which can be a model for the
problem. The experimenter announces to the subject that he has a deck of cards
(which is ﬁnite)—it might be the whole deck or just part of it, but it includes the
ace of spades. The cards are going to be turned over in order one by one, and
the experimenter further tells the subject that he (the subject) will not know in
advance when the ace of spades will turn up.3
Now suppose the deck consists of only one card. The experimenter says: “This
card is the ace of spades, but you will not know which card it is until it has been
turned over.” The subject will think that this is obvious nonsense. Many people
who have discussed the surprise-exam paradox have assumed that the signiﬁcant
2

We all know that in contemporary death penalty jurisprudence people are often not sure when
they will be executed—last-minute appeals and the like make the execution date uncertain. But
sadistic judges who announce that they have chosen a “surprise” date to execute a prisoner, are,
I hope, very rare.
3
I really think this should be done in a serious psychological laboratory; I did it as a student in
college with a fellow student. One can try variations on the number of cards, and also vary whether
subjects have heard of the “surprise exam” problem before the card experiment, or whether they
have not been told about it before (but may or may not start going through the reasoning themselves
during the experiment).

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

29

transition comes between the cases of one and two days (or rather, between ruling
out the last day and the second-to-last day, as long as there are two or more).
Maybe in some sense this is right. But suppose now that there are two cards in the
deck, the ace of spades and another one, and the experimenter again announces:
“You will not know in advance when the ace of spades will be turned over.”
When I tried the experiment, the subject,4 who had heard of the paradox, reacted
along the following lines: “There is still something very strange about this
announcement. If you have put the ace on the bottom, I will not be surprised
after you have turned up the ﬁrst card. So, if you really mean to do what you say,
you can’t have put the ace on the bottom. But now I have proved that it must be
the top card, and so again will not be surprised. I do know in advance.”
Consider the case where all ﬁfty-two cards, or at least a large number, are in the
deck. Imagine that the experimenter, without telling the subject where it is,
assures the subject that he has put the ace somewhere in the deck, and that the
subject will not know in advance when the ace will come up if the cards are
turned up one by one. Can the experimenter guarantee this? It seems clear that he
can, say, by putting the ace somewhere in the middle.5
The subject can still go through the same kind of reasoning as in the case of the
two cards. It seems that the reasoning may be generalized. However, it sounds
very unconvincing in this case. One therefore gets the impression that the
reasoning gets weaker and weaker the more cards there are. This in itself is
strange because it is the same piece of reasoning applied again and again.
Of course we are familiar with this kind of phenomenon from the paradox of
the heap: if someone has only £1 to his or her name, she is poor; and if someone
with only £N to his or her name is poor, so is someone with just £(N+1).
Therefore, by mathematical induction, no matter how many pounds she has, she
4
The subject was Richard Speier. If my memory is right, we were both undergraduates (so about
1960). I now (2009) ﬁnd that Ayer (1973) mentions a card model, but it differs somewhat from the
original problem, as in the case of the next footnote (though it is not quite the same as that one
either).
5
In the original version of this lecture I imagined that the experimenter put the ace somewhere
in the middle right in front of the subject. But this is not the appropriate model for the examination
version. Though no doubt the subject will not know in advance when the ace will turn up, neither
will the experimenter. In the original examination problem the teacher has decided on a particular
day to give the surprise exam, which makes the situation very different. If the experimenter acts as
I described in the earlier version, the last card is excluded all right, but the reasoning of the surpriseexam paradox is superﬂuous, since everyone sees that the ace has been inserted somewhere in the
middle. Similarly for the second-to-the-last card, and so on. (Actually, in the same original version,
I eventually mentioned this point of disanalogy. But then I shouldn’t have introduced this
procedure as if it were an analogue in the ﬁrst place). Exactly where the exclusion stops is
somewhat indeterminate, and in contrast with what I say about the problem below in the text,
something like vagueness may be involved. But here, whether or not it applies elsewhere (and I ﬁnd
the view rather dubious in general), it would be vagueness only in the sense of something like the
now well-known characterization of Timothy Williamson (1994), since, after all, the card is in some
deﬁnite place. Its exact position is simply unknown to both people, and the vagueness is merely
epistemic (though in this case they could eventually ﬁnd out the card’s location).

30

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

is poor. It is a familiar philosophical problem that there must be something
wrong with this, but it is hard to say exactly what. The heap/poverty problem
involves reasoning with a vague predicate, but it is not clear that the issue in the
present problem involves any question of vagueness.
What are the premises of the reasoning in this problem? The student is not to
know on the day before the exam that it will be given. Let there be N days in
which the exam may be given and let Ei mean that the exam will be given on day i.
The teacher announces that the exam will be given on one of the ﬁrst N days:
ð1Þ Ei for some i; 1  i  N ðequivalently; E1  ::: EN Þ
The exam is going to be given on exactly one day; that is, it is not the case that it
is going to be given on two distinct days:
ð2Þ  ðEi Ej Þ for anyi 6¼ j; 1  i; j  N
Then there is the announcement that the examination is to be a surprise. Let
Ki (p), for any statement “p,” mean that the student knows on day i that p is true.
So we can say that it is not the case that the student knows on day i–1 that the
exam will be given on day i:
ð3Þ  K i1 ðEi Þ for each i; 1  i  N
If i is 1, then i–1 is 0, which means that she does not know in advance of the whole
series (that is, before the ﬁrst day) that the exam will be given on the ﬁrst day.
We now have an additional premise. If the exam has not been given on one of
the ﬁrst i–1 days, then the student knows this on day i–1, as soon as noon has
passed:
ð4Þ

ð  E1   E2  :::   Ei1 Þ  Ki1 ð  E1   E2  :::   Ei1 Þ
for each i; 1  i  N

Given premise (2), we can conclude that if the exam is going to be held on the
ith day, it cannot have been given on any previous day. Hence, it follows from (4)
and (2) that if the exam is to be given on the ith day, the student will know on the
(i–1)th day that the exam has not been given on any of the ﬁrst i–1 days:
ð5Þ Ei  Ki1 ð  E1   E2  :::   Ei1 Þ for each i; 1  i  N
So, these are the premises that are alleged to lead to a paradox. There may be
some additional premises about knowledge itself that are required to carry out
the reasoning. Obvious premises include: if a student knows any statement on
day i, then it is true:
ð6Þ K i ðpÞ  p for each i; 1  i  N

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

31

Also, we may require the “deductive closure of knowledge”: if a student knows that
p on day i, and knows that if p then q on day i, then she knows that q on day i:
ð7Þ ðKi ðpÞKi ðp  qÞÞ  K i ðqÞ for each i; 1  i  N
This premise is, in general, false—people may know all the premises of a
deductive argument without knowing the conclusion. Mathematics would be a
trivial subject if everyone’s knowledge were deductively closed. It would be the
easy way out, as the president of the United States would say,6 to solve this
problem by denying such a premise; but we can make the simplifying assumption
that these particular students are clever enough to draw all the consequences of
the things they know. This is not what is in question.7
We must also assume that, on any day, a student knows all principles of logic,
including all propositional tautologies. This, again, is not true of students in
practice, as anyone who has given a logic course knows. However, we can assume
that it is true of these students, so they may do any kind of deductive reasoning.
Let us symbolize this schema as follows:
ð8Þ Taut  Ki ðTautÞ for each i; 1  i  N
Can we now deduce a contradiction—that the exam cannot be given by
surprise at all, which contradicts premise (1)—from all these premises? We
start the reasoning by trying to show that the exam cannot be given on the last
day. This reasoning must try to state that if the exam were to be given on the Nth
day, the student will know on the (N–1)th day that the exam will be given on the
Nth day (the last day), thus showing by reductio ad absurdum that the exam
cannot be held on the Nth day. By substituting N for i in premise (5), we ﬁnd
that the student knows that the exam has not been given on one of the ﬁrst N–1
days on the (N–1)th day. She knows from premise (1) that it must be given on one
of the ﬁrst N days, and so concludes on day N–1 that it must be given on the Nth
day (i.e., KN–1 (EN)). But this is an immediate contradiction of the relevant
instance of premise (3) (viz. KN–1 (EN)). She then concludes that her initial
hypothesis, (EN), has been disproved by reductio ad absurdum, and thus that the
exam cannot be given on the last day.
6

The president was Richard Nixon when this talk was given.
By the time I spoke, at least Fred Dretske (see 1970, 1971) had already denied that knowledge
is always deductively closed, even for people able to make the deduction. Since then he has been
followed by many others. This was supposed to protect against some problems of philosophical
skepticism. But presumably these writers (who may or may not give the required restrictions) must
think that only in very exceptional cases having to do with skepticism should the relevant principles
of deductive closure fail. Otherwise, one person could accuse another of making the well-known
fallacy of giving a valid deductive argument (from accepted premises) for his views!
I was probably unaware of Dretske’s papers when I gave this lecture. However, I was fortunate
enough to have Dretske in the audience when I gave a version of this lecture, and he was not only
disinclined to object, but found the paper very convincing. See Chapter 7 for some discussion on
this issue.
7

32

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

But this has a fallacy in it: all premise (1) says is that the exam will be given
on one of the ﬁrst N days, not that the student knows that fact. To reach
the conclusion, we must also have the premise that the student knows on day
N–1 that the exam will be given on one of the ﬁrst N days (i.e., KN–1 (Ei) for
some i, 1  i  N ). But we cannot obtain this from our premises. This is
Quine’s solution to the paradox in his article “On a So-Called Paradox” (Quine
1953). (He chooses the version in which a prisoner is to be hanged.) The prisoner
is supposed to know that the judge’s decree that he is to be hanged will be
fulﬁlled. But how does he know this? Maybe the judge is a liar. As Quine puts it:
It is notable that K [the prisoner] acquiesces in the conclusion (wrong, according to the
fable of the Thursday hanging) that the decree will not be fulﬁlled. If this is a conclusion
that he is prepared to accept (though wrongly) in the end as a certainty, it is an alternative
which he should have been prepared to take into consideration from the beginning as a
possibility.
K ’s fallacy may be brought into sharper relief by taking n as 1 and restoring the
hanging motif. The judge tells K on Sunday afternoon that he, K, will be hanged the
following noon and will remain ignorant of the fact till the intervening morning. It would
be like K to protest at this point that the judge was contradicting himself. And it would be
like the hangman to intrude upon K’s complacency at 11.55 next morning, thus showing
that the judge had said nothing more self-contradictory than the simple truth. If K had
reasoned correctly, Sunday afternoon, he would have reasoned as follows. “We must
distinguish four cases: ﬁrst, that I shall be hanged tomorrow noon and I know it now (but
I do not); second, that I shall be unhanged tomorrow noon and know it now (but I do
not); third, that I shall be unhanged tomorrow noon and do not know it now; and fourth,
that I shall be hanged tomorrow noon and do not know it now. The latter two alternatives
are the open possibilities, and the last of all would fulﬁl the decree. Rather than charging
the judge with self-contradiction, therefore, let me suspend judgment and hope for the
best.” (Quine 1953:20, 21)8

Quine’s solution to this problem has never seemed to me to be quite satisfactory:
consider again the card experiment. It does seem strange, even though not
literally contradictory, to take a card (face down) and say, “This is the ace of
8
Two things to add, summarizing Quine’s discussion. First, Quine originally discusses the case
of many days and argues that the idea that the decree cannot be fulﬁlled if the hanging takes place on
the last day is wrong; he also discusses it in a more abstract way—hence the phrase “restoring the
hanging motif.” He then goes on to draw the more extreme conclusion quoted in the text, that is,
that even in the case of only one day there is no problem in the judge’s announcement.
Second, one might elaborate on Quine’s remark that “if this is a conclusion that he is prepared to
accept (though wrongly) in the end as a certainty, it is an alternative which he should have been
prepared to take into consideration from the beginning as a possibility” (1953:65). He says: “The
tendency to be deceived by the puzzle is perhaps traceable to a wrong association of K ’s argument
with reductio ad absurdum. It is perhaps supposed that K is quite properly assuming fulﬁllment of
the decree, for the space of his argument, in order to prove that the decree will not be fulﬁlled” (66).
Quine goes on to say that the argument of the puzzle requires not only the supposition that the
decree will be fulﬁlled, but that the prisoner knows that it will be. This destroys any idea that this is a
valid reductio ad absurdum argument, where only the weaker assumption would be allowed.

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

33

spades, but you do not know that this is the ace of spades.”9 In the second half of
my utterance, am I inviting you to suppose that I cannot be trusted? Wasn’t
I communicating knowledge to you in the ﬁrst half? Indeed, in this case
(analogous to the one with only one day in the examination or hanging period),
the hearer will not know what to believe, given the strangeness of the performance, and therefore would not know, though the strangeness does not persist if
there are many cards.
Quine says that the fallacy derives from the fact that the prisoner does not
know that the judge is telling the truth, or that the student does not know that
there will be an exam given at all. But often, I think, you do know something
simply because a good teacher has told you so. If a teacher were to announce a
surprise exam to be given within a month, a student who did badly could not
excuse herself by saying that she did not know that there was going to be an exam.
If there is only one day, we have the anomalous situation I have just mentioned.
But if there are many days, then it is natural to give the students knowledge on
the basis of what the teacher tells them.
Clearly, we are justiﬁed in changing premise (1) to allow that a student knows
from the beginning that an exam will be given on one of the ﬁrst N days.
ð10 Þ K 0 ðEi Þ for some i; 1  i  N ðin other words K 0 ðEi  ::: EN ÞÞ
Similarly, we may allow that she knows at the beginning that the exam will not be
given on two days and that it will be a surprise:
ð20 Þ K 0 ð  ðEi Ej ÞÞ for any i 6¼ j; 1  i; j  N
ð30 Þ K 0 ð  K i1 ðEi ÞÞ for each i; 1  i  N
Can we now derive the paradox? We need two further premises. First, that if a
student knows a statement on day i, she knows it on any later day:
ð9Þ Ki ðpÞ  Kj ðpÞfor anyi; j such that 0  i  j  N
On its face this simply means that we are assuming that the student does not
forget anything that she knows. Second, we need (though its use could perhaps
be avoided) what has been called the double-K principle: that if a student knows
on day i that p, then the student knows on day i that she knows on day i that p:
ð10Þ Ki ðpÞ  Ki ðKi ðpÞÞ for any i; 0  i  N

9

See Moore’s paradox (“p, but it is not the case that I believe that p”). As is well known,
statements of this form are not contradictory, and may sometimes even be true, but anyone who
utters one has made a strange performance. The case is similar here, with appropriate changes.
Suppose someone asked me my name and I said, “It is Saul Kripke, but you still don’t know what
my name is.” This may not literally be a contradiction, but is obviously very odd.

34

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

This latter is a controversial principle in the logic of knowledge; so one might
think that that is what is going wrong and try to avoid the use of it. I will,
however, make a few preliminary remarks about it. Is it the case that if someone
knows something, she knows that she knows it? There have been two attitudes
about this in recent philosophy. One is that all that is meant by knowing that you
know something is that you know it. This sort of extreme attitude is stated,
according to Hintikka (1962:108–10), by Schopenhauer, and is further argued
by Hintikka himself. At the opposite extreme is the view10 that, maybe we know
many things: that Nixon is president of the United States, that the Russians had a
revolution in 1917, that the sun is mostly gas—things which epistemological
skeptics alone would deny. We do not, however, really know that we know them
because that would involve a very high degree of certainty. Maybe our evidence
does not constitute knowledge (though in fact it does, I guess, if we are lucky).
To know that you know something is to perform a very great epistemological
feat, which is not comparable to just knowing it—since you can’t distinguish
knowledge from mere justiﬁed belief in something false. It is very hard to
adjudicate between these two positions, or even ﬁnd a position in between,
because “I know that I know that p” is not a sentence that we often ﬁnd on
our lips.
I would suggest the following in favor not of the principle being true, but of its
being nearly true: true enough for all practical purposes. Suppose I know something—for example, I know that Nixon is the president of the United States now.
The following is an argument for the double-K principle in this instance.
Certainly you (in the audience) know that I know that Nixon is the president.
For one thing, I have just said this, presumably basing my statement on newspapers, television, and so on. Even if I had not said this, if you knew me, you
would presume that I knew the fact on the same basis. Surely, I am not normally
in a worse position than you to judge this matter. Is there a principle of privileged
non-self-access here? I would suppose that normally, if someone else can know
that I know something, then I myself can know it at least on the same basis,
though perhaps I do not need to use this basis. (I do not myself need to argue:
well, I have said that Nixon is president, I read the newspapers, and so on; but if
you can know that I know this on such a basis, it would be surprising that I am
singularly worse off.)
In fact, the argument can be strengthened. For I know that you know that
I know that Nixon is president. After all, I just said so. But knowledge implies
truth. So if I know that you know something, I must know it myself. Hence,
I know that I know that Nixon is president.
10
The truth is that now (in 2009) I am not sure who in “recent philosophy” (i.e., in 1972)
I might have had in mind as holding this opposite extreme. One could certainly imagine the
plausibility that someone might hold such a view. However, the claim that knowing implies
knowing that one knows can certainly be doubted, and has been doubted by many philosophers.

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

35

Yet another variation: I know that everyone who reads the newspapers knows
that Nixon is president, and I know that I myself read the newspapers. Therefore,
I know that I must know that Nixon is president. Once again, in the case of these
variations, it is artiﬁcial to suppose that I need to go through the reasoning given,
but nevertheless it is valid and implies the appropriate case of the double-K
principle.
No doubt there may be exceptions where arguments such as these are not
applicable, but the arguments should be acceptable in a very wide range of cases.
I would, however, like to distinguish myself from Hintikka and others who
advocate such a principle universally and as a near tautology (in Hintikka’s case,
on the basis of what appears to me to be a circular argument). However, because
of the arguments I have given, I believe that one should have no doubt of the
principle in the present case. Therefore, I think that the fallacy does not lie here at
all. We may, therefore, put any number of Ks before the premises—not only
does a student know on a given day that they are true, but she also knows that she
knows on that given day that they are true, and so on.
One can now derive the contradiction from these premises plus the principle
we have just discussed. Yet it seems very strange that even if the announcement
that the exam will be given is true, the student cannot possibly know that it will
be: for students surely do know that such exams will be given. Let us look again at
premise (9), that if a student knows something on a given day, she knows it on
any later day. Is this a generally true principle of epistemology? It is true that she
can forget, but this is not what is in question: we may suppose that her memory is
good enough not to forget any signiﬁcant detail. Then, will it be true?
Many of you will know that I have written articles on modal logic; suppose
I came to one of you and sadly denied that, and claimed (“admitted”) they were
written by someone named “Schmidt” and that I merely signed them. Suppose
I even showed you a manuscript in Schmidt’s handwriting. After a certain
amount of persuading you might well be convinced that I did not write any
articles on modal logic. So you would not, at that later date, even believe it, let
alone know it. You may say that this means that you did not know it at the earlier
time. This may be so if I am now telling the truth and have not written any
articles on modal logic. But suppose now that I was lying, as some form of
English joke, and really had written the articles. You would then have been
correct in your initial belief, and, assuming that you were in a good enough
position to support your belief rationally, and so on, it would seem you did know
this at the earlier date but were rationally persuaded to change your mind. If you
wanted to argue that you did not know at the earlier date, then you would have to
say that you do not know a certain fact if at some future date someone produces
phony evidence to change your mind. Thus, what is true for you now would be
vulnerable to what might happen later. I think that I would rather say that one
can know something now but lose that knowledge at a later date on the basis of

36

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

further misleading evidence. (It must be misleading evidence; if it were genuine,
then your supposed knowledge would in fact have been mistaken belief.)
What happens in the particular case of the paradox? Let us again try to rule out
the last day. We say, for the reductio ad absurdum, that the exam will be given on
the Nth day. It will not have been given on any of the ﬁrst N–l days; the student
therefore knows it will not have been given on the ﬁrst N–1 days and, according
to premise (4), knows this on day N–1. The student knew at the outset that it will
be given on one of the ﬁrst N days. So we can conclude that if she knew it was not
given on one of the ﬁrst N–1 days, then she knew that it must be given on the
Nth, which contradicts premise (3). But there is a missing step in the argument,
which is that just because she knows on day 0 that it will be given on one of the
ﬁrst N days, she must therefore know this on day N–l. This does not in fact
follow without using premise (9), and would be false if the student later doubted
that the exam was to be given at all.
Is it plausible to call this “a missing step”? Is it clear, in this case, that what the
student knew on day 0 she would still know at any future date? The teacher has
announced that the exam is going to be given on one of the N following days and
that it is to be a surprise. What then will the students think when all the available
days but one have passed? Perhaps that something has gone wrong, since, if the
teacher still intends to give an exam, it will not be a surprise: they may therefore
fall into doubt and say, “Look, maybe the teacher isn’t intending to give us an
exam now; maybe he’s changed his mind.” This would be a case of having had
knowledge at one time but losing it at some later time. The student has the
knowledge that the exam will be given at the outset, but she no longer has it at the
end of the examination period. This seems to me to be fairly straightforward
common sense, and so it is a fallacy to assume that the student retains this
knowledge. Thus, the step of the argument which says that the last day can be
ruled out is, in fact, erroneous, and so the whole argument never gets going. This
is the basic fallacy in the argument.
This explanation, however, does not yield one feature of the problem which
I have mentioned before—that, somehow, the more days there are, the worse the
argument becomes. Perhaps we can in some way reinstate the argument by ruling
out the last day. We cannot appeal to premise (9), since it is clearly false in this
case. But we could add an extra premise: that the student knows, even on day
N–l, that the exam will be given. We can make this plausible by saying that it is a
rule of the school that a grade must be given for the course and that grades are
always given on the basis of exams. Then the students would think on day N–l,
when the exam still had not been given, “Something has gone wrong, but it
cannot be that the teacher has decided not to give us an exam: it must be that he
has decided not to bother making it a surprise.”
Now we really can rule out the last day—rule it out in the sense that the
premises contradict the supposition that the examination will be given on the last
day, for the premises include that the exam, when given, will be a surprise. How

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

37

do we rule out the second-to-last day? The intuitive reasoning is something like
this: knowing that the examination will not be given on the last day, the (N–l)th
is the last possible day left, and then we go through the very same reasoning for
that day as we did for the Nth day; we therefore will not need any more premises
to allow us to rule out each day one-by-one going backward. But, as we have
explicitly argued so far, this is a fallacy: we have not yet concluded that anyone
knows on any particular day that the examination will not be given on the last day;
we have merely concluded that it will not in fact be given on the last day.
What do we need for the student to reason? We have to know that on day N–2
she says “I know the exam cannot be on the last day, so there is only one day left
for the exam, the (N–1)th.” Then that day may be treated as if it were a new last
day, and the supposition that it will be given on that day can be ruled out as
contradicting the assumption that the exam will be a surprise. But this is
fallacious, as things stand, because all we know is that in fact the examination
will not be given on the Nth day, not that the student knows it on day N–2 (i.e.,
that KN-2 (EN)). A student whose knowledge is deductively closed will know
this provided that she knows (on any given day) all the premises on which that
conclusion was based. What premise did we use? We demanded that the student
know on day N–1 that the exam was still going to be given. But now we need the
stronger premise that she will know on day N–2 that she will know on day N–1
that the exam is still going to be given. This is acceptable in the situation
I described, where exams are a rule of the school. But another premise used
was that the exam will be a surprise: that the student was not to know on day N–1
that the exam would be given on day N (this is the particular case that we used).
For the student to use this on day N–2, she will have to know on day N–2 that
she will not know on day N–1 that the examination will be given on day N,
that is, that KN-2 (KN-1 (EN)). She knows this on day 0, from premise (3), but
N–2 need not be 0. If we accept premise (9), then since she knows on day 0 that
KN-1 (EN), then she must know it on day N–2. Is the principle plausible in this
case? Well, what does the student think on day N–2 if the exam has not yet been
given? “There is going to be an exam—it’s a rule of the school. But is it really
going to be a surprise? If I knew it were going to be a surprise, then I would know
the exam would have to be tomorrow, in which case it would not be a surprise at
all. Therefore, I do not know that it is going to be a surprise. Maybe the teacher is
going to stick to it being a surprise and maybe he is not going to bother and just
give the exam on the last day.” So, although the student knew at the outset that it
was to be a surprise, she may not know it on day N–2; she may still be said to
have known this at the outset, provided that it still will be a surprise—that is, that
it is given on the (N–l)th day rather than the Nth. Again, it is premise (9) that is
causing the fallacy—only now about the surprise element rather than about
whether the exam will be given.
Thus we cannot use premise (9) to conclude from what the student knows
initially to what she knows on day N–2; we would need an extra premise to say

38

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

that the student still knows on day N–2 that the exam will be a surprise. When
will this extra premise be plausible? Well, one case is the case where N=2, that is,
where the entire class period has only two days. Then premise (9) is not needed,
since what the student is supposed to know initially sufﬁces; there is not time for
the knowledge to be lost. However, in this case the teacher’s announcement has
the Moore’s paradoxical ﬂavor we already noted in Quine’s analysis of the oneday case. This is exactly what happened when I tried the card experiment on a
fellow undergraduate, as I have mentioned above. Therefore, as I have already
said, the difference between the last day and the penultimate day is not always the
crucial one.
What if there are many days? Then to exclude day N–1, one needs another
argument: that the student still would know on day N–2 that the exam will be
given and will be a surprise (not known in advance). Once again, we could
invoke the “rule of the school” device. We can suppose that it is long-settled
school policy that the exam must be given on a day when the students do not
know that it will be given, even on the day before. And, of course, we also
suppose that school policy demands an exam. Given these things, the supposition
that the exam will be given on day N–1 will lead to a contradiction of the
appropriate premises. This type of idea could be iterated to exclude successive
days from the list. The rule of the school will get successively more complicated
and involve iterations of knowledge about knowledge, lack of knowledge, and the
preservation of the situation.11
Let me generalize this argument by describing how the reasoning is iterated. In
each case, we conclude that the exam cannot be given on a given day, the Jth day;
we then try to rule out the (J–l)th day. To do this we have to assume not only that
the previous premises are true but also that the student knows on the previous
day, the (J–2)th day, that all these previous premises are true. Only then can the
student conclude, on the basis of her knowledge on day J–2, that the exam is not
going to be given on days from J onward and so say that it must be given on the
( J–l)th day, contradicting the premise that it is a surprise. Thus, we always
require not only that the previous premises shall be true and known to be true at
the outset but also that they shall remain known to be true on day J–2, whatever
day that is, and this is always an extra premise, since we have not accepted

11

One could think vaguely that it is school policy to allow enough of these iterations in each case
to generate the paradox. Then there would be a vagueness question.
In the original version of this talk, I mentioned the case already discussed in note 5, where the
experimenter randomly sticks the card somewhere in the middle of the deck. Then it might seem (at
least again thinking vaguely) that enough iterations of the knowledge involved will always be
available to rule out successive days from the end. But in the original transcript, I explicitly say
that it would be valid but superﬂuous to use this reasoning to rule out the second-from-the-last card,
since the subject can see that the card is not being placed near the bottom. I should have gone on to
conclude, as I did in note 5, that this model considerably changes the original problem.

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

39

premise (9) as generally true but rather as something that must be argued
separately in each case.
Thus where we thought that we were only applying the same reasoning again
and again, we were in fact adding tacit extra premises at each stage. The feeling of
the heap—that the more days that are involved, the weaker the reasoning
becomes—derives from these extra premises piling up, which in fact need special
arguments to justify them.
This is all I want to say about this paradox. I do not know if it is really solved;
I am sure that there are more things one could say about it.
I would like here to go on to consider the principle that if you know something
now you will know it at any later date. It was assumed (premise (9)) in the
fallacious argument for the paradox above, and it is also assumed by Quine:
If this [that the decree will not be fulﬁlled] is a conclusion which he is prepared to
accept . . . in the end as a certainty, it is an alternative which he should have been prepared
to take into consideration from the beginning as a possibility. (Quine 1953: 20)

That is to say, if she knew in the beginning that the exam will be given, then she
cannot, at any later stage, fall into doubt or denial of this: and this is what I am
denying. Quine, on the contrary, seems to consider it obvious that if she is
willing to accept at a later stage that the exam will not be given, then at no earlier
date could she have known that the exam will be given.
Again, Hintikka says:
What exactly is implied in the requirement that the grounds of knowledge in the full sense
of the word must be conclusive? For our purposes it sufﬁces to point out the following
obvious consequence of this requirement: If somebody says “I know that p” in this strong
sense of knowledge, he implicitly denies that any further information would have led him to
alter his view. He commits himself to the view that he would still persist in saying that he
knows that p is true—or at the very least, persists in saying that p is, in fact true—even if he
knew more than he now knows. (Hintikka 1962:20–21; emphasis in text)

Of course, in a way, what Hintikka is saying here is obviously true because he
says, “He commits himself to the view that he would still persist in saying that he
knows that p is true . . . even if he knew more than he now knows.” As stated, this
is not a substantive principle. “Knows that” could be replaced by any propositional attitude verb, say, “believes that” or even “doubts that,” and the resulting
principle still would be true—that is, it would still be true that someone would
persist in saying that he doubts that p, say, even if he would come to doubt more
than he now doubts. But what Hintikka really means here, presumably, is that it
is a characteristic of knowledge that even if I have more evidence than I now have,
I will still know that p; and this is what I have been denying in giving my
counterexamples. You may know something now, but, on the basis of further
evidence—without any loss of evidence or forgetfulness—be led to fall into
doubt about it later.

40

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

Hintikka says that the principle is true only for the “strong sense of knowledge.” This implies that there are two senses of the phrase “to know”: a strong
one and, perhaps, a weak one for which the principle is not really true. There is
something in Malcolm (1952) about this too: Malcolm admits that there are
cases where you can know something but, later on, on the basis of extra evidence,
conclude that you did not know it. He gives the following example: if you know
that the sun is about 90 million miles from the Earth, you might later, on the
basis of learned astronomers saying (perhaps falsely—he is not clear on this
point) that an error had been made and that the correct distance was 20 million
miles, be persuaded that you were wrong. The astronomers might be saying
something false (e.g., if an astronomers’ convention had decided to play a trick
on the public), but if they were right, then, of course, you did not know it
beforehand.12
But Malcolm argues that this is not always true, citing another example:
suppose there is an ink bottle in front of you, on your desk. Can it be the case
that some later information would lead you to change your mind? Malcolm
writes:
It could happen that in the next moment the ink-bottle will suddenly vanish from sight;
or that I should ﬁnd myself under a tree in the garden with no ink-bottle about;13 or that
one or more persons should enter this room and declare with apparent sincerity that they
see no ink-bottle on this desk. . . . Having admitted that these things could happen, am
I compelled to admit that if they did happen then it would be proved that there is no inkbottle here now? Not at all! I could say that when my hand seemed to pass through the
ink-bottle I should then be suffering from hallucination; that if the ink-bottle suddenly
vanished it would have miraculously ceased to exist . . .
. . . No future experience or investigation could prove to me that I am mistaken.
Therefore, if I were to say “I know that there is an ink-bottle here,” I should be using
“know” in the strong sense. . . .
In saying that I should regard nothing as evidence that there is no ink-bottle here now,
I am not predicting what I should do if various astonishing things happened. If other
members of my family entered this room and, while looking at the top of this desk,
declared with apparent sincerity that they see no ink-bottle, I might fall into a swoon or
become mad. I might even come to believe that there is not and has not been an ink-bottle
here. I cannot foretell with certainty how I should react. But if it is not a prediction what is

12
See Malcolm (1952:184). Since knowledge implies truth, then if Malcolm is really giving an
example where knowledge is lost, the announcement by the astronomers must be wrong—after all,
you did once know that the sun is about 90 million miles from the Earth. Things would be different
if the discussion were one of certainty, justiﬁed conviction, or whatever, where these are not
construed as implying truth. The same is true of much of my previous discussion in this paper.
Everything would be different if knowledge were replaced by a concept that does not imply truth.
For example, I wouldn’t have had to give an example where I falsely convince someone that I never
wrote on modal logic. However, other arguments that used the fact that knowledge implies truth
would go.
13
He was in his room at his desk.

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

41

the meaning of my assertion that I should regard nothing as evidence that there is no inkbottle here?
That assertion describes my present attitude towards the statement that here is an inkbottle. It does not prophesy what my attitude would be if various things happened. My
present attitude toward that statement is radically different from my present attitude
toward those other statements (e.g., that I have a heart).14 I do now admit that certain
future occurrences would disprove the latter. Whereas no imaginable future occurrence
would be considered by me now as proving that there is not an ink-bottle here.
These remarks are not meant to be autobiographical. They are meant to throw light
on the common concepts of evidence, proof, and disproof. (Malcolm 1952:185–86;
emphasis in text)

He includes the statement “three plus two is ﬁve” in the same batch as the inkbottle case. I am not sure that the ink-bottle case is a good example—a magician
might persuade you that you had been tricked.15

14
The statement that he himself has a heart Malcolm supposes to be a statement he knows only
in the weak sense since he could be persuaded later of its falsity.
15
Malcolm is surely right that ordinarily we would regard the presence of an ink bottle in the room as
conclusive, not merely probable. Malcolm quotes Ayer to the effect that “no proposition, other than a
tautology, can possibly be anything more than a probable hypothesis” (1952:183, note 4). (See also
Malcolm’s quotations from Descartes and Locke on the same page.) Actually, Hume already states that
some empirical statements are not really just probable. He writes: “One would appear ridiculous, who
would say that it is only probable the sun will rise to-morrow, or that all men must dye; though it is plain
we have no further assurance of these facts, than what experience affords us” (2000: Book 1, Part III, Sec.
XI). (However, Hume goes on to reserve the term “knowledge,” following previous authors, for a priori
knowledge, and uses “proofs” for arguments giving empirically certain knowledge; I take this to be a bit
of technical terminology, not really a denial of what Malcolm afﬁrms against Ayer.)
In Malcolm’s case of the ink bottle, indeed I may be certain that there is an ink bottle here, but
I will be equally certain that the extraordinary future events Malcolm describes will not happen. If
I seriously entertain the idea that some of them will or even may happen, then I am entertaining the
idea that perhaps a clever magician is deceiving me, or some other even more outré case. What
Malcolm says does not seem to me to describe my present attitude toward the bizarre possibilities he
mentions.
My own intuitions differ from Malcolm’s in the opposite direction about some other cases. The
statement that I have a heart in the quoted material refers to his claim earlier in the paper that if
astonished surgeons told him that when they operated on him they found that he had none, he
would believe them, in contrast to the case involving the ink bottle. But I ﬁnd this belief much
harder to give up, even under extraordinary circumstances (I would probably think that the surgeons
must be putting me on).
In my discussion of the astronomer’s case, I was worried that if the distance from the earth to the
sun was knowledge, the astronomers must be tricking us (by deﬁnition). But let us just speak of what
would lead me to give up my belief about the distance between the sun and the earth. An
extraordinary error such as Malcolm describes would be very hard to swallow without an
elaborate explanation. I might wonder whether astronomy is much of a science after all.
A slighter error would be better and might be easier to explain. I simply would not believe a
committee of astronomers who announced that the earth is ﬂat after all.
Malcolm says at the end of the paper (189) that the ideas in this paper derive from discussion with
Ludwig Wittgenstein, something I may not have noticed in 1972. If so, they appear to be based on
Wittgenstein’s exposition to him of some of the ideas that are now published in On Certainty
(Wittgenstein 1969). I am not sure, however, that the Wittgenstein of that book would agree with
the way Malcolm puts various matters.

42

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

I may be in no doubt now as to whether there is an ink-bottle in front of me
and yet it seems to me compatible with this to suppose that future evidence could
persuade me that there is no ink-bottle. There seem to me to be two different
questions here: whether I have the kind of certainty characterized by there being
no doubt now, and whether I take the attitude that no future evidence could
disprove this. But let this distinction, and the question as to whether this
particular example is correct, be set aside—there may be correct examples. The
strange—and unargued—thing here is, why does this show that there is a strong
sense of “know” for which this is true? Suppose there are some cases of knowledge
in which no future evidence will lead me to change my mind, and other cases of
knowledge in which I would change my mind. That does not show that the word
“know” is being used in two senses anymore than there being Americans who are
rich and Americans who are poor shows that the word “American” is being used
in two senses. Any class may, in various interesting ways, divide up into
subclasses. Why not instead say that, in general, knowing does not imply that
no future evidence would lead me to lose my knowledge, but in some cases,
where I do know, it just is in fact the case (and not because of some special sense
of “know”) that no future evidence would lead me to change my mind?
One would need some additional—say, linguistic—evidence that this shows
that “know” is being used in two senses. After all, is it likely that, in Ubangi or
Swahili, two different words are used for these two different senses of “know”?
There are, of course, different senses of the word “know” in English: those that
would be translated as connaı̂tre as opposed to savoir, kennen as opposed to
wissen. These are different senses of knowing: you know a person as opposed to
knowing that p is true. These are indeed different senses of “to know,” and this
fact is exhibited by the fact that other languages differentiate between them. We
all, of course, have heard of the “biblical sense” of “to know,” which in English
derives from the King James Bible’s translation of the corresponding classical
Hebrew, and is perhaps similarly distinct in some other languages. But why
should there be different kinds of propositional or factual knowledge? Prima
facie, it seems to me that the idea that factual-propositional knowledge has two
different senses is a red herring. So, what can these people have in mind? Why do
they not just say that there are two cases?
I think what they have in mind is this.16 First, there are obvious principles
about knowledge which seem to them to imply that, in general, if you know
something, no future evidence could lead you to change your mind—the
grounds must be conclusive. But then there are counterexamples; this conclusion
does not seem to be correct. So then they argue: well, that must be a weaker sense
of “to know.” But why not accept counterexamples as counterexamples? Why
16
Even though there has been a recent resurgence of interest in the question of whether “knows”
has different senses, I have chosen not to incorporate the ever-growing recent literature on this
subject.

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

43

invoke a doctrine of different senses of “know”? Should there really be different
dictionary entries? But there must be something behind the idea that “know” has
a sense in which knowledge cannot be lost (Hintikka) or at least that our present
attitude toward the statement is that the knowledge cannot be lost (Malcolm).
This is to be our second paradox. Unlike my treatment of the ﬁrst paradox, I shall
merely state it, and not attempt to solve it—because I discovered it!
I want to try to prove the principle that I earlier declared to be false: that if you
know something now, you have got to know it later. One cannot really prove it in
such a simple form. You might forget, and so on. But one can try to prove the
more careful principle suggested by Malcolm’s discussion of the alleged strong
sense of “know”: that if I know something now, I should, as a rational agent,
adopt a resolution not to allow any future evidence to overthrow it. But this does
not seem to be our attitude toward statements that we know—nor does it seem to
be a rational attitude.
Consider the following. First, the deductive closure of knowledge:
(i ) If A knows that p and A knows that p entails q, and, on the basis of such
knowledge, A concludes that q, then A knows that q.
And then (let “p” be any statement):
(ii ) p entails the following hypothetical: any evidence against p is misleading
(where misleading is to mean leads to a false conclusion).
If p is true—notice that (ii ) does not say anything about knowledge—any
evidence against it is misleading, that is, leads to the false conclusion that not-p.
Now, suppose that
(iii ) The subject A knows that p, and A knows (ii ).
Then, provided that he carries out the appropriate deduction, it follows from
premise (ii ) that we can conclude:
(iv) A knows that any evidence against p is misleading.
(The statement applies to any evidence, arising now or in the future, but
naturally we are most interested in the future.) This already seems very strange:
that just by knowing some common or garden-variety statement, which I am
calling p, one knows a sweeping thing: that any future evidence against p will be
misleading.
We might have as a general principle something like this (though it is very
hard to state in a nice, rigorous way, especially giving it the necessary generality):
(v) If A knows that taking an action of type T leads to consequence C, and A
wishes above all else to avoid C (i.e., this is the only relevant issue), then A
should resolve now not to take any action of type T.

44

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

This, too, is a very sweeping statement, but we are considering the case where A
knows, at a certain time, that if he does anything of a certain kind in the future, it
will lead to some consequence that he thinks bad, there being no other relevant
consequences which would override it. For example, suppose he knows that if he
opens the door, someone standing outside is going to shoot him. It would then
be a reasonable thing for him to resolve not to open the door.
So, he should resolve not to take any action of type T. Let the action of type T
be accepting evidence against p—that is, doubting or denying that p on the basis
of some future evidence. The consequence C is gaining a false belief—or at least
losing a true one, if we merely fall into doubt—and this is something that we do
not want. Then one may conclude:
(vi) A should resolve not to be inﬂuenced by any evidence against p.
To make the argument clearer, notice there are two ways in which one can
make this resolution. In the ﬁrst place, one can resolve not to look at any alleged
evidence against p. For example, I might resolve not to read books of a certain
type. I think that, in practice, this is the most important case. It is not possible to
keep to such a resolution in the case of the surprise exam (see also note 17), nor
does it seem to be what some of the authors I have mentioned have in mind. In
the second place, one could conceivably resolve that, if one is faced, regardless of
whether one wanted it, with particular evidence against p, one should nevertheless ignore it, since one knows that it must be misleading, given that one knows
that p. Neither of these things seems to be our attitude toward future evidence in
cases where we know something. I think it is from such an argument that the idea
of a strong sense of “know” may come; that, in some special cases, these
conclusions are true. But if you look at the premises and reasoning, there does
not seem to be any “super” sense of “know” being supposed, just “know” in the
ordinary sense. So there must be something else wrong, and this is the question—
what is wrong?
Some political or religious leaders have indeed argued along some lines such as
those of (vi). They have argued on this basis that if their followers or subjects are
not strong enough to stick to the resolution themselves, they—the leaders—ought
to help them avoid contact with the misleading evidence. For this reason, they
have urged or compelled people not to read certain books, writings, and the like.
But many people need no compulsion. They avoid reading things, and so on.
If the conclusion of this argument were accepted, our solution to the ﬁrst
paradox would in some sense go by the board, since the student should resolve
that, no matter how things appear in the future, she should never lose any of her
beliefs in the teacher’s announcements. That is a trivial special case of principle
(vi), but it is the genesis of my considering this second problem and this
particular set of premises. And they have their own sort of importance in
epistemology. One can be led in two directions by them: ﬁrst, one can think

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

45

that conclusion (vi) is correct, and so to know something means that no possible
future evidence should lead me to change my mind. But since that is almost never
the case, we know almost nothing. This is the skeptical attitude. Alternatively,
one might be lead to the corresponding dogmatic view—that, since we know all
sorts of things, we should now make a resolution not to be swayed by any future
evidence.17
The commonsense view is, for example, that you do know that I have written
certain papers on modal logic but that future evidence could lead you to change
your mind about this. So, you should rationally leave yourself open to such
changings-of-mind, even though it is the case that you know that I wrote
these papers. The question is, why?18,19
APPENDIX I
In a recent class discussion,20 Fred Michael remarked that Quine’s move, at least as to the
last day, could be avoided by a simple change in the notion of “surprise.” Regard an exam
(or hanging) as a surprise if one cannot know in advance of a given day that if the event
(exam or hanging) will occur at all, the event must occur on that day. Then the question
of whether one knows in advance that there will be an exam (a hanging) becomes
irrelevant.21 One could try to complicate the deﬁnition of surprise corresponding to
the successive elimination of days, but eventually the pileup of extra knowledge assumptions in my main discussion will go over into more and more complicated conditionals
with more and more antecedents, and very artiﬁcial notions of “surprise.”
17
Although I was in fact led to the second paradox by my consideration of the ﬁrst (the surpriseexam paradox), in one way taking this case as paradigmatic is misleading. In the case of the surprise
exam, the student experiencing the passing of successive days (and perhaps seeing no exam until
nearly the end) cannot avoid facing the future evidence, and may not be able to stick to her
resolution. The same is not true of what I had in mind for many typical cases of the paradox, where
one may avoid contact with the “misleading” counterevidence altogether—for example, by avoiding
reading certain books or articles.
The corresponding cases of Malcolm (1952) are at least similar in that it was important to me to
phrase the problem in terms of a resolution at the present time, rather than as a prediction as to what
I would do. However, in all of Malcolm’s cases the idea that one might avoid the misleading
counterevidence altogether is not there. (And, as I said above, for some of his cases it is not clear that
Malcolm regards the counterevidence as misleading.)
18
But see also my note 12 above. Since the authors I was concerned with (Hintikka and
Malcolm), as well as the previous discussion of the surprise exam, were discussing knowledge,
and since knowledge is the subject of the present paper, this second problem has been put in terms of
knowledge. But there could be parallel problems for certainty, rationally justiﬁed conviction, and so
on.
19
My thanks to the late G. E. M. (Elizabeth) Anscombe and the Cambridge Moral Sciences
Club for transcribing this lecture. Thanks to Jeff Buechner, Gary Ostertag, Harold Teichman, and
especially to Romina Padró for their help in producing the present version. This paper has been
completed with support from the Saul A. Kripke Center at the City University of New York,
Graduate Center.
20
In my spring 2009 seminar at the CUNY Graduate Center.
21
I now ﬁnd that a similar remark is made in Ayer (1973:125).

46

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

However, we owe to Shaw (1958) the proposal that the teacher’s announcement be
taken to be self-referential: one cannot derive in advance from the present announcement
when the exam will be given. Done that way, any pileup is avoided, either in knowledge
assumptions or in antecedents. The formulation I prefer of this self-referential approach
to the surprise exam is in a paper by Frederic B. Fitch (1964).22, 23 Given enough material
to formalize the kind of self-reference involved in Gödel’s ﬁrst incompleteness theorem
(say, by quoting syntax into elementary number theory), one can formalize the problem
in terms of deducibility and eliminate any notion of knowledge. That is, the announcement (A) can be that the exam will be given on a day such that one cannot deduce from
(A) itself, plus the fact that it has not been given on previous days, that it will be given on
that very day. Fitch simply accepts that such an announcement, so formulated, leads to a
contradiction. The reasoning follows that of the usual surprise exam argument, successively eliminating the days starting from the last. However, he argues that a slightly
weaker version is “apparently self-consistent” (1964:163). This modiﬁes the announcement so that “what is intended in practice is not that the surprise event will be a surprise
whenever it occurs, but only when it occurs on some day other than the last” (163). He
22
Shaw (1958) seems to think that the self-reference makes the problem dubious, like the liar
paradox, but Fitch’s Gödelian formulation is beyond logical doubt. Shaw is also somewhat sloppy in
his formulation. The deduction in advance that is ruled out involves not only the announcement
itself, but also that the exam has not been given yet.
23
See also Kaplan and Montague (1960). Their version is still about knowledge, whereas that of
Fitch shows that the notion of knowledge can be eliminated in favor of deduction. Kaplan and
Montague have both done justly esteemed and famous work, and the present paper is formally
unexceptionable. However, I see some problems in it. For example, is it really one of our “intuitive
epistemological principles” that “one cannot know a non-analytic sentence about the future”
(81–82)? No wonder one cannot know anything about the exam (hanging) in advance; it will be
just as much a surprise as the rising of the sun! (See also note 15 above.)
But the main problem with their paper is this: in order to obtain Gödelian self-reference, they
take knowledge as a predicate, rather than an intensional operator (see their excuse at the end of the
ﬁrst paragraph on 80). They then reduce the problem to an analogue of the liar paradox (which they
call “the Knower,” 88). Basically, it is “my negation is known” (87, formula (1)), from which they
derive a contradiction using intuitive principles about knowledge. But then the entire original ﬂavor
of the surprise exam (hanging) is lost. One could blame everything on the use of a knowledge
predicate. In a subsequent paper, Montague (1963) himself, inspired by this one, argues that if
modality is treated as a predicate, customary modal laws cannot be maintained, precisely because of
the possibility of Gödelian self-reference.
There is an important difference between the goals of Kaplan–Montague and those of Fitch.
Kaplan and Montague are looking for “a genuinely paradoxical decree” (1960:85), that is, one that
apparently can be proved to be both true and false. Fitch, on the other hand, avoids the possibility of
any paradox almost by the deﬁnition of his enterprise. The whole argument can be formalized in
ﬁrst-order arithmetic (“Peano Arithmetic”), or strictly speaking, an extension of that system, by
adding ﬁnitely many propositional constants corresponding to the E1, . . . , EN. By deﬁnition, there
can be no contradiction as long as Peano Arithmetic is consistent (the added propositional constants
change nothing).
Given that we are looking for a self-referential interpretation, I think Fitch’s perspective to be
better than that of Kaplan and Montague. The problem is not to ﬁnd a paradox like the liar, but
simply a highly counterintuitive conclusion that it is impossible to announce a surprise exam (or
decree a surprise hanging) within a certain time limit. One case in Kaplan and Montague (the
decrees D2 and D3) (82–84), which they consider merely to be a decree that cannot be fulﬁlled (and
thus not genuinely paradoxical), in fact comes closer to capturing the right ﬂavor than the
subsequent modiﬁcation to get a “genuinely paradoxical decree”.

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

47

includes in the modiﬁed announcement that the last day “will be a surprise in the weak
sense of being not provably implied by the prediction itself ” (163).24

APPENDIX 2: LETTER TO FITCH
I now append a letter that I wrote to Fitch.25 Were I to have written it today, I would not
have started with Löb’s theorem, but with Gödel’s second incompleteness theorem,
which is the main point.26 The point is that Fitch’s modiﬁed announcement implies
that various things cannot be derived from it, namely things about when the exam will be
given. A fortiori, it implies its own consistency. But, by Gödel’s second incompleteness
theorem, any statement implying its own consistency must itself be inconsistent, contrary
to Fitch’s guess about his modiﬁed announcement.
As I conclude in the letter to Fitch, I do not think that the self-referential interpretation of the problem is a very natural one.
[UCLA]
Los Angeles, California
Department of Philosophy
August 4, 1972
Prof. Frederick Fitch
Department of Philosophy
Yale University
New Haven, Connecticut 06520
Dear Fred:
You may be interested in the following observation related to your article on the Prediction
Paradox in the APQ for April 1964. The statement in (16) [and the one in (17) also] which
you call “apparently self-consistent” is actually refutable. The reason: call the statement “P.”
P implies Bew#P, since if Bew#P then, of course, Bew#[P  Q1] and Bew#[P  Q2]. So
P  Bew#P is provable. So Bew# P  P is provable. By the famous theorem of Löb
(viz, if Bew#A  A is provable, so is A; JSL 1955 pp. 115–8), P is provable [Löb 1955].
The situation should really be looked at this way: let P be any statement which implies that
it itself is not refutable. Then, Z plus P, where Z is elementary number theory, is a system
which can prove its own consistency, and therefore is inconsistent by Gödel’s Second
Incompleteness Theorem. Hence, P must be refutable in Z. Your statement P is a statement

24
See his formulae (16) (for two days) and (17) (for three days). (There appears to me to be a
subtle error involving the use of exclusive “or” in the formulation of (17) that I hope to discuss
elsewhere, not particularly in connection with Fitch’s paper.)
25
Fitch replied to this letter simply saying that he could ﬁnd nothing wrong with it.
26
As I mentioned in the letter, I have shown that Löb’s theorem, proved by Löb in a different
way, is actually a simple corollary of Gödel’s second incompleteness theorem. See, for example,
Smullyan (1992:110), and Boolos and Jeffrey (1980: ch. 16). In the letter to Fitch, I actually give
the argument, and maybe this is why I mention Löb’s theorem.

48

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

which implies its own irrefutability, since it implies that various things cannot be deduced
from it, and is therefore refutable. The same argument easily establishes that Löb’s theorem,
cited above, is a simple consequence of Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem, as
I observed in a short unpublished paper. Simply take P in the preceding paragraph to be A.
The same observations show that much of what Bennett says in his review (JSL 1965) of
your paper and others is wrong. Some of the statements which he declares to be self-consistent
or even logically true can be shown to be refutable by the same argument, at least if they are
interpreted in terms of Gödelian self-reference.
Since any statement whatsoever which implies its own self-consistency (and therefore any
statement which implies that something else cannot be deduced from it) is refutable, it seems
to me that interpretations of the Prediction Paradox in terms of Gödelian self-reference and
deducibility in number theory do not really capture the spirit of the original paradox. For,
surely the original paradox was not meant to follow from such general considerations. My own
view of the paradox is different, but that’s another story.

Best,
Saul Kripke

APPENDIX 3: COMMENTS ON THE SECOND PARADOX
There has been a considerable secondary literature on my second paradox, which has come to
be known as the dogmatism paradox. As I said, it can be discussed for other epistemic concepts
such as certainty, rational belief, and so on; and indeed there is literature on some other forms.
Moreover, one might distinguish between ﬁrst and third person formulations of the problem,
and in the latter case, whether it is a subject who really knows or merely thinks he or she knows.
Here I am discussing a subject S who genuinely knows that p.
In the published literature the ﬁrst discussion of my second paradox is in Gilbert Harman’s
well-known book Thought (Harman 1973:147ff), and I emphasize this version. I hope I have
understood Harman correctly. To discuss his treatment of the problem, one should remember
that my point is about a resolution made in advance to ignore certain types of evidence. Mostly
the strategy followed is that of failing to read literature of a certain type, and so on. One might
make a resolution to ignore particular evidence even when one is forcibly confronted with it,
but this is often more difﬁcult to keep.27
People who follow these strategies are, after all, not uncommon at all, as I have mentioned in
the paper. Often, however, we think of them for this reason as dogmatists who do not really know.
Here, however, the premise was that we are dealing with a subject who really knows. We are
arguing that such a subject ought to maintain the dogmatic attitude because any counterevidence
really is misleading. (In my own discussion, I imagine trying to convince people, falsely, that
I never worked on modal logic after all, so that some prior knowledge would be lost.)

27
Those who followed the main strategy might be compared to what Ulysses would have done if
he had decided to put wax in his ears or follow another route. Tying oneself to the mast is something
of an analogue of the second strategy some might follow if forced to confront the evidence (the
sirens). Think also of cases of trying to avoid addictive substances (I have heard the comparison
made between dangerous—misleading—books and dangerous drugs) and what an addict may warn
his friends about his behavior before he tries to withdraw.

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

49

Harman’s discussion goes like this, where we replace his particular example with the letter
“p.” He says, “Since I now know that p, I now know that any evidence that appears to indicate
something else is misleading. That does not warrant me in simply disregarding any further
evidence, since getting that further evidence can change what I know. In particular, after I get
such further evidence I may no longer know that it is misleading. For having the new evidence
can make it true that I no longer know that p; if I no longer know that, I no longer know that
the new evidence is misleading” (1973:148–49).
Well, one need not disagree with what Harman says about the acquisition of the new
evidence (at least for typical cases). But remember that I was talking about a resolution to be
made in advance. Just because the subject wishes to avoid a loss of knowledge such as Harman
describes, so for that reason she or he makes the resolution. Usually, this resolution is to avoid
certain types of contact with alleged evidence, such as reading the wrong books (for they can
contain nothing but sophistry and illusion), associating with the wrong people, and so on.
Moreover, by hypothesis, the books and so on, are misleading, and the subject knows they are.
One should certainly construe the resolution to include a more speciﬁc form, avoiding
contact with some speciﬁc counterevidence to p, though usually one will not know of it.
Harman is right to say that if such contact nevertheless occurs, one may well lose the
knowledge that p, and hence no longer know that the counterevidence is misleading. But
just this is why the subject resolves not to get into such a situation!28
I should add something I was probably not aware of when I originally gave this lecture,
which is that sometimes the dogmatic strategy is a rational one. I myself have not read much
defending astrology, necromancy, and the like (I remember Stephen Weinberg making the
same remark). Even when confronted with speciﬁc alleged evidence, I have sometimes ignored
it although I did not know how to refute it. I once read part of a piece of writing by a
reasonably well-known person defending astrology.29 Another time, I saw an advertisement
professing to prove that Vincent Foster had been murdered (presumably on orders of the
Clintons, though this was not stated explicitly). I was not in a position to refute speciﬁc claims
but assumed that this was a piece of no value.30, 31 One epistemological problem is to delineate
the cases when the dogmatic attitude is justiﬁed.

28
I am assuming that we are dealing with a subject who wishes to avoid losing knowledge.
Sometimes there are people who “don’t want to know” or do wish to lose knowledge that they have,
sometimes for arguably good reasons. They are not in question here.
29
What I had glanced at was a piece by Hans Eysenck professing to prove the theories of a
particular French astrologer.
30
My reaction was amply conﬁrmed by several investigations, including even one headed by
Kenneth Starr. If someone doesn’t like this example, try, say, holocaust denial.
31
It is a merit of Robert Nozick’s discussion of the problem (1981:237–39) that he recognizes
that there are cases where alleged evidence for dubious or crackpot views contrary to what we know
may be ignored (239). The rest of his discussion, in this respect like Harman’s, imagines us
confronted with a particular piece of evidence e, purporting to undermine, or even contradict, the
knowledge that p. Nozick bases his rather detailed discussion of this matter on his view that
knowledge fails to be closed under Universal Instantiation (UI). Even though S may know that
all evidence against p is misleading, according to Nozick that does not show that S knows that some
speciﬁc evidence e against p is misleading, and therefore can be disregarded. He then adds a subtle
discussion of this particular case. Many (including me) might ﬁnd Nozick’s rejection of the closure
of knowledge under UI in and of itself implausible. But I have discussed Nozick’s theory in some
detail in the present volume and hope to be pardoned for omitting any further discussion of its
application to this case. (For more discussion of Nozick’s views on deductive closure, see Chapter 7.)
David Lewis also developed an epistemological theory stating that whether a subject knows that

50

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge
REFERENCES

Ayer, A. J. (1973). “On a Supposed Antinomy.” Mind 82:125–26.
Bennett, J. (1965). “Review of R. Shaw, The Paradox of the Unexpected Examination.”
Journal of Symbolic Logic 30:101–12.
Boolos, G., and R. Jeffrey (1980). Computability and Logic, 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dretske, F. (1970). “Epistemic Operators.” Journal of Philosophy 67:1007–23.
———. (1971). “Conclusive Reasons.” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 49:1–22.
Fitch, F. (1964). “A Goedelized Formulation of the Prediction Paradox.” American
Philosophical Quarterly 1:161–64.
Harman, G. (1973). Thought. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Hawthorne, J. (2004). Knowledge and Lotteries. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hintikka, J. (1962). Knowledge and Belief: An Introduction to the Logic of the Two Notions.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Hume, D. (2000). Treatise of Human Nature. Ed. David Fate Norton. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. First published 1740.
Kaplan, D., and R. Montague (1960). “A Paradox Regained.” Notre Dame Journal of
Formal Logic 1:79–90.
Lewis, D. (1996). “Elusive Knowledge.” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 74:549–67.
Löb, M. H. (1955). “Solution to a Problem of Leon Henkin.” Journal of Symbolic Logic
20:115–18.
Malcolm, N. (1952). “Knowledge and Belief.” Mind 61:178–89.
Montague, R. (1963). “Syntactical Treatments of Modality, with Corollaries on Reﬂexion Principles and Finite Axiomatizability.” Acta Philosophica Fennica 16:153–67;
reprinted in Montague (1974).
———. (1974). Formal Philosophy: Selected Papers of Richard Montague. Ed.
R. Thomason. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Nozick, R. (1981). Philosophical Explanations. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Quine, W. V. O. (1953). “On a So-Called Paradox.” Mind 62:65–67. Reprinted under
the title “On a Supposed Antinomy,” in The Ways of Paradox and other Essays. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1966, 19–21; page references are to the reprint.
Shaw, R. (1958). “The Paradox of the Unexpected Examination.” Mind 67:382–84.
Smullyan, R. (1992). Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorems. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sorensen, R. (1988a). Blindspots. Oxford: Clarendon.

p can depend on the conversational context, notably whether traditional skeptical philosophical
doubts have been brought into the discussion (see Lewis 1996). In the case of the present paradox,
he thinks that merely hearing that there is purported counterevidence is enough to create a context
in which one no longer knows that p, and hence that such counterevidence is misleading. (It is
unclear to me whether Lewis means that we are aware of what the purported counterevidence is, or
aware merely of its existence.) We have seen that this is in general too strong, but I think Lewis is
probably not really unaware of this. I can’t go into Lewis’s contextual theory here, though my
inclination is not to agree. Other philosophers, such as Hawthorne (2004) and Sorensen (1988b),
have discussed the problem. I will not discuss their views here.

On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge

51

———. (1988b). “Dogmatism, Junk Knowledge, and Conditionals.” Philosophical
Quarterly 38:433–54.
Williamson, T. (1994). Vagueness. London: Routledge.
Wittgenstein, L. (1969). On Certainty. Ed. G. E. M. Anscombe and G. H. von Wright.
Trans. G. E. M. Anscombe and D. Paul. Oxford: Blackwell.

3
Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities*

One of the main concerns of my previous work (Kripke 1980)1 is the semantics
of proper names and natural kind terms. A classical view which Putnam mentioned, advocated by Mill, states that proper names have as their function simply
to refer; they have denotation but not connotation. The alternative view, which
until fairly recently has dominated the ﬁeld, has been that of Frege and Russell.
They hold that ordinary names2 have connotation in a very strong sense: a proper
name such as ‘Napoleon’ simply means the man having most of the properties we
commonly attribute to Napoleon, such as being Emperor of the French, losing at
Waterloo, and the like. Of course, intermediate views might be suggested, and
perhaps have been suggested.
For various general terms, such as ‘cow’ and ‘tiger’ or ‘elm’ and ‘beech’, not
only Frege and Russell, but Mill as well (probably more explicitly than the other
two), held that they have connotation in the sense that we learn what it is to be a
tiger by being given some list of properties which form necessary and sufﬁcient
conditions for being a tiger. In both these cases, both where Mill and Frege–
Russell disagree and where Mill and Frege–Russell agree, I have advocated the

* The present paper (essentially a precursor of my John Locke Lectures at Oxford) was delivered
at the conference ‘Language, Intentionality, and Translation Theory’, held at the University of
Connecticut in March of 1973 and organized by Sam Wheeler and John Troyer. The other papers
in the conference, together with the discussions afterward, were published in Synthese 27, 1974. The
version here is based on a transcription made by the conference organizers. A general discussion of
my own paper was printed in the Synthese volume mentioned (509–21), even though the paper itself
was not. Papers were presented by many distinguished philosophers of language, who also
participated in the discussion.
1
Now this work is well known, but the present paper should be read bearing in mind that it was
fairly new at the time, and hence was summarized again in part.
2
Russell also speaks of so-called logically proper names. For these, his views are close to those of
Mill, but he argues that what we normally call ‘names’ are not, in fact, logically proper names. It is
with ordinary names that I am concerned when I speak of Russell’s views on names, and I will
henceforth omit the qualiﬁcation ‘ordinary’, even though according to Russell they are not ‘genuine’
names. See the discussion mentioned in note 14 below, and Russell (1918–19) generally.

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

53

view that the consensus is largely wrong; that it is reference which is much more
important here than any supposed sense.3
I want to discuss one aspect of this problem today, since no consideration in
favor of the Frege–Russell view of proper names has seemed more conclusive
than the fact that names can sometimes be empty—that, for example, they can
occur in ﬁction. Also, even if they do in fact refer, it is intelligible to raise
the question of whether the alleged referent really exists. For instance, we ask
whether Moses as a historical character really existed and the like. What can we
mean by this? If the function of naming were simply reference, then empty
names would seem to have no semantic function at all, but plainly they do not
fail to have a semantic function, as anyone who enjoys a good work of ﬁction can
attest. And even if they do have referents, we can ask whether, say, Moses or
Napoleon really existed. When we do so we are not asking whether that person
really existed. We are not questioning of him whether he really existed, because if
we were asking such a question, the answer should be evident. Since everyone
really exists, that person does also. It is unintelligible, as Russell and Frege have
emphasized, to ask of a person whether he really exists.
Now to this problem the Frege–Russell analysis, and its modiﬁcations, provides a neat solution. If we have a story—for example, one involving Sherlock
Holmes—to say that Sherlock Holmes really exists is to say that someone or
other uniquely satisﬁes the conditions of the story, or at any rate, most or enough
of them. To say that he does not exist is to say that this is not the case.
Presumably, if this is to be the analysis of the statement, it should apply to
counterfactual situations also. To say, ‘Sherlock Holmes would have existed
(or might have existed) under certain circumstances’ is to say that some person
would have uniquely played the role of the detective in the Sherlock Holmes
story, or might have played it under those circumstances. And to say that he
would not have existed in certain circumstances is to say that the story would not
have been true of any such detective under those circumstances. We can then
replace the names in these sentences by existential quantiﬁers, replacing ‘Sherlock
Holmes existed’ with ‘There exists a man uniquely satisfying the conditions of
the story’. And these are supposed to be necessary and sufﬁcient conditions both
about the actual world and about every possible world.
Some of you will know that I distinguish between the questions of what is
necessary, whether something would have been true in a possible world, and the
epistemological question of whether we know a priori that certain conditions
3
There are more recent modiﬁcations, but here I am going to lump them together with Frege
and Russell: many writers—Wittgenstein (1953), Searle (1958), and others—have held that instead
of a ﬁxed list of properties forming necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for being Napoleon or being
a tiger, one should instead use a cluster of properties, most of which must roughly hold of the object.
Not all of them—or at least not a lot of them—could fail. In Kripke (1980) I argued that this
modiﬁcation, no matter what those who made it thought, does not really overcome the most
important objections to the classical view (see 31–33, 60–61, and 74–75).

54

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

must be true of the actual world. Therefore there are two questions here about
the Frege–Russell analysis. First, is it true that to ask whether Moses exists in a
given counterfactual situation, or whether Sherlock Holmes exists, is to ask
whether the things commonly said about them would have been true in that
situation? Secondly, do we know a priori, or with some sort of advance certainty
about the actual world, that the existence of Moses or of Sherlock Holmes is
materially equivalent in the actual world to the question of the existence of some
unique person satisfying the conditions in the story? These questions are separable and distinct; Frege and Russell could be right on one and wrong on the other.
At any rate, they seem to have a neat solution to all these problems that seems to
ﬁt into what we actually ask when we ask whether there really was a Sherlock
Holmes—or so it may seem at ﬁrst blush.
Those familiar with my previous work will know that I believe, from a battery
of examples, that the Frege–Russell analysis is erroneous, as applied to natural
language, for both cases. It is wrong in general about the counterfactual situations, and it is wrong about what we can say a priori about the actual world.
Surely, for example, to ask whether under certain circumstances Moses would
have existed is not to ask whether under these circumstances such-and-such
events would have taken place. For, ﬁrst, presumably Moses might have existed
yet not gone into religion or politics, and therefore not done any of these great
deeds. Nor need anyone else, of course, have done them in his place. Second,
even had Moses never existed, perhaps someone of comparable stature would
have come along to do exactly these great deeds. The statements (that is, one
containing ‘Moses’ and the other containing a description typically associated
with that name), which are supposed to have the same truth-value in all possible
worlds, are such that neither one entails the other in a possible world. One can be
true and the other false in both directions.4 Of course, there might be certain
(extremely implausible, maybe never held) views in the philosophy of history
which assert that there are great individuals uniquely called forth to perform
certain tasks. This should hardly be assumed simply to follow from an analysis of
existential statements and of proper names. I think then that in this case the
Frege–Russell analysis must be rejected. In particular, to describe a counterfactual situation as one in which Moses would or would not have existed is not to
ask whether any properties would have been instantiated.5 This is to oppose the
4

Note that in this case I am taking ‘Moses’ as the name of a real person, and even perhaps
assuming the essential accuracy (if not entire accuracy) of the Pentateuchal account. I am then
talking about counterfactual situations, and arguing that the existence of someone satisfying the
Pentateuchal account has little to do with whether Moses would have existed in a given
counterfactual situation. (The case of Moses was discussed in Kripke [1980:66–67], based on
Wittgenstein’s use of this example [1953:}79].)
5
Of course, one could invent a property, ‘Mosesizing’, as frequently proposed by Quine. See
Quine (1940:149–50) and Quine (1960:176–80), and my comment in Kripke (1980:29). Such an
artiﬁcially invented property is not in question here, and is not in and of itself objectionable.

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

55

technical meaning that Frege gave to the doctrine that existence is not a predicate. An apparent singular statement of the form ‘Moses exists’ is not equivalent
to any statement of the form ‘Such-and-such properties are instantiated’, unless
you take the property of being Moses as the property in question. But if you did
so, this would be written out in the form that Frege did not like. It would mean,
essentially, ‘There is a y, such that y is Moses’.
Russell also held that existence is not a predicate.6 Explicitly what bothered him
about this property is that it would be trivially true of everything. As Russell says,
‘There is no sort of point in a predicate which could not conceivably be false. I mean,
it is perfectly clear that, if there were such a thing as this existence of individuals that
we talk of, it would be absolutely impossible for it not to apply, and that is the
characteristic of a mistake’ (Russell 1918–19:211). The premise Russell is using
here can be construed to be correct. It is necessary that everything exists, or that for
every x there is a y, such that y is x. It by no means follows that existence is a trivial
property, in the sense that everything has necessary existence. Symbolically, the
difference is between (x)Ex (the fact that Russell invokes) and (x)Ex, which
does not follow. Only if the second formula were true would the predicate attributing existence to individuals be trivial. I have discussed this confusion as a modal
fallacy in a technical paper on modal logic (Kripke 1971:70)7 If, in fact, the existence
of a particular object is contingent, we can say of that object that it might not have
existed and would not have existed under certain speciﬁed conditions. For example,
I would not have existed if my parents had never met. So Moore is right in saying,
as against Russell, that one can say of a particular that it might not have existed
under certain circumstances and mean nothing that has to be analyzed out in
terms of whether certain properties might or might not have been instantiated.8
6
Both Frege and Russell think that existence cannot be a predicate of individuals but identify it
with the ‘higher level’ property expressed when we attach an existential quantiﬁer to a one-place
predicate. Frege said that the error of regarding existence as a predicate of individuals rather than (in
his terminology) a second-level concept is the fundamental error of the ontological argument (see
Frege 1997:146, note H). Russell’s view is in fact similar to Frege’s, though formulated in terms of
his theory of descriptions, so that the illusion that there is a predicate of individuals can be
connected to the illusion that the descriptions are terms referring to objects. This is clear from
Quine, who writes: ‘Russell undertook to resolve the anomalies of existence by admitting the word
“exists” only in connection with descriptions, and explaining the whole context “( x)( . . . x . . . )
exists” as short for ‘(∃y)(x)(x = y. . . . . x . . . )’ . . . This course supplies a strict technical meaning for
Kant’s vague declaration that “exists” is not a predicate; namely, “exists” is not grammatically
combinable with a variable to form a matrix “y exists”’ (1940:151, citations omitted). But it is hard
to see how Frege or Russell could deny that ‘(∃y)(y = x)’ is a ‘ﬁrst-level concept’ (or predicate of
individuals) that deﬁnes existence. See the discussion below about necessary existence, and
Moore’s argument against Russell in note 8.
7
As I said in Kripke (1980:157–58), in which some of the views I am now stating are already
summarized, the use of ‘Sherlock Holmes’ as the name of an actual but not possible individual now
seems to me to be mistaken.
8
Moore writes:
[I]n the case of every sense-datum which any one ever perceives, the person in question could always
say with truth of the sense-datum in question ‘This might not have existed’; and I cannot see how

Ø

56

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

Now turn to the actual world. The view of Frege and Russell would assert that
to ask whether Sherlock Holmes really existed is to ask whether the story was
substantially true of someone (uniquely); and to ask whether Moses existed is to
ask whether the story was substantially true of someone. Let’s ﬁrst take the case
where it is not a work of ﬁction, where historians have concluded that the
characters really existed. I have discussed this case in Kripke (1980:67–68). In
the case of Moses existing, does an afﬁrmative answer imply that the story was
substantially true of someone? I think that here again Frege and Russell have
gone wrong, even in talking about the actual world. They fail to distinguish
between a legend that is completely a tissue of whole cloth about a mythical
character and a legend that grew up about an actual character. In the latter case
we may say that the stories which have reached us are legendary and were true of
no one, yet Moses or whoever else is mentioned in the story really existed. In fact,
I quoted a biblical scholar who says exactly that about Jonah.9
As I have emphasized about these cases, the reason that we can say that Jonah
really existed, though the stories which have reached us about him are substantially false, is that there is a historical chain of communication in which the name,
with perhaps linguistic changes, has reached us, leading back to the man Jonah
himself and the stories which were erroneously asserted about him.
Suppose the Sherlock Holmes stories were all true of one unique detective:
does that amount to concluding that Sherlock Holmes really existed? The dustjackets of many books of this type contradict such a thesis. The opening page
may say ‘The characters in this work are ﬁctional and any resemblance to anyone
living or dead is purely coincidental’. What is meant by this is that even if by
some bizarre accident the stories told in this work are substantially true of some
particular people, and even true of them uniquely, the resemblance is purely
fortuitous and was unknown to the author. (Actually, we might be suspicious of
such a claim, but surely it is not conceptually impossible.) They are not the
referents of the names that occur in the story, and it is just a coincidence that the
story is substantially true of them. If one of these people about whom the story
was true sued in court for invasion of privacy, or perhaps slander or libel, he
would not win the case solely on the basis of establishing that the story was
this could be true, unless the proposition ‘This does in fact exist’ is also true, and therefore the words
‘This exists’ signiﬁcant (1959:126).
Moore’s argument would obviously apply to a much larger class of objects than sense-data. (I think
the reason he is concerned with sense-data involves Russell’s ideas on logically proper names, in
particular that ‘this’ is always used as a logically proper name of a sense-datum.) And if one thought
that some objects (say, numbers) did have necessary existence, this would be a signiﬁcant fact about
each such object and should imply a fortiori that the object exists.
9
I could have stuck to Moses himself. The famous biblical scholar Martin Noth believed that
there really was a Moses but that (in contrast to Wittgenstein 1953:}79, quoted in Kripke 1980:31)
he had nothing to do with the exodus from Egypt or most of the best-known things related of him in
the Pentateuch. (The true core about him is ‘guidance into the arable land’.) This information was
probably unknown to me when I gave the present paper.

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

57

substantially true of him. The judge, if the coincidence were really established,
would rule against the plaintiff and against Frege, Russell, Wittgenstein, and
Searle.10 The reason, once again, lies in the lack of any historical connection to an
actual person, even though the beliefs are substantially true of the person.
This is enough by way of softening up. If the Frege–Russell theory is wrong,
then, of course, some account must be put forward in its place. But if their theory
(as standardly conceived) does not give an account of the problems of existence
and apparently empty names that is intuitively correct, then these problems do
not, in themselves, argue in favor of their theory as opposed to one emphasizing
reference rather than descriptive sense.
Let me take a stab at what a true account should be. There are really two
different issues. One is what kind of proposition is expressed using an actual
name, a name that really has reference: what is expressed when we make an
existential statement using that name? Assume that the name ‘Moses’ refers to a
certain man. When we say truly that Moses did exist, or if we said falsely that
Moses did not exist, or counterfactually, what would have happened if Moses
had not existed, we are always talking about that man. Existence is in this sense a
predicate. Of course, if the man is around he has got to satisfy the predicate,
and that makes it is a very special one. But although we could analyze this as ‘(∃y)
(y = Moses),’ we shouldn’t try to replace it by anything involving instantiation of
properties. When we say, ‘Moses might not have existed and under certain
circumstances would not have existed’, we are saying something about a certain
person, not about whether his deeds would have been accomplished under
certain circumstances. Quantiﬁed sentences, such as ‘Every (actual) person
might not have existed at all’, make perfect sense, and existence is a predicate
governed by a quantiﬁer.
As I have warned with respect to analogous cases in Kripke (1980), it doesn’t
matter that if Moses had not existed, people would not have been able to make
the negative existential assertion. Rather, since we can refer to Moses, we can
describe a counterfactual situation in which Moses wouldn’t have existed. It
matters not at all that in that situation people would not have been able to say,
‘Moses does not exist’, at least using ‘Moses’ the way we are using it here. Indeed,
I can describe a counterfactual situation in which I would not have existed, even
though if that were the case I wouldn’t be around to say it. It would be wrong to
identify the language people would have, given that a certain situation obtained,
with the language that we use to describe how circumstances would have been in that
situation. (I have sometimes run across this confused identiﬁcation, both in the
published literature and in discussion.)
10
I have later been told that my assertion would not be true in English libel law, which is very
favorable to plaintiffs, but would be true in U.S. law. I have not checked up on the matter. The
conceptual point I am making is not really affected (even if English law imposes something like
‘strict liability’ here).

58

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

What happens in the case of a work of ﬁction? A work of ﬁction, generally
speaking of course, is a pretense that what is happening in the story is really going
on. To write a work of ﬁction is to imagine—spin a certain romance, say—that
there really is a Sherlock Holmes, that the name ‘Sherlock Holmes’ as used in this
story really refers to some man, Sherlock Holmes, and so on. It is therefore
presumably part of the pretense of the story that the name ‘Sherlock Holmes’ is
really a name and really has the ordinary semantic function of names. If one
mistakenly believed the name to be non-empty rather than empty, it would be
part of the mistake that this is a name having the ordinary semantic function of
names. This principle I have roughly stated here, just as applied to works of
ﬁction, we can call the pretense principle. What goes on in a work of ﬁction is a
pretense that the actual conditions obtain.11 A work of ﬁction need not even
say that the names used in it are the ‘real names’ of the characters, the names
that their parents gave them or the correct ‘family name’, or what their friends
call them, and so on. In Lolita (Nabokov 1955),12 in fact, it is stated that the
names have been changed to protect the innocent. And that, too, is part of the
pretense.
11
Many other people have held something like this. But when I gave this talk, and even the
subsequent John Locke Lectures, I was simply unaware that this principle is enunciated by Frege.
See the following passage:
Names that fail to fulﬁll the usual role of a proper name, which is to name something, may be called
mock proper names [Scheineigennamen]. Although the tale of William Tell is a legend and not
history and the name ‘William Tell’ is a mock proper name, we cannot deny it a sense. But the sense
of the sentence ‘William Tell shot an apple off his son’s head’. . . I characterize . . . as ﬁctitious.
Instead of speaking of ‘ﬁction’, we could speak of ‘mock thoughts’ [‘Scheingedanke]. . . . Even the
thoughts are not to be taken seriously as in the sciences: they are only mock thoughts. If Schiller’s
Don Carlos were to be regarded as a piece of history, then to a large extent the drama would be false.
But a work of ﬁction is not meant to be taken seriously in this way at all: it is all play. Even the
proper names in the drama, though they correspond to names of historical persons, are mock proper
names; they are not meant to be taken seriously in the work. . . .
The logician does not have to bother with mock thoughts, just as a physicist, who sets out to
investigate thunder, will not pay any attention to stage-thunder. (Frege 1897:229–30)
There are various puzzles created by this passage, but the exegesis of Frege is not the main point here.
Three things, however, should be noted. First, Frege is the ﬁrst author I am aware of to have
emphasized that empty names in ﬁction, and the sentences that contain them, are pretenses. Second,
were the passage I am quoting to be given in full and expounded, it would not be clear that what I am
calling the ‘Frege–Russell’ view was really Frege’s view of the senses of names in ﬁction. Something like
it does appear to be Frege’s view of names of historical characters; it also appears to be the view of
certain contemporary Fregeans, such as Alonzo Church, for legend and ﬁction (see his remarks about
‘Pegasus’ in Church 1956: 7, note 18). However, the view of names in ﬁction one might deduce from
the passage quoted will be considerably different. (There is some difﬁculty understanding the passage,
making it self-consistent or consistent with what Frege says elsewhere.) Third, in the passage Frege says
that when a historical ﬁgure appears even by name in a ﬁctional work, the name is only a “mock proper
name”. If this means that it is not truly a name of the ﬁgure in question, or that it fails to refer to him or
her, I don’t think this is right. When in War and Peace Tolstoy mentions Napoleon, and has him as a
character in the work, he is talking about Napoleon (See Chapter 9.)
12
In the preface, the supposed editor of the manuscript says that the names are not real. For
example, ‘Humbert Humbert’, the name of the narrator and main character, is a pseudonym.

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

59

If this is so, the name, of course, doesn’t really have any referent, it is pretended
to have a referent; and if some view like Mill’s is right, and the semantic function
of naming is reference, then it follows that here we are only pretending to refer to
a certain person and say something about him. The propositions that occur in the
story, then, are not genuine propositions saying something about some particular
person; they are instead merely pretended propositions. This is not to say that the
sentences that occur in the story are meaningless in the strongest possible sense,
because one knows, so to speak, what kind of propositions they are pretending to
express. It could be (though maybe the supposition is fantastic) that in fact Doyle
had not written stories but historical accounts of actual events. In this case we
would be mistaken in believing that these sentences expressed no proposition. In
fact, we could in principle say that they did express a proposition. But they don’t,
on the view I’m suggesting, express any proposition at all if in fact the names
don’t refer. In particular, it should be required of a genuine proposition that we
should be able to say, of each possible world, whether the proposition allegedly
expressed by the sentence would or would not have been true under the
circumstances in question. If this test fails for the sentences in ﬁction, then
they do not express genuine propositions. And to my mind this test does fail
for the sentences in ﬁction.
Under what circumstances, to mention the case that I noted before, would
Sherlock Holmes have existed, given that the name in fact has no referent? Well,
not simply if someone or other would have done these things in the story,
because the name ‘Sherlock Holmes’ is supposed to refer to a particular person
rigidly. One cannot say, ‘Well, it does not designate a real person, but just a
(merely) possible person’, whether one likes such an ontology or not, because
many possible people might have done the things in the story. In fact, some
actual people might have done the things in the story, if the circumstances had
been different, in another possible world. Charles Darwin, if had he decided to
go into another line of work, might have made an excellent detective around
London at the time and fought with some analogue of Moriarty. This is not to
say of him, or of anyone else, that he would have been Sherlock Holmes or might
have been Sherlock Holmes. He could have played the role of Sherlock Holmes,
he could have fulﬁlled the stories that are told about Sherlock Holmes. But if the
pretense about Sherlock Holmes is that ‘Sherlock Holmes’ designates someone
rigidly, one cannot say which person would have been designated. There is no
criterion to pick out one as opposed to another; one should just say that this
name does not designate.13
I want to say something further about this question of pretense. Aside from the
philosophical doctrine of pretended propositions that I have, it seems to me
13
See Kripke (1980:156–58). Recall that when this talk was given, the lectures were fairly recent.
This section begins with a mythical natural kind term (‘unicorn’), but continues with ‘Sherlock
Holmes’.

60

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

obvious that any theory has got to start with the fact that these pretenses in ﬁction
are pretenses. It seems that people have worried and puzzled about empty names
as if their existence is a great paradox, and that it is very hard to ﬁnd a theory that
can possibly account for the possibility of such things. ‘If the function of naming
is reference, how could we have empty names?’ On the contrary, one has virtually
got to have empty names because given any theory of reference—given any theory
of how the conditions of reference are fulﬁlled—one can surely pretend that these
conditions are fulﬁlled when in fact they are not. Thus the existence of pretended
names (in ﬁction) cannot possibly adjudicate among different theories of names.
The question of whether empty names are possible particularly agitated
Russell. He wanted to get rid of the possibility of an empty name (for his notion
of logically proper names; names in the ordinary sense were supposed to be
abbreviated deﬁnite descriptions, could be empty, and were not really names;
see note 2). He restricted logically proper names to names of our immediate
sense-data, whose existence was supposed to be indubitable, but was also very
ﬂeeting.14 It was then an indubitable truth that the things so named exist.
Wittgenstein in the Tractatus (1961) makes the objects his names refer to part
of the necessary furniture of the world. Thus it is not possible that the things in
question should have failed to exist. These two strategies come from, of course,
the same motivation: in fact, as we know, they were working together.
It is interesting to point out that the conclusions to which they were led are not
identical but, in fact, incompatible and show the trouble of switching from
epistemic to metaphysical considerations. For surely our own immediate sensedata do not have any kind of necessary existence. Their existence is as contingent
as anything could be. I right now am receiving all sorts of visual impressions. Had
I not entered this room at all, or had I entered it blindfolded, these visual
impressions would never have existed. Their existence is therefore contingent.
14

As the following exchange shows:
Q.: If the proper name of a thing, a ‘this’, varies from instant to instant, how is it possible to make
any arguments?
Mr. Russell: You can keep ‘this’ going for about a minute or two. I made that dot [he had then put a
dot on the blackboard] and talked about it for some little time. I mean it varies often. If you argue
quickly, you can get some little way before it is ﬁnished. I think things last for a ﬁnite time, a matter
of some seconds or minutes or whatever it may happen to be.
Q.: You do not think that air is acting on that and changing it?
Mr. Russell: It does not matter about that if it does not alter its appearance enough for you to have a
different sense-datum. (Russell 1918–19:180)
Russell already thought in ‘On Denoting’ (1905) that the constituents of our propositions must be
objects of acquaintance, but what we are allowed to be acquainted with gradually became more and
more restricted as his work progressed. So-called names of things that are not objects of our
acquaintance are really disguised descriptions. The theory proposed in Russell (1918–19) is more
restrictive than earlier ideas. To Gideon Makin (well after this lecture was delivered) I owe the point
that for Russell sense-data were actually something physical, not strictly speaking to be identiﬁed
with visual impressions, as I tend to do in the text. This doesn’t affect the point that they are ﬂeeting
entities, as the cited interchange attests.

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

61

Lots of exegetes have wondered whether the objects of the Tractatus were in fact
the Russellian sense-data. Aside from internal evidence, one thing we can say is
that if they were, they would not fulﬁll the conditions laid down for objects in the
Tractatus.
At any rate, Russell hardly succeeds in avoiding the mere possibility of
empty names. If names are restricted to our own immediate sense-data, perhaps
it is the case then that one cannot doubt whether objects so-called exist. But one
can still spin a story, imagining oneself naming sense-data using pretended
names, which in the story are stated to be Russellian logically proper names,
though in fact they are the names of sense-data that one doesn’t have. Suppose,
for example, one such name were ‘Harry’, and ‘Harry’ is the name of some
particular sense-datum. It will then be true for me to say outside the story that
Harry does not exist, that there is no such sense-datum as Harry. So even
Russell’s theory does not avoid this difﬁculty. It seems to me impossible to
imagine that this difﬁculty could conceivably have been avoided; given that we
have a theory of reference, it can be part of the pretense of a story that the
conditions for this theory are fulﬁlled, even when in fact they are not. (It might
be possible to avoid any mistake as to whether one is really naming, but not the
possibility of ﬁction or pretense.)
So to get clearer about this problem, one must stop tying oneself up in knots;
one must recognize that pretenses that the conditions for semantic reference are
fulﬁlled will always be possible, regardless of what theory of reference one may
espouse. The degree of meaningfulness that a story has depends on our knowing
what is being pretended. In the case of Sherlock Holmes it is being pretended
that the name refers to a certain man and that certain things are being said about
him. That is not to say that the sentences which occur in the story express
genuine propositions in the sense that we can say under which counterfactual
circumstances they would have been true, because we cannot. What I’m saying
about pretense could be applied, mutatis mutandis, to mistakes and other cases
like that—error as opposed to pretense or ﬁction. (Russell does, perhaps, by his
certainty condition, avoid the possibility of mistake.) And one should not regard
it as strange that such errors can exist—one should regard it as natural and
inevitable.
Now to get a correct view on this matter, one has to separate the case of names
occurring in ﬁction—where, using them correctly, we can say that the character
doesn’t exist: for example, ‘Sherlock Holmes does not exist’—from cases where,
on the contrary, the name ‘Sherlock Holmes’ is used in such a way that it is true
to say that Sherlock Holmes does exist. It has been argued in the literature—for
example, by Hintikka (1962)—that, regarded as a logical inference, ‘I think,
therefore I am’, as stated by Descartes, would be fallacious. For, Hintikka says,
replace ‘I’ with ‘Hamlet’. Hamlet thought many things, but does it follow that
Hamlet existed? The sort of usage that Hintikka presumably has in mind is on a
true–false English test, where one asks:

62

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities
Hamlet was married—true or false?
Hamlet was indecisive—true or false?
Hamlet thought—true or false?

To mark the latter one false would be to call him a mindless character, which is
not the intent of the play. But what Hintikka’s argument fails to recognize is that
in this sense—in this special usage, where one is reporting on the play—‘Hamlet
existed’ would be true also, because within the play there really was such a person
as Hamlet. This is not trivial; sometimes on such a true–false test such a
statement should be marked ‘false’. For example, it is probable that according
to the play Macbeth’s dagger did not exist. Was the ghost of Hamlet’s father real,
or was Hamlet merely imagining things? In that case, I think the intent of the
play is that the ghost was real. In this sense, surely Hamlet really did exist, though
if he really thought there was a rat behind a curtain, there was no such rat. So the
inference ‘A thinks, therefore A exists’ holds up perfectly well against this alleged
counterexample to the inference pattern.15
In the play Hamlet they put on a play called The Murder of Gonzago. Let’s
suppose that, according to the play Hamlet, this isn’t supposed to be about any
historical character.16 One can then say, speaking within the play Hamlet, that
such a real person as Gonzago never existed and that Gonzago was merely a
ﬁctional character. Since Hamlet was a real person within the play, it would be
false to say that about Hamlet. So Gonzago was merely ﬁctional; Hamlet was a
real person. Whatever reasons there may be for free logic, the case of Hamlet (as
cited in Hintikka’s paper) is not one of them.17
Sometimes we say not that ‘Hamlet’ is an empty name, but that ‘Hamlet’ is the
name of a ﬁctional character. That seems to give the name a referent. Now,
should we take this as a misleading mode of speaking, or should we attribute to
ordinary language an ontology of things called ‘ﬁctional characters’? Well, the
scary phrase ‘things called “ﬁctional characters”’ suggests a negative answer. Are
there going to be ghostly entities around?
Now actually I think that the answer to my question is yes, and that ﬁctional
characters are not ghostly entities or merely possible entities—they are entities of
a certain sort that exist in the real world. We seem to existentially quantify over

15

H. P. Grice told me that this was his view also, though I do not vouch for every detail.
When I made such a supposition, I was only showing my own ignorance. Apparently, in fact,
the House of Gonzaga was an important group of Italian noblemen who ruled in Mantua and
elsewhere. (Why it is spelled ‘Gonzago’ in Shakespeare is unclear to me.) Years ago I talked to a
Shakespeare expert, who told me that a real Gonzago (presumably, a member of the House) was, in
fact, murdered, though there was no such play as The Murder of Gonzago as far as anyone knows.
However, I have been unable to verify this conclusively. In the text, I have let stand my supposition
that historically there was neither a murdered Gonzago, nor a play about such a murder.
17
In free logic the general inference pattern Fa∴(∃x) Fx is invalid. Also, (∃x) (x=a) is neither
valid nor does it follow in general from Fa. Whatever the motivations may be, the case of ‘Hamlet
thinks’, taken within the play, is no conﬁrmation of the need for free logic.
16

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

63

them when we say, ‘There was such a ﬁctional character as Hamlet’. Statements
of this form—they are not within the story, because within the story Hamlet is
not a ﬁctional character, though Gonzago is—are also not trivial, just as within
the story the afﬁrmative existence statements using ‘Hamlet’ are not trivial.
Here we can ask, ‘Was there such a ﬁctional character as Hamlet?’, and the
answer is ‘Yes’. Was there such a ﬁctional character as Gonzago? The answer
is ‘No’, because it is only the play Hamlet that says that there is a play The Murder
of Gonzago. There really isn’t any such play, and therefore there isn’t any
such dramatic character as Gonzago to appear in The Murder of Gonzago.
Speaking inside the play, we would say that Hamlet is a real person and
Gonzago a ﬁctional character. Speaking outside the play, we say that Hamlet is
a ﬁctional character and not a real person; Gonzago, on the other hand, is not a
ﬁctional character. That is, in a work of ﬁction there is said to be such a ﬁctional
character, but not outside that work of ﬁction.
It is important to see that ﬁctional characters so called are not shadowy
possible people. The question of their existence is a question about the actual
world. It depends on whether certain works have actually been written, certain
stories in ﬁction have actually been told. The ﬁctional character can be regarded
as an abstract entity which exists in virtue of the activities of human beings, in the
same way that nations are abstract entities which exist in virtue of the activities of
human beings and their interrelations.18 A nation exists if certain conditions are
true about human beings and their relations; it may not be reducible to them
because we cannot spell them out exactly (or, perhaps, without circularity).
Similarly, a ﬁctional character exists if human beings have done certain things,
namely, created certain works of ﬁction and the characters in them.
In ordinary language, we very often quantify over ﬁctional characters. Perhaps
such quantiﬁcation could be eliminated if it were always possible to replace the
original (quantiﬁed) sentence with a sentence describing the activities of people.19 But, for example, here is a conversation I once had. You have probably
heard how in the Bible the Israelites are often condemned to sacriﬁcing their
children to an evil deity called ‘Moloch’. There are biblical scholars who hold
that taking ‘Moloch’ to be the proper name of a deity was a mistake.20 There was
18
Van Inwagen (1977, 1983) seems to have rediscovered a very similar theory. I myself now
vaguely recall hearing a lecture by Michael Dummett that mentioned a distinction between empty
names and names of ﬁctional characters. If my recollection is correct, it could well have inﬂuenced
my ideas. Also, already in his paper ‘Imaginary Objects’, Moore (arguing against Ryle) says that, of
course, various ﬁctional statements of Dickens really are ‘about Mr. Pickwick’, but does not draw
any explicit conclusion about an ontology of ﬁctional characters. Nor does he seem to be defending
a Meinongian ontology. See Moore (1959:105).
19
Nevertheless, it is true that there are ﬁctional characters with certain properties, and anyone
who denies this is wrong.
20
In fact, among them was Otto Eissfeldt, and those who accepted his theory (see Eissfeldt
1935). I think that Eissfeldt’s theory may be less popular now than it was when I spoke, but this in
no way affects the example. The much earlier theory, attributed by Eissfeldt to Abraham Geiger,

64

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

not, in fact, any such pagan deity, and ‘Moloch’ meant a type of sacriﬁce, like
a burnt offering.21 And ‘to Moloch’ should really be translated ‘as a Moloch’, the
kind of sacriﬁce. So the idea that there was such a pagan deity was just a mistake.
I was explaining this to someone22 once and saying that on this account there was
no such god, and he said to me, ‘Of course there was not such a god. You don’t
believe in pagan deities, do you?’ This response reveals an ambiguity in what
I had said: one construal involves quantiﬁcation over real gods, in which it is
presumably already guaranteed that there is no such a god as Moloch; the
other construal involves quantiﬁcation over mythical entities, as in ‘Was there
such a (mythical) god?’ The answer might have been ‘yes’, but according to this
particular theory, turns out to be ‘no’. The term ‘god’ turns out to be ambiguous.
It may be used in such a way that only a pagan believer of the right kind would
recognize the existence of the gods on Mount Olympus. But usually we use it
otherwise—for example, when we ask, ‘How many Greek gods were there?’, ‘Can
you name any of the Greek gods?’, and the like.
Phrasing the question in terms of the existence of ﬁctional characters, the
answer to the question ‘Did Hamlet exist?’ is afﬁrmative, and we are not
reporting on what the story says. In the same way, the answer to the question
‘Was there such a deity as Moloch?’ may be afﬁrmative, contrary to Eissfeldt.
One has to make sure what kind of entity one is talking about here. If one asks,
‘Was there such a ﬁctional character as Hamlet?’ the answer is ‘yes’. And, of
course, one can ask of a ﬁctional character referred to as A and a ﬁctional
character referred to as B whether they are the same ﬁctional character; that
makes sense, too. In a rough and ready way the apparatus of quantiﬁcation and
identity over these ﬁctional characters is available to us in ordinary language.
They are not ghostly possible entities; they are abstract entities of a certain sort
that exist in virtue of the activities of people.
Many people have gotten confused about these matters because they have said,
‘Surely there are ﬁctional characters who ﬁctionally do such-and-such things; but
ﬁctional characters don’t exist; therefore, some view like Meinong’s, with a ﬁrstclass existence and a second-class existence, or a broad existence and a narrow
existence, must be the case’.23 This is not what I am saying here. The name
‘Hamlet’ as used in the story is not purporting to refer to a ﬁctional character, it is
purporting to refer to a person; and only when we speak outside the story can we
would also have the consequence that ‘Moloch’ was not the name of a pagan deity but came from a
misvocalization of ‘melech’ (‘king’ in Hebrew). Some recent commentators I have read (long after
this paper was delivered) accept that ‘Moloch’ did indeed name a pagan deity.
21
In fact, as I recall, it meant human sacriﬁce.
22
Harry Frankfurt.
23
At any rate, this is how Meinong is characterized by Russell in ‘On Denoting’. I confess that
I have never read Meinong and don’t know whether the characterization is accurate. It should be
remembered that Meinong is a philosopher whom Russell (at least originally) respected; the
characterization is unlikely to be a caricature.

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

65

say that no such person exists. When we say ‘There was such a ﬁctional character
as Hamlet’, we are not referring to a ghostly person—we are referring to a
ﬁctional character, one who really does exist, because people have written
works of a certain sort. As I said, ﬁctional characters are abstract entities of a
certain kind. There are also alleged ﬁctional characters that don’t exist—Gonzago is an example. However, there can be ﬁctional ﬁctional characters, such as
Gonzago. The predicate ‘ﬁctional’ can be iterated, and Gonzago is a genuine
ﬁctional ﬁctional character. There really is such a ﬁctional ﬁctional character,
even though there is no such ﬁctional character.24
The properties of ﬁctional characters can be various. Many are not those of
people (Meinongian or otherwise). Thus a ﬁctional character can be widely
popular or little read about, much discussed by literary critics, found in several
Shakespeare plays, invented by Conan Doyle, and so on. On the other hand, a
convention of our language allows us to elliptically25 attribute to them properties
in the works where they occur. Thus there was a ﬁctional detective who lived on
Baker Street, could draw conclusions from small details, and so on. There is a
ﬁctional character who was given a mission to kill his uncle, but there isn’t one
given a mission to kill his great-grandmother. (Or maybe there is; too many
works have been written, and quite likely I just haven’t heard about a relevant
work. Still, if there is such a work, I can say with conﬁdence that the respective
ﬁctional characters are not equally famous.)
Two sorts of things remain. First, I should mention, especially in light of the
fact that Putnam emphasized these cases, my views about imaginary substances,
as, for example, a magic elixir or unicorns. There, too, I would hold that one
cannot intelligibly say, as is usually said in the literature, that though there are in
fact no unicorns, unicorns might have existed. Why do I say that we cannot say
this? Well, unicorns in the myth are supposed to refer to a certain species, a
certain natural kind of animals. The term ‘tiger’ does not just mean ‘any old
animal that is yellow in color with black stripes’. An animal, whether existing in
fact or only counterfactually, even though it looked just like a tiger on the
outside, would not, if it were a reptile on the inside, be a tiger, as I have
emphasized (Kripke 1980:119–21, and elsewhere).26 Similarly, of course, something with a different chemical composition from water would not be water.
Hence the statement ‘water is H2O’ is a necessary truth.
If one is referring to an actual animal, one may of course pick it out by what
Putnam calls a ‘stereotype’ (Putnam 1975a), without knowing what its internal
structure is or how to differentiate it from other bogus things like fool’s gold or
24

Recall (see note 16) that the example is apparently incorrect, but I have kept up the pretense
that it is correct. Correct examples plainly do exist. Note that if Eissfeldt is right there is no such
ﬁctional character (god) as Moloch, but there is no such ﬁctional ﬁctional character either.
25
I mean that such a phrase as ‘in the relevant stories’ can be, and usually is, omitted.
26
The dictionary deﬁnition to which I refer is given there in full.

66

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

fool’s tiger. David Lewis once mentioned marsupial tigers to me, which might
come along. One need not be able to make the differentiation as a layperson, and
one may leave it up to the scientists, who may take a long time to do so, but we
can still refer to tigers. That is because tigers are around; we have historical causal
connections to them in the real world by virtue of which we can refer to them.
Those properties that determine their essence can be discovered empirically later;
when they are discovered, we can say which possible (or actual) animals resembling tigers wouldn’t have been (or are not) tigers.
The same thing, I say, holds of unicorns. If the story about unicorns had really
been true, then of course the animals would really be around and we could refer
to them and discover their internal structure later. But suppose the story is
completely false, that there is no connection with any actual animal. Then one
should not say that ‘unicorn’ in this story simply means (let’s say this is all the
story tells us) ‘that animal which looks like a horse and has a single horn’. One
should not say that ‘unicorn’ simply means any old animal like that because then
it would not be a pretended name of a species. In fact, one might well discover a
new fragment of the story that explains how sometimes people were misled by
animals that looked just like unicorns and mistook them for unicorns. These
fool’s unicorns commanded a high price on the market until their internal
structure was discovered. The story, however, does not specify the differences
in internal structure. ‘Unicorn’ is supposed to be the name of a particular species.
We are given a partial identiﬁcation of them; there are other criteria that would
pick them out from fool’s unicorns, but we are not told what these criteria are.
Nor can we say ‘Well, let’s wait for the biologists to ﬁnd out’, because biologists
cannot ﬁnd anything out about unicorns. Thus of no possible animal can we say
that it would have been a unicorn. One can merely say that it would look the way
unicorns are supposed to. If a possible world contained two very different species,
both fully conforming to the aforementioned story, one could not say which of
them would have been unicorns.
Speaking of the actual world, I want similarly to say that a mere discovery that
there were animals that answered entirely to whatever the myth says about
unicorns would not, in and of itself, constitute a discovery that unicorns really
existed. The connection, unlikely though this may be, could be purely coincidental. In fact the myth may say, ‘The species mentioned in this myth is
mythical, and any resemblance to any species extant or extinct is purely coincidental’. Let us suppose it does in fact say this. This shows that what one needs is
not merely the fact that the animals in the unmodiﬁed myth satisfy everything
that unicorns are supposed to satisfy, but that the myth was about them, that the
myth was saying these things about them because the people had some historical
and actual connection with them.
There are, then, two distinct theses here. First, we could ﬁnd out that unicorns
actually existed, but to ﬁnd this out we would not just have to ﬁnd out that
certain animals have the properties mentioned in the myth. We would have to

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

67

discover a real connection between the species and the myth—at least in the case
of a species that is highly biologically unspeciﬁed. If a precise biological speciﬁcation of it were given, the answer might be different. A complete description of
the internal structure (and perhaps a speciﬁcation of its place on the evolutionary
tree, genetic inheritance, and the like) might lead us to say, ‘By accident it turns
out that there is a species exactly like that’. But that is not what usually goes on in
stories and myths. Moreover, the way I have been putting it may be too
epistemic. I am not really talking about what we could ‘ﬁnd out’. I am giving
requirements for it to be true that unicorns actually existed, contrary to what we
normally think.27 However, were the speciﬁcations precise in the terms that
I have just mentioned, then, if a kind meeting these speciﬁcations (structure,
position on the evolutionary tree, etc.) actually existed, the story might arguably
be true, and genuine propositions about the kind in question might be expressed,
even in the (unlikely) case that the connection is purely coincidental.
Secondly—and this is another thesis—given that there are no unicorns, we
cannot say that unicorns might have existed or would have existed under certain
circumstances. Statements about unicorns, like statements about Sherlock
Holmes, just pretend to express propositions. They do not really express, but
merely purport to express, propositions. In the case of species, at least, this is true
when the myth has not fully speciﬁed a hypothetical species, as I have mentioned
in the previous paragraph. One cannot say when these sentences would have been
true of a counterfactual situation, and therefore no proposition can have been
expressed.28
However, something else should be said. Just as Sherlock Holmes was a
ﬁctional character, and there might or might not have been a mythical god
referred to by the biblical ‘Moloch’,29 so there really is such a mythical kind of
animal as ‘the unicorn’. This does not name a natural kind—even a Meinongian
27
If the term ‘unicorn’ does in fact go back to some real kind of animal, there are two
possibilities. One would be that unicorns really existed after all. Another is that a mythical kind
of animal is historically connected to a real kind. In the case of individual people, an analogue is
Santa Claus, a mythical character tracing back to a real historical person, Saint Nicholas (see Kripke
1980:93). Exactly when we should say, in the case either of animal kinds or of persons, that what is
now a mythical case grew out of a real one or whether misconceptions grew up about an actual
historical person or kind of animal is delicate. There may be borderline cases. We need not deal with
this further here.
28
Probably I ignored a nest of special technicalities when here, and in Kripke (1980), I talked
very informally of animal natural kinds, and even used the term ‘species’ in a relatively informal way.
There have been problems and disputes in the taxonomic literature on how ‘species’ should be
deﬁned and how larger and smaller natural kinds of animals should be deﬁned. Moreover, I pay no
attention to species where the male and the female may have very different internal structures (there
is always going to be some difference). Although I am not an expert in the chemical case either, talk
of chemical substances probably involves fewer issues. But here the examples of mythical species are
too good to pass up, and I hope that a rough and ready treatment gives a reasonable idea for these
cases.
29
Outside the Pentateuch itself, probably ‘Moloch’ occurs in later religious literature and is used
for a mythical god. My statements really should be conﬁned to the Pentateuchal usage.

68

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

natural kind—but once again an actual abstract entity, a ‘mythical beast’, as
I think I have seen in one dictionary.
Let me mention perhaps the stickiest point about the doctrine of pretending to
express a proposition. One may feel, very strongly, ‘How can the statement that
unicorns exist not really express a proposition, given that it is false?’ Against this,
I would say ﬁrst that it is not sufﬁcient just to be able to say that it is false; one has
to be able to say under what circumstances it would have been true, if any. And
there seems to be no clear criterion here. Nevertheless, there remains the question
of why we call this false. Why do we say ‘unicorns don’t exist’? Similarly, of
course, in the case of Sherlock Holmes.
I am not entirely sure of the answer to this, but I will say what I can. First,
I think the argument that ‘unicorns exist’ cannot express a proposition, or that
‘Sherlock Holmes really exists’ cannot express a proposition, is fairly conclusive.
Here, when I talk about ‘Sherlock Holmes really exists’ I am not using ‘Sherlock
Holmes’ to refer to the ﬁctional character; under this interpretation the name
does purport to refer to an existing entity. Nor am I using the sentence under the
convention that what counts as true is what the story says.
Suppose I am using the sentence to express an alleged proposition about a
detective, given to us by the story. Then I cannot say of a counterfactual situation
that it is correctly describable as one in which ‘Sherlock Holmes was fond of
cricket’, ‘Sherlock Holmes was a detective’, or ‘Sherlock Holmes exists’. This is
because when I think about them I cannot understand under what circumstances
they would have been true—let alone any other propositions about Sherlock
Holmes, like ‘Sherlock Holmes was the best detective of all time’. Some of these
statements are true and do express propositions when we are just reporting on
what is said in the story, but, as I said, that is not the sort of usage in question
here. (Similarly, sometimes one uses the statement just to say that the story says
or implies that p, but that is a different sort of usage.) Nor am I talking about
statements about ﬁctional characters. These have truth-value in describing actual
or counterfactual situations; in particular, such a ﬁctional detective does in fact
exist, but we can easily suppose counterfactual situations in which that detective
wouldn’t have existed, namely, situations where neither Doyle, nor (perhaps)
anyone else, wrote or conceived such stories.30
30
It would have been very tempting to fall back on the ﬁctional character, so that the problem of
‘Sherlock Holmes’ as an empty name would disappear. Moreover, statements with ‘Sherlock
Holmes’ have multiple ambiguities, on my view. They can be evaluated according to the story, or
be about the ﬁctional character (and such a character does exist); but, as we have seen, predicates
applying to people can attach to that abstract entity in a derivative way.
Nevertheless, not all empty names are also used as names of ﬁctional characters, nor am I sure that
there is always an analogous class of entities. In any event, ‘Sherlock Holmes does not exist’ does
look as if it has a usage under which it is true. Note, however, that this is a philosopher’s tenseless
usage. We are inclined really to say ‘Sherlock Holmes never existed’, similarly for ‘Vulcan’ (the
planet). To me ‘George Washington no longer exists, though he once did’ seems to be a reasonably
natural expression about a dead person, but I would be disinclined to put it as ‘George Washington

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

69

Nevertheless, one may feel very strongly that one should truly say ‘Unicorns
don’t exist’. I feel equally strongly, in fact, that one should say the same thing
about bandersnatches, the animals Lewis Carroll mentions in ‘Jabberwocky’
(1872). Presumably, the bandersnatch is a ﬁctional beast. According to the
story, it is also a very dangerous one. Of course, there is no such animal as a
bandersnatch; we can say ‘There are no bandersnatches’. But surely no one would
claim here that we can say that under certain circumstances bandersnatches
would have existed—that we are just not told enough about them. They are
just some dangerous sort of animal. Better get out of their way! They are also
‘frumious’. But who knows what that means (though no doubt it is a dangerous
or undesirable trait)? This does not prevent us from asserting ‘bandersnatches
don’t exist and never did’ or ‘there are no bandersnatches’. Then the argument
attempting to establish that ‘unicorns exist’ expresses a proposition on the basis
of an intuition that the sentence is false surely cannot be conclusive. Just because
we say ‘unicorns don’t exist’, it does not follow that we can compare possible
worlds with a concept of unicorns and declare that in it unicorns would have
existed or not. In the case of bandersnatches, the situation is even more blatantly
obvious.
Please do not say that bandersnatches would have existed if someone—even
Lewis Carroll himself, say—had written this very poem about a real animal, for
example, tigers, and so bandersnatches would have been tigers. This means that
as language would have developed in that counterfactual situation, the sentence
‘bandersnatches really existed’ would have expressed something true. Of course
that is the case, but that is talking about the language that Carroll would have
used in that situation. It is not talking about Carroll’s actual language as applied
to that situation. Plainly, using ‘bandersnatch’ as it is used in the poem, one
cannot say that this is a situation in which tigers would have been bandersnatches
(or that the sentence ‘tigers would have been bandersnatches’ is true). Tigers
would have been called ‘bandersnatches’, but one cannot say that they would
have been bandersnatches. We cannot say when something would have been a
bandersnatch any more than when some animal would have been ‘frumious’.
Although we can say ‘there are no bandersnatches’ or ‘bandersnatches don’t
exist’, this plainly does not imply that we would know what it would be like for
bandersnatches to have existed. Nor is an impossibility of the ordinary kind
involved, such as the necessary nonexistence of round squares. We do say
‘bandersnatches don’t exist’, and thus a certain sentence about bandersnatches
seems to have a truth-value, but this does not mean that sentences containing
‘bandersnatch’ express ordinary propositions. And this I regard as a very substantial problem; perhaps the commentators will have something to say about it.
They might just say that I’m wrong. David Kaplan, however, has expressed views
does not exist’. (I am taking it that here there isn’t a problem of an empty name either.) I might have
thought about this example after listening to a talk by Nathan Salmon.

70

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

very similar to mine at various points, and so it will be a problem for him, too. So
I don’t think he would be likely to say that I’m just wrong.
What can one say here? The same question arises for ‘Sherlock Holmes’. We
want to say, ‘Sherlock Holmes doesn’t exist’. One proposal might be to interpret
it metalinguistically rather than as about a person. Thus, one might say
that ‘Sherlock Holmes does not exist’ should be analyzed as meaning: ‘The
name “Sherlock Holmes” has no referent’. Then ‘Sherlock Holmes does exist’
should be analyzed as meaning ‘The name “Sherlock Holmes” does have a
referent’. And if one has a particular theory of reference, say a historical one,
one might continue the analysis further and say ‘Sherlock Holmes exists’ means
‘The chain goes somewhere’ and ‘Sherlock Holmes does not exist’ means ‘The
chain goes nowhere’.
I reject this on a bunch of grounds, already stated in effect above. Let me say
ﬁrst what I accept. Although it may not be a priori, it is close enough to a priori
for present purposes that Moses exists if and only if the name ‘Moses’ has a
referent, and that Sherlock Holmes exists if and only if the name ‘Sherlock
Holmes’ has a referent. That is the condition for the reference of the name. In
general, relationships like these hold and the material equivalence of metalinguistic statements and corresponding statements in the ‘material mode’ is automatically accepted.
However, neither in the case of the name ‘Moses’ nor in the case of ‘Sherlock
Holmes’ does this metalinguistic translation give an analysis that would apply to
counterfactual situations also. Counterfactually speaking, Moses might have
existed even though the name ‘Moses’ had no referent. This would be the case
if neither he nor anyone else had ever been called ‘Moses’. It is also true that the
name ‘Moses’ might have had a referent, where that referent might not have been
Moses.31 However, my greatest emphasis, stated above, has been this. If we say,
counterfactually, ‘If Moses had not existed, then such and such . . .’, or ‘If his
parents had never met, Moses would not have existed’, or simply ‘Moses might
not have existed’, we are speaking about this man and asking what might have
happened to him.
Our problem, then, is this. If we use negative existentials, hypothetically,
counterfactually, or whatever, we are normally supposing that we are talking
about a referent and asking what would have happened if it had not existed. On
the other hand, if we make the same statements categorically, we appear to be
31
When I said these things, I was really ignoring many complications. First, many people may in
fact be called ‘Moses’, and this is irrelevant. I would have to speak more carefully of ‘the referent’,
and say something about the referent of the name as we use it in certain discourses, or in the King
James translation, or whatever. I shouldn’t be implying anything about whether he was, or anyone
would have been, himself called ‘Moses’ in the ordinary sense of ‘called’. The name appears to be
ancient Egyptian, and is translated into Hebrew in the biblical original. It wasn’t really ‘Moses’, and
similar adjustments are needed for a literal description of the corresponding hypothetical situations.
But none of this matters very much.

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

71

repudiating the object itself and saying that the name used only purports to be a
name. Nor can we tell, simply by looking at a work, whether the Pentateuch or
Doyle’s stories, which strategy is appropriate. But don’t we wish to give the
statements in question a univocal analysis?
What I have said above about ﬁctional characters gives us some respite.
A name of a ﬁctional character has a referent. One might then suppose that the
name deﬁnitely has a referent (the ﬁctional character). It will be a matter of
empirical investigation, concerning a given work, whether it is about a ﬁctional
character or a real person.
However, I ﬁnd myself uneasy about invoking this as a complete solution.
There is an inclination to say ‘Sherlock Holmes never existed’. Atheists have
often been inclined to deny the existence of God, and perhaps sometimes they
mean to use it as an empty name.32 To use the example mentioned above, there is
the denial of Moloch that I quoted from Eissfeldt, but if Eissfeldt is wrong, one
could imagine two ancients arguing, with one saying that he believes in Jupiter
but not in Moloch (and the usage of a follower of Eissfeldt must be explained,
too, denying the existence of a particular mythical being). ‘The bandersnatch’
stands for a genuine ﬁctional species or kind of beast, but we are inclined to say
‘there are no bandersnatches’, meaning in this instance to deny the existence of
the kind (even though no one can say what a bandersnatch would have been).
What gives us any right to talk that way? I wish I knew exactly what to say. But
the following is a stab at it. We can sometimes appear to reject a proposition,
meaning that there is no true proposition of that form, without committing
ourselves to mean that what we say expresses any proposition at all. Thus,
without being sure of whether Sherlock Holmes was a person, or whether we
can speak of hypothetical situations under which ‘Sherlock Holmes did such and
such’ correctly describes the situation, we can say ‘none of the people in this
room is Sherlock Holmes, for all are born too late, and so on’; or ‘whatever
bandersnatches may be, certainly there are none in Dubuque’. Here we should,
strictly speaking, be able to say that there is no true proposition to the effect that
there are bandersnatches in Dubuque, without committing ourselves to the
existence of such a proposition at all. Then ‘Sherlock Holmes does not exist’,
‘there are no bandersnatches’, and so on, are limiting cases of the same principle,
really denying that there could be propositions of a certain kind at all.
In sum, I have stressed the following:
First, existence is a real predicate of individuals. Even though it may be trivial
that everything exists, many things have only contingent existence and might not
32

There might be some question about the term ‘God’ (see Kripke 1980:26–27). Here I am
taking it to be a name. However, it might be taken to be a description, ‘the unique divine being’,
and, if so, a Russellian analysis might be applied. (I am inclined to favor the ﬁrst view, even if the
reference is ﬁxed by description.) There has traditionally been an uncontroversial proper name for
God, but it is rarely found on the lips of ordinary speakers today.

72

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

have existed. Statements of this type should not be reduced to statements about
the fulﬁllment of properties.
Second, whether a work is truth or ﬁction is not equivalent to whether
existential statements asserting that some events occurring in the narrative
did or did not happen (or whether some properties instantiated in the narrative did or did not get instantiated). The coincidence may be strange, but it is
not impossible that things like these could have happened but had no connection
with the work.
Third, when one evaluates what is true according to the story, existential
statements have to be evaluated the same way as any others (not differently, as in
Hintikka’s case of ‘Hamlet thinks’ versus ‘Hamlet exists’ discussed above, Macbeth’s dagger, etc.).
Fourth, questions of the existence of ﬁctional characters, and other ﬁctional
objects, are empirical questions like any other, and sometimes have afﬁrmative or
negative answers. They depend on what ﬁctional works exist. Thus, there
certainly was a ﬁctional detective, widely read about at the time he was described
to exist, living on Baker Street, and so on. We have given examples, however,
where the existence of various ﬁctional or mythical objects can be dubious or
controversial, and have remarked that the term ‘ﬁctional’ can be iterated. We
may mistakenly believe in the existence of a ﬁctional character. Perhaps the most
striking case (not mentioned above) would be a case where we took something to
be a work of ﬁction when it was actually genuine history, written and so
intended.
Finally, I had a residue of questions that appear to involve genuinely empty
names and real assertions of nonexistence. These have just been discussed.33

REFERENCES
Beaney, M., ed. (1997). The Frege Reader. Oxford: Blackwell.
Carroll, L. [C. L. Dodgson]. (1872). Through the Looking Glass, and What Alice Found
There. London: Macmillan.
Church, A. (1956). Introduction to Mathematical Logic. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Davidson, D., and G. Harman, eds. (1972). Semantics of Natural Language. Dordrecht,
the Netherlands: D. Reidel.

33

I would like to thank Sam Wheeler and John Troyer for transcribing the original lecture. My
thanks to Jeff Buechner, Gary Ostertag, and Harold Teichman for their editorial advice, and
especially to Romina Padró for useful conversations and suggestions, and for her help in
producing the present version. This paper has been completed with support from the Saul
A. Kripke Center at the City University of New York, Graduate Center.

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

73

Eissfeldt, O. (1935). Molk als Opferbegriff im Punischen und Hebräischen, und das Ende des
Gottes Moloch. Halle (Saale), Germany: M. Niemeyer.
Evans, G. (1982). The Varieties of Reference. Ed. John McDowell. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Frege, G. (1897). ‘Logic’. In Posthumous Writings, ed. and trans. Hans Hermes, Friedrich
Kambartel, and Friedrich Kaulbach. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979.
Reprinted in part in Beaney (1997), 227–50; citations are to the reprint.
———. (1997). ‘Function and Concept’. In M. Beaney (1997), 130–48. Translated by
P. T. Geach. Originally published in 1891.
Gunderson, K. (1975). Language, Mind, and Knowledge. Minnesota Studies in the
Philosophy of Science, Volume 7. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Hintikka, J. (1962). ‘Cogito, Ergo Sum: Inference or Performance?’ Philosophical Review
71:3–32.
Kripke, S. (1963). ‘Semantical Considerations on Modal Logic’. Acta Philosophica
Fennica 16:83–94. Reprinted in L. Linsky (1971); citations are to the reprint.
———. (1973). Reference and Existence: The John Locke Lectures. Unpublished.
———. (1980). Naming and Necessity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. First
published in Davidson and Harman (1972), 253–355, 763–69.
Linsky, L., ed. (1971). Reference and Modality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Moore, G. E. (1933). ‘Imaginary Objects’, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society: Supplementary Volume XII: 55–70. Reprinted in Moore (1959), 102–14.
———. (1936). ‘Is Existence a Predicate?’ Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volume XV: 175–88. Reprinted, with apparent changes, in Moore (1959),
115–26; citations are to the reprint.
———. (1959). Philosophical Papers. London: George Allen & Unwin.
Nabokov, V. (1955). Lolita. New York: Random House. 1st ed., Paris: Olympia, 1955.
Putnam, H. (1975a). ‘The Meaning of “Meaning.”’ In Gunderson (1975). Reprinted in
Putnam (1975b).
———. (1975b). Mind, Language, and Reality: Philosophical Papers, Volume 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Quine, W. V. O. (1940). Mathematical Logic. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
———. (1960). Word and Object. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Russell, B. (1905). ‘On Denoting’. Mind 14:479–93.
———. (1918–19). ‘The Philosophy of Logical Atomism’. The Monist 28: 495–527,
and 29:33–63, 190–222, and 344–80. Reprinted in Russell (1988), 155–244.
———. (1988). The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell, Volume 8:The Philosophy of
Logical Atomism and Other Essays, 1914–19. Ed. John Slater. London: Routledge.
Salmon, N. (1998). ‘Nonexistence’. Noûs 32:277–319. Reprinted in Metaphysics, Mathematics, and Meaning: Philosophical Papers, Volume 1. Oxford: Clarendon, 50–90.
Searle, J. R. (1958). ‘Proper Names’. Mind 67:166–73.
Strawson, P. F. (1959). Individuals. London: Methuen.
van Inwagen, P. (1977). ‘Creatures of Fiction’. American Philosophical Quarterly
14:299–308.
———. (1983). ‘Fiction and Metaphysics’. Philosophy and Literature 7:67–77.

74

Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities

Whitehead, A. N., and Russell, B. (1910, 1912, 1913). Principia Mathematica.
3 Volumes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 2nd ed., 1925 (Vol. 1), 1927
(Vols. 2, 3).
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical Investigations. Trans. G. E. M. Anscombe. Oxford:
Blackwell.
———. (1961). Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. Trans. David Pears and Brian McGuinness. London: Routledge.

4
Outline of a Theory of Truth*

I . THE PROBLEM
Ever since Pilate asked, “What is truth?” (John XVIII, 38), the subsequent search
for a correct answer has been inhibited by another problem, which, as is well
known, also arises in a New Testament context. If, as the author of the Epistle to
Titus supposes (Titus I, 12), a Cretan prophet, “even a prophet of their own,”
asserted that “the Cretans are always liars,” and if “this testimony is true” of all
other Cretan utterances, then it seems that the Cretan prophet’s words are true if
and only if they are false. And any treatment of the concept of truth must
somehow circumvent this paradox.
The Cretan example illustrates one way of achieving self-reference. Let P(x)
and Q(x) be predicates of sentences. Then in some cases empirical evidence
establishes that the sentence ‘(x)(P(x)  Q(x))’ [or ‘(∃x)(P(x)  Q(x))’, or the
like] itself satisﬁes the predicate P(x); sometimes the empirical evidence shows
that it is the only object satisfying P(x). In this latter case, the sentence in question
“says of itself” that it satisﬁes Q(x). If Q(x) is the predicate1 ‘is false’, the Liar
* Presented in an APA symposium on Truth, December 28, 1975.
Originally it was understood that I would present this paper orally without submitting a prepared text.
At a relatively late date, the editors of The Journal of Philosophy (where this paper originally appeared)
requested that I submit at least an “outline” of my paper. I agreed that this would be useful. I received the
request while already committed to something else, and had to prepare the present version in tremendous
haste, without even the opportunity to revise the ﬁrst draft. Had I had the opportunity to revise, I might
have expanded the presentation of the basic model in sec. III so as to make it clearer. The text shows that a
great deal of the formal and philosophical material, and the proofs of results, had to be omitted.
Abstracts of the present work were presented by title at the Spring, 1975, meeting of the
Association for Symbolic Logic held in Chicago. A longer version was presented as three lectures
at Princeton University, June, 1975. I hope to publish another more detailed version elsewhere.
Such a longer version should contain technical claims made here without proof, and much technical
and philosophical material unmentioned or condensed in this outline.
1
I follow the usual convention of the “semantic” theory of truth in taking truth and falsity to be
predicates true of sentences. If truth and falsity primarily apply to propositions or other
nonlinguistic entities, read the predicate of sentences as “expresses a truth.”
I have chosen to take sentences as the primary truth vehicles not because I think that the objection
that truth is primarily a property of propositions (or “statements”) is irrelevant to serious work on

76

Outline of a Theory of Truth

paradox results. As an example, let P(x) abbreviate the predicate ‘has
tokens printed in copies of Philosophical Troubles, p. 76, line 4. Then the sentence:
ðxÞðP ðxÞ  Q ðxÞÞ
leads to paradox if Q(x) is interpreted as falsehood.
The versions of the Liar paradox which use empirical predicates already point
up one major aspect of the problem: many, probably most, of our ordinary
assertions about truth and falsity are liable, if the empirical facts are extremely
unfavorable, to exhibit paradoxical features. Consider the ordinary statement,
made by Jones:
(1) Most (i.e., a majority) of Nixon’s assertions about Watergate are false.
Clearly, nothing is intrinsically wrong with (1), nor is it ill-formed. Ordinarily
the truth value of (1) will be ascertainable through an enumeration of Nixon’s
Watergate-related assertions, and an assessment of each for truth or falsity.
Suppose, however, that Nixon’s assertions about Watergate are evenly balanced
between the true and the false, except for one problematic case,
(2) Everything Jones says about Watergate is true.
Suppose, in addition, that (1) is Jones’s sole assertion about Watergate, or
alternatively, that all his Watergate-related assertions except perhaps (1) are
true. Then it requires little expertise to show that (1) and (2) are both paradoxical: they are true if and only if they are false.
The example of (1) points up an important lesson: it would be fruitless to look
for an intrinsic criterion that will enable us to sieve out—as meaningless, or illformed—those sentences which lead to paradox. (1) is, indeed, the paradigm of
an ordinary assertion involving the notion of falsity; just such assertions were
characteristic of our recent political debate. Yet no syntactic or semantic feature
of (1) guarantees that it is unparadoxical. Under the assumptions of the previous
truth or to the semantic paradoxes. On the contrary, I think that ultimately a careful treatment of
the problem may well need to separate the “expresses” aspect (relating sentences to propositions)
from the “truth” aspect (putatively applying to propositions). I have not investigated whether the
semantic paradoxes present problems when directly applied to propositions. The main reason
I apply the truth predicate directly to linguistic objects is that for such objects a mathematical
theory of self-reference has been developed. (See also footnote 32.)
Further, a more developed version of the theory would allow languages with demonstratives and
ambiguities and would speak of utterances, sentences under a reading, and the like, as having truth
value. In the informal exposition this paper does not attempt to be precise about such matters.
Sentences are the ofﬁcial truth vehicles, but informally we occasionally talk about utterances,
statements, assertions, and so on. Occasionally we may speak as if every utterance of a sentence in
the language makes a statement, although below we suggest that a sentence may fail to make a
statement if it is paradoxical or ungrounded. We are precise about such issues only when we think
that imprecision may create confusion or misunderstanding. Like remarks apply to conventions
about quotation.

Outline of a Theory of Truth

77

paragraph, (1) leads to paradox.2 Whether such assumptions hold depends on
the empirical facts about Nixon’s (and other) utterances, not on anything
intrinsic to the syntax and semantics of (1). (Even the subtlest experts may not
be able to avoid utterances leading to paradox. It is said that Russell once asked
Moore whether he always told the truth, and that he regarded Moore’s negative
reply as the sole falsehood Moore had ever produced. Surely no one had a keener
nose for paradox than Russell. Yet he apparently failed to realize that if, as he
thought, all Moore’s other utterances were true, Moore’s negative reply was not
simply false but paradoxical.3) The moral: an adequate theory must allow our
statements involving the notion of truth to be risky: they risk being paradoxical if
the empirical facts are extremely (and unexpectedly) unfavorable. There can be
no syntactic or semantic “sieve” that will winnow out the “bad” cases while
preserving the “good” ones.
I have concentrated above on versions of the paradox using empirical properties of sentences, such as being uttered by particular people. Gödel showed
essentially that such empirical properties are dispensable in favor of purely
syntactic properties: he showed that, for each predicate Q(x), a syntactic predicate
P(x) can be produced such that the sentence (x)(P(x)  Q(x)) is demonstrably the
only object satisfying P(x). Thus, in a sense, (x)(P(x)  Q(x)) “says of itself” that
it satisﬁes Q(x). He also showed that elementary syntax can be interpreted in
number theory. In this way, Gödel put the issue of the legitimacy of selfreferential sentences beyond doubt; he showed that they are as incontestably
legitimate as arithmetic itself. But the examples using empirical predicates retain
their importance: they point up the moral about riskiness.
A simpler, and more direct, form of self-reference uses demonstratives or
proper names: Let ‘Jack’ be a name of the sentence ‘Jack is short’, and we have
a sentence that says of itself that it is short. I can see nothing wrong with “direct”
self-reference of this type. If ‘Jack’ is not already a name in the language,4 why
can we not introduce it as a name of any entity we please? In particular, why can
it not be a name of the (uninterpreted) ﬁnite sequence of marks ‘Jack is short’?
(Would it be permissible to call this sequence of marks “Harry,” but not “Jack”?
Surely prohibitions on naming are arbitrary here.) There is no vicious circle in
our procedure, since we need not interpret the sequence of marks ‘Jack is short’
before we name it. Yet if we name it “Jack,” it at once becomes meaningful and

2
Both Nixon and Jones may have made their respective utterances without being aware that
the empirical facts make them paradoxical.
3
On an ordinary understanding (as opposed to the conventions of those who state Liar
paradoxes), the question lay in the sincerity, not the truth, of Moore’s utterances. Paradoxes
could probably be derived on this interpretation also.
4
We assume that ‘is short’ is already in the language.

78

Outline of a Theory of Truth

true. (Note that I am speaking of self-referential sentences, not self-referential
propositions.5)
In a longer version, I would buttress the conclusion of the preceding paragraph
not only by a more detailed philosophical exposition, but also by a mathematical
demonstration that the simple kind of self-reference exempliﬁed by the “Jack is
short” example could actually be used to prove the Gödel incompleteness
theorem itself (and also, the Gödel-Tarski theorem on the undeﬁnability of
truth). Such a presentation of the proof of the Gödel theorem might be more
perspicuous to the beginner than is the usual one. It also dispels the impression
that Gödel was forced to replace direct self-reference by a more circumlocutory
device. The argument must be omitted from this outline.6
It has long been recognized that some of the intuitive trouble with Liar
sentences is shared with such sentences as
(3) (3) is true.
which, though not paradoxical, yield no determinate truth conditions. More
complicated examples include a pair of sentences each one of which says that the
other is true, and an inﬁnite sequence of sentences {Pi}, where Pi says that Pi+1 is
true. In general, if a sentence such as (1) asserts that (all, some, most, etc.) of the
sentences of a certain class C are true, its truth value can be ascertained if the truth
values of the sentences in the class C are ascertained. If some of these sentences
themselves involve the notion of truth, their truth value in turn must be
ascertained by looking at other sentences, and so on. If ultimately this process
terminates in sentences not mentioning the concept of truth, so that the truth
value of the original statement can be ascertained, we call the original sentence
grounded; otherwise, ungrounded.7 As the example of (1) indicates, whether a
sentence is grounded is not in general an intrinsic (syntactic or semantic)
property of a sentence, but usually depends on the empirical facts. We make
utterances which we hope will turn out to be grounded. Sentences such as (3),
though not paradoxical, are ungrounded. The preceding is a rough sketch of the
usual notion of groundedness and is not meant to provide a formal deﬁnition:
the fact that a formal deﬁnition can be provided will be a principal virtue of the
formal theory suggested below.8

5

It is not obviously possible to apply this technique to obtain “directly” self-referential propositions.
There are several ways of doing it, using either a nonstandard Gödel numbering where
statements can contain numerals designating their own Gödel numbers, or a standard Gödel
numbering, plus added constants of the type of ‘Jack’.
7
If a sentence asserts, e.g., that all sentences in class C are true, we allow it to be false and
grounded if one sentence in C is false, irrespective of the groundedness of the other sentences in C.
8
Under that name, groundedness seems to have been ﬁrst explicitly introduced into the
literature in Hans Hertzberger, “Paradoxes of Grounding in Semantics,” The Journal of
Philosophy, XVII, 6 (March 26, 1970): 145–167. Hertzberger’s paper is based on unpublished
work on a “groundedness” approach to the semantic paradoxes undertaken jointly with Jerrold
6

Outline of a Theory of Truth

79

I I. PREVIOUS PROPOSALS
Thus far the only approach to the semantic paradoxes that has been worked out
in any detail is what I will call the “orthodox approach,” which leads to the
celebrated hierarchy of languages of Tarski.9 Let L0 be a formal language, built
up by the usual operations of the ﬁrst-order predicate calculus from a stock of
(completely deﬁned) primitive predicates, and adequate to discuss its own syntax
(perhaps using arithmetization). (I omit an exact characterization.) Such a
language cannot contain its own truth predicate, so a meta-language L1 contains
a truth (really satisfaction) predicate T1(x) for L0. (Indeed, Tarski shows how to
deﬁne such a predicate in a higher-order language.) The process can be iterated,
leading to a sequence {L0, L1, L2, L3, . . . } of languages, each with a truth
predicate for the preceding.
Philosophers have been suspicious of the orthodox approach as an analysis of
our intuitions. Surely our language contains just one word ‘true’, not a sequence
of distinct phrases dtruene, applying to sentences of higher and higher levels. As
against this objection, a defender of the orthodox view (if he does not dismiss
natural language altogether, as Tarski inclined to do) may reply that the ordinary
notion of truth is systematically ambiguous: its “level” in a particular occurrence
is determined by the context of the utterance and the intentions of the speaker.
The notion of differing truth predicates, each with its own level, seems to
correspond to the following intuitive idea, implicit in the discussion of “groundedness” above. First, we make various utterances, such as ‘snow is white’, which
do not involve the notion of truth. We then attribute truth values to these, using
a predicate ‘true1’. (‘True1’ means—roughly—“is a true statement not itself
involving truth or allied notions.”) We can then form a predicate ‘true2’ applying
to sentences involving ‘true1’, and so on. We may assume that, on each occasion
of utterance, when a given speaker uses the word ‘true’, he attaches an implicit

J. Katz. The intuitive notion of groundedness in semantics surely was part of the folklore of the
subject much earlier. As far as I know, the present work gives the ﬁrst rigorous deﬁnition.
9
By an “orthodox approach”, I mean any approach that works within classical quantiﬁcation
theory and requires all predicates to be totally deﬁned on the range of the variables. Various writers
speak as if the “hierarchy of languages” or Tarskian approach prohibited one from forming, for
example, languages with certain kinds of self-reference, or languages containing their own truth
predicates. On my interpretation, there are no prohibitions; there are only theorems on what can and
cannot be done within the framework of ordinary classical quantiﬁcation theory. Thus Gödel
showed that a classical language can talk about its own syntax; using restricted truth deﬁnitions
and other devices, such a language can say a great deal about its own semantics. On the other hand,
Tarski proved that a classical language cannot contain its own truth predicate, and that a higherorder language can deﬁne a truth predicate for a language of lower order. None of this came from
any a priori restrictions on self-reference other than those deriving from the restriction to a classical
language, all of whose predicates are totally deﬁned.

80

Outline of a Theory of Truth

subscript to it, which increases as, by further and further reﬂection, he goes
higher and higher in his own Tarski hierarchy.10
Unfortunately this picture seems unfaithful to the facts. If someone makes
such an utterance as (1), he does not attach a subscript, explicit or implicit, to his
utterance of ‘false’, which determines the “level of language” on which he speaks.
An implicit subscript would cause no trouble if we were sure of the “level” of
Nixon’s utterances; we could then cover them all, in the utterance of (1) or even
of the stronger
(4) All of Nixon’s utterances about Watergate are false.
simply by choosing a subscript higher than the levels of any involved in Nixon’s
Watergate-related utterances. Ordinarily, however, a speaker has no way of
knowing the “levels” of Nixon’s relevant utterances. Thus Nixon may have said,
“Dean is a liar,” or “Haldeman told the truth when he said that Dean lied,” etc.,
and the “levels” of these may yet depend on the levels of Dean’s utterances, and
so on. If the speaker is forced to assign a “level” to (4) in advance [or to the word
‘false’ in (4)], he may be unsure how high a level to choose; if, in ignorance of the
“level” of Nixon’s utterances, he chooses too low, his utterance (4) will fail of its
purpose. The idea that a statement such as (4) should, in its normal uses, have a
“level” is intuitively convincing. It is, however, equally intuitively obvious that
the “level” of (4) should not depend on the form of (4) alone (as would be the
case if ‘false’—or, perhaps, ‘utterances’—were assigned explicit subscripts), nor
should it be assigned in advance by the speaker, but rather its level should depend
on the empirical facts about what Nixon has uttered. The higher the “levels” of
Nixon’s utterances happen to be, the higher the “level” of (4). This means that in
some sense a statement should be allowed to seek its own level, high enough to
say what it intends to say. It should not have an intrinsic level ﬁxed in advance, as
in the Tarski hierarchy.
Another situation is even harder to accommodate within the conﬁnes of the
orthodox approach. Suppose Dean asserts (4), while Nixon in turn asserts

10
Charles Parsons, “The Liar Paradox,” Journal of Philosophical Logic, III, 4 (October 1974):
380–412, may perhaps be taken as giving an argument like the one sketched in this paragraph.
Much of his paper, however, may be regarded as conﬁrmed rather than refuted by the present
approach. See in particular his fn 19, which hopes for a theory that avoids explicit subscripts. The
minimal ﬁxed point (see sec. III below) avoids explicit subscripts but nevertheless has a notion of
level; in this respect it can be compared with standard set theory as opposed to the theory of types.
The fact that the levels are not intrinsic to the sentences is peculiar to the present theory and is
additional to the absence of explicit subscripting.
The orthodox assignment of intrinsic levels guarantees freedom from “riskiness” in the sense
explained in sec. I above. For (4) and (5) below, the very assignment of intrinsic levels which would
eliminate their riskiness would also prevent them from “seeking their own levels” (see pp. 695–697).
If we wish to allow sentences to seek their own levels apparently we must also allow risky sentences.
Then we must regard sentences as attempting to express propositions, and allow truth-value gaps.
See sec. III below.

Outline of a Theory of Truth

81

(5) Everything Dean says about Watergate is false.
Dean, in asserting the sweeping (4), wishes to include Nixon’s assertion (5)
within its scope (as one of the Nixonian assertions about Watergate which is said
to be false); and Nixon, in asserting (5), wishes to do the same with Dean’s (4).
Now on any theory that assigns intrinsic “levels” to such statements, so that a
statement of a given level can speak only of the truth or falsity of statements of
lower levels, it is plainly impossible for both to succeed: if the two statements are
on the same level, neither can talk about the truth or falsity of the other, while
otherwise the higher can talk about the lower, but not conversely. Yet intuitively,
we can often assign unambiguous truth values to (4) and (5). Suppose Dean has
made at least one true statement about Watergate [other than (4)]. Then,
independently of any assessment of (4), we can decide that Nixon’s (5) is false.
If all Nixon’s other assertions about Watergate are false as well, Dean’s (4) is true;
if one of them is true, (4) is false. Note that in the latter case, we could have
judged (4) to be false without assessing (5), but in the former case the assessment
of (4) as true depended on a prior assessment of (5) as false. Under a different set
of empirical assumptions about the veracity of Nixon and Dean, (5) would be
true [and its assessment as true would depend on a prior assessment of (4) as
false]. It seems difﬁcult to accommodate these intuitions within the conﬁnes of
the orthodox approach.
Other defects of the orthodox approach are more difﬁcult to explain within a
brief outline, though they have formed a substantial part of my research. One
problem is that of transﬁnite levels. It is easy, within the conﬁnes of the orthodox
approach, to assert
(6) Snow is white,
to assert that (6) is true, that ‘(6) is true’ is true, that ‘“(6) is true” is true’ is true,
etc.; the various occurrences of ‘is true’ in the sequence are assigned increasing
subscripts. It is much more difﬁcult to assert that all the statements in the
sequence just described are true. To do this, we need a metalanguage of transﬁnite level, above all the languages of ﬁnite level. To my surprise, I have found that
the problem of deﬁning the languages of transﬁnite level presents substantial
technical difﬁculties which have never seriously been investigated.11 (Hilary
Putnam and his students essentially investigated—under the guise of a superﬁcially completely different description and mathematical motivation—the problem for the special case where we start at the lowest level with the language of
elementary number theory.) I have obtained various positive results on the
problem, and there are also various negative results; they cannot be detailed
here. But in the present state of the literature, it should be said that if the “theory
11
The problem of transﬁnite levels is perhaps not too difﬁcult to solve in a canonical way at level
o, but it becomes increasingly acute at higher ordinal levels.

82

Outline of a Theory of Truth

of language levels” is meant to include an account of transﬁnite levels, then one of
the principal defects of the theory is simply the nonexistence of the theory. The
existing literature can be said to deﬁne “Tarski’s hierarchy of languages” only for
ﬁnite levels, which is hardly adequate. My own work includes an extension of the
orthodox theory to transﬁnite levels, but it is as yet incomplete. Lack of space not
only prevents me from describing the work; it prevents me from mentioning the
mathematical difﬁculties that make the problem highly nontrivial.
Other problems can only be mentioned. One surprise to me was the fact that
the orthodox approach by no means obviously guarantees groundedness in the
intuitive sense mentioned above. The concept of truth for 1 arithmetical
statements is itself 1, and this fact can be used to construct statements of the
form of (3). Even if unrestricted truth deﬁnitions are in question, standard
theorems easily allow us to construct a descending chain of ﬁrst-order languages
L0, L1, L2, . . . , such that Li contains a truth predicate for Li+1. I don’t know
whether such a chain can engender ungrounded sentences, or even quite how to
state the problem here; some substantial technical questions in this area are yet to
be solved.
Almost all the extensive recent literature seeking alternatives to the orthodox
approach—I would mention especially the writings of Bas van Fraassen and
Robert L. Martin12—agrees on a single basic idea: there is to be only one truth
predicate, applicable to sentences containing the predicate itself; but paradox is
to be avoided by allowing truth-value gaps and by declaring that paradoxical
sentences in particular suffer from such a gap. These writings seem to me to suffer
sometimes from a minor defect and almost always from a major defect. The
minor defect is that some of these writings criticize a strawmannish version of the
orthodox approach, not the genuine article.13 The major defect is that these
writings almost invariably are mere suggestions, not genuine theories. Almost
never is there any precise semantical formulation of a language, at least rich

12

See Martin, ed., The Paradox of the Liar (New Haven: Yale, 1970) and the references given

there.
13

See fn 9 above. Martin, for example, in his papers “Toward a Solution to the Liar Paradox,”
Philosophical Review, LXXVI, 3 (July 1967): 279–311, and “On Grelling’s Paradox,” ibid., LXXVII, 3
(July 1968): 325–331, attributes to “the theory of language levels” all kinds of restrictions on selfreference which must be regarded as simply refuted, even for classical languages, by Gödel’s work.
Perhaps there are or have been some theorists who believed that all talk of an object language must
take place in a distinct metalanguage. This hardly matters; the main issue is: what constructions can
be carried out within a classical language, and what require truth-value gaps? Almost all the cases of
self-reference Martin mentions can be carried out by orthodox Gödelian methods without any need
to invoke partially deﬁned predicates or truth-value gaps. In fn 5 of his second paper Martin takes
some notice of Gödel’s demonstration that sufﬁciently rich languages contain their own syntax, but
he seems not to realize that this work makes most of his polemics against “language levels” irrelevant.
At the other extreme, some writers still seem to think that some kind of general ban on selfreference is helpful in treating the semantic paradoxes. In the case of self-referential sentences, such a
position seems to me to be hopeless.

Outline of a Theory of Truth

83

enough to speak of its own elementary syntax (either directly or via arithmetization) and containing its own truth predicate. Only if such a language were set up
with formal precision could it be said that a theory of the semantic paradoxes has
been presented. Ideally, a theory should show that the technique can be applied
to arbitrarily rich languages, no matter what their “ordinary” predicates other
than truth. And there is yet another sense in which the orthodox approach
provides a theory while the alternative literature does not. Tarski shows how,
for a classical ﬁrst-order language whose quantiﬁers range over a set, he can give a
mathematical deﬁnition of truth, using the predicates of the object language plus
set theory (higher-order logic). The alternative literature abandons the attempt at
a mathematical deﬁnition of truth, and is content to take it as an intuitive
primitive. Only one paper in the “truth-gap” genre that I have read—a recent
paper by Martin and Peter Woodruff14—comes close even to beginning an
attempt to satisfy any of these desiderata for a theory. Nevertheless the inﬂuence
of this literature on my own proposal will be obvious.15

I I I . THE PRESENT PROPOSAL
I do not regard any proposal, including the one to be advanced here, as deﬁnitive
in the sense that it gives the interpretation of the ordinary use of ‘true’, or the
solution to the semantic paradoxes. On the contrary, I have not at the moment
thought through a careful philosophical justiﬁcation of the proposal, nor am
I sure of the exact areas and limitations of its applicability. I do hope that the model
given here has two virtues: ﬁrst, that it provides an area rich in formal structure and
mathematical properties; second, that to a reasonable extent these properties capture
important intuitions. The model, then, is to be tested by its technical fertility.
It need not capture every intuition, but it is hoped that it will capture many.
Following the literature mentioned above, we propose to investigate languages
allowing truth-value gaps. Under the inﬂuence of Strawson,16 we can regard a
14
“On Representing ‘True-in-L’ in L,” Philosophia, 5, (1975): 217–221. In the terminology of
the present paper, the paper by Martin and Woodruff proves the existence of maximal ﬁxed points
(not the minimal ﬁxed point) in the context of the weak three-valued approach. It does not develop
the theory much further. See Although it partially anticipates the present approach, it was unknown
to me when I did the work.
15
Actually I was familiar with relatively little of this literature when I began work on the
approach given here. Even now I am unfamiliar with a great deal of it, so that tracing
connections is difﬁcult. Martin’s work seems, in its formal consequences if not its philosophical
basis, to be closest to the present approach.
There is also a considerable literature on three-valued or similar approaches to the set-theoretical
paradoxes, with which I am not familiar in detail but which seems fairly closely related to the present
approach. I should mention Gilmore, Fitch, Feferman.
16
I am interpreting Strawson as holding that ‘the present king of France is bald’ fails to make a
statement but is still meaningful, because it gives directions (conditions) for making a statement.
I apply this to the paradoxical sentences, without committing myself on his original case of

84

Outline of a Theory of Truth

sentence as an attempt to make a statement, express a proposition, or the like.
The meaningfulness or well-formedness of the sentence lies in the fact that
there are speciﬁable circumstances under which it has determinate truth conditions (expresses a proposition), not that it always does express a proposition.
A sentence such as (1) is always meaningful, but under various circumstances
it may not “make a statement” or “express a proposition.” (I am not attempting
to be philosophically completely precise here.)
To carry out these ideas, we need a semantical scheme to handle predicates
that may be only partially deﬁned. Given a nonempty domain D, a monadic
predicate P(x) is interpreted by a pair (S1, S2) of disjoint subsets of D. S1 is the
extension of P(x) and S2 is its anti-extension. P(x) is to be true of the objects in S1,
false of those in S2, undeﬁned otherwise. The generalization to n-place predicates
is obvious.
One appropriate scheme for handing connectives is Kleene’s strong threevalued logic. Let us suppose that P is true (false) if P is false (true), and
undeﬁned if P is undeﬁned. A disjunction is true if at least one disjunct is
true regardless of whether the other disjunct is true, false, or undeﬁned17; it is
false if both disjuncts are false; undeﬁned, otherwise. The other truth functions
can be deﬁned in terms of disjunction and negation in the usual way. (In
particular, then, a conjunction will be true if both conjuncts are true, false if at
least one conjunct is false, and undeﬁned otherwise.) (∃x)A(x) is true if A(x) is
true for some assignment of an element of D to x; false if A(x) is false for all
assignments to x, and undeﬁned otherwise. (x)A(x) can be deﬁned as (∃x) A
(x). It therefore is true if A(x) is true for all assignments to x, false if A(x) is false
for at least one such assignment, and undeﬁned otherwise. We could convert
the preceding into a more precise formal deﬁnition of satisfaction, but we won’t
bother.18
descriptions. It should be stated that Strawson’s doctrine is somewhat ambiguous and that I have
chosen a preferred interpretation, which I think Strawson also prefers today.
17
Thus the disjunction of ‘snow is white’ with a Liar sentence will be true. If we had regarded a
Liar sentence as meaningless, presumably we would have had to regard any compound containing
it as meaningless also. Since we don’t regard such a sentence as meaningless, we can adopt
the approach taken in the text.
18
The valuation rules are those of S. C. Kleene, Introduction to Metamathematics (New York:
Van Nostrand, 1952), sec. 64, pp. 332–340. Kleene’s notion of regular tables is equivalent (for the
class of valuations he considers) to our requirement of the monotonicity of  below.
I have been amazed to hear my use of the Kleene valuation compared occasionally to the
proposals of those who favor abandoning standard logic “for quantum mechanics,” or positing
extra truth values beyond truth and falsity, etc. Such a reaction surprised me as much as it would
presumably surprise Kleene, who intended (as I do here) to write a work of standard mathematical
results, provable in conventional mathematics. “Undeﬁned” is not an extra truth value, any more
than—in Kleene’s book— is an extra number in sec. 63. Nor should it be said that “classical logic”
does not generally hold, any more than (in Kleene) the use of partially deﬁned functions invalidates
the commutative law of addition. If certain sentences express propostitions, any tautological truth
function of them expresses a true proposition. Of course formulas, even with the forms of
tautologies, which have components that do not express propositions may have truth functions

Outline of a Theory of Truth

85

We wish to capture an intuition of somewhat the following kind. Suppose we are
explaining the word ‘true’ to someone who does not yet understand it. We may say
that we are entitled to assert (or deny) of any sentence that it is true precisely under
the circumstances when we can assert (or deny) the sentence itself. Our interlocutor
then can understand what it means, say, to attribute truth to (6) (‘snow is white’) but
he will still be puzzled about attributions of truth to sentences containing the word
‘true’ itself. Since he did not understand these sentences initially, it will be equally
nonexplanatory, initially, to explain to him that to call such a sentence “true”
(“false”) is tantamount to asserting (denying) the sentence itself.
Nevertheless, with more thought the notion of truth as applied even to various
sentences themselves containing the word ‘true’ can gradually become clear.
Suppose we consider the sentence,
(7) Some sentence printed in the New York Daily News, October 7, 1971, is true.
(7) is a typical example of a sentence involving the concept of truth itself. So if
(7) is unclear, so still is
(8) (7) is true.
However, our subject, if he is willing to assert ‘snow is white’, will according to
the rules be willing to assert ‘(6) is true’. But suppose that among the assertions
printed in the New York Daily News, October 7, 1971, is (6) itself. Since our
subject is willing to assert ‘(6) is true’, and also to assert ‘(6) is printed in the New
York Daily News, October 7, 1971’, he will deduce (7) by existential generalization. Once he is willing to assert (7), he will also be willing to assert (8). In this
manner, the subject will eventually be able to attribute truth to more and more
statements involving the notion of truth itself. There is no reason to suppose that
all statements involving ‘true’ will become decided in this way, but most will.
Indeed, our suggestion is that the “grounded” sentences can be characterized as
those which eventually get a truth value in this process.
A typically ungrounded sentence such as (3) will, of course, receive no truth
value in the process just sketched. In particular, it will never be called “true.” But
the subject cannot express this fact by saying, “(3) is not true.” Such an assertion
would conﬂict directly with the stipulation that he should deny that a sentence is
true precisely under the circumstances under which he would deny the sentence
itself. In imposing this stipulation, we have made a deliberate choice (see below).
Let us see how we can give these ideas formal expression. Let L be an
interpreted ﬁrst-order language of the classical type, with a ﬁnite (or even
that do not express propositions either. (This happens under the Kleene valuation, but not under the
van Fraassen.) Mere conventions for handling terms that do not designate numbers should not be
called changes in arithmetic; conventions for handling sentences that do not express propositions are
not in any philosophically signiﬁcant sense “changes in logic.” The term ‘three-valued logic’,
occasionally used here, should not mislead. All our considerations can be formalized in a classical
metalanguage.

86

Outline of a Theory of Truth

denumerable) list of primitive predicates. It is assumed that the variables range
over some nonempty domain D, and that the primitive n-ary predicates are
interpreted by (totally deﬁned) n-ary relations on D. The interpretation of the
predicates of L is kept ﬁxed throughout the following discussion. Let us also
assume that the language L is rich enough so that the syntax of L (say, via
arithmetization) can be expressed in L, and that some coding scheme codes ﬁnite
sequences of elements of D into elements of D. We do not attempt to make these
ideas rigorous; Y. N. Moschovakis’s notion of an “acceptable” structure would do
so.19 I should emphasize that a great deal of what we do below goes through
under much weaker hypotheses on L.20
Suppose we extend L to a language L by adding a monadic predicate T(x)
whose interpretation need only be partially deﬁned. An interpretation of T(x) is
given by a “partial set” (S1, S2), where S1, as we said above, is the extension of T
(x), S2 is the antiextension of T(x), and T(x) is undeﬁned for entities outside S1 [
S2. Let L(S1, S2) be the interpretation of L which results from interpreting T(x)
by the pair (S1, S2), the interpretation of the other predicates of L remaining
0
0
as before.21 Let S1 be the set of (codes of)22 true sentences of L(S1, S2), and let S2
be the set of all elements of D which either are not (codes of) sentences of
0
0
L(S1, S2) or are (codes of) false sentences of L(S1, S2). S1 and S2 are uniquely
determined by the choice of (S1, S2). Clearly, if T(x) is to be interpreted as truth
0
for the very language L containing T(x) itself, we must have S1 ¼ S1 and
0
S2 ¼ S2 . [This means that if A is any sentence, A satisﬁes (falsiﬁes) T(x) iff A
is true (false) by the evaluation rules.]
A pair (S1, S2) that satisﬁes this condition is called a ﬁxed point. For a
0
0
given choice of (S1, S2) to interpret T(x), set fððS1 ; S2 ÞÞ ¼ ðS1 ; S2 Þ.  then is
a unary function deﬁned on all pairs (S1, S2) of disjoint subsets of D, and the
“ﬁxed points” (S1, S2) are literally the ﬁxed points of ; i.e., they are those pairs
(S1, S2) such that ((S1, S2)) = (S1, S2). If (S1, S2) is a ﬁxed point, we sometimes
call L(S1, S2) a ﬁxed point also. Our basic task is to prove the existence of ﬁxed
points, and to investigate their properties.
Let us ﬁrst construct a ﬁxed point. We do so by considering a certain
“hierarchy of languages.” We start by deﬁning the interpreted language L0 as
19
Elementary Induction on Abstract Structures (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1974). The notion
of an acceptable structure is developed in chap. 5.
20
It is unnecessary to suppose, as we have for simplicity, that all the predicates in L are totally
deﬁned. The hypothesis that L contain a device for coding ﬁnite sequences is needed only if we are
adding satisfaction rather than truth to L. Other hypotheses can be made much weaker for most of
the work.
21
L is thus a language with all predicates but the single predicate T(x) interpreted, but T(x) is
uninterpreted. The languages L(S1, S2) and the languages La deﬁned below are languages obtained
from L by specifying an interpretation of T(x).
22
I parenthetically write “codes of” or “Gödel numbers of ” in various places to remind the
reader that syntax may be represented in L by Gödel numbering or some other coding device.
Sometimes I lazily drop the parenthetical qualiﬁcation, identifying expressions with their codes.

Outline of a Theory of Truth

87

L(, ), where  is the empty set; i.e., L0 is the language where T(x) is
completely undeﬁned. (It is never a ﬁxed point.) For any integer a, suppose we
0
0
0
have deﬁned La = L(S1, S2). Then set Laþ1 ¼ LðS1 ; S2 Þ, where as before S1 is
0
the set of (codes of) true sentences of La, and S2 is the set of all elements of D which
either are not (codes of) sentences of La or are (codes of) false sentences of La.
The hierarchy of languages just given is analogous to the Tarski hierarchy for
the orthodox approach. T(x) is interpreted in La+1 as the truth predicate for La.
But an interesting phenomenon, detailed in the following paragraphs, arises on
the present approach.
Let us say that (S1{, S2{) extends (S1, S2) [symbolically, (S1{, S2{) (S1, S2) or
(S1, S2)  (S1{, S2{)] iff S1 S1{, S2 S2{. Intuitively this means that if T(x) is
interpreted as (S1{, S2{), the interpretation agrees with the interpretation by (S1,
S2) in all cases where the latter is deﬁned; the only difference is that an interpretation by (S1{, S2{) may lead T(x) to be deﬁned for some cases where it was
undeﬁned when interpreted by (S1, S2). Now a basic property of our valuation
rules is the following:  is a monotone (order-preserving) operation on : that is,
if (S1, S2)  (S1{, S2{), ((S1, S2))  ((S1{, S2{)). In other words, if (S1, S2) 
(S1{, S2{), then any sentence that is true (or false) in L(S1, S2) retains its truth value
in L(S1{, S2{). What this means is that if the interpretation of T(x) is extended by
giving it a deﬁnite truth value for cases that were previously undeﬁned, no truth value
previously established changes or becomes undeﬁned; at most, certain previously
undeﬁned truth values become deﬁned. This property—technically, the monotonicity of —is crucial for all our constructions.
Given the monotonicity of , we can deduce that for each a, the interpretation
of T(x) in La+1 extends the interpretation of T(x) in La. The fact is obvious for
a = 0: since, in L0, T(x) is undeﬁned for all x, any interpretation of T(x)
automatically extends it. If the assertion holds for Lb—that is, if the interpretation of T(x) in Lb+1 extends that of T(x) in Lb—then any sentence true or false
in Lb remains true or false in Lb+1. If we look at the deﬁnitions, this says that the
interpretation of T(x) in Lb+2 extends the interpretation of T(x) in Lb+1. We have
thus proved by induction that the interpretation of T(x) in La+1 always extends the
interpretation of T(x) in La for all ﬁnite a. It follows that the predicate T(x)
increases, in both its extension and its antiextension, as a increases. More and more
sentences get declared true or false as a increases; but once a sentence is declared true or
false, it retains its truth value at all higher levels.
So far, we have deﬁned only ﬁnite levels of our hierarchy. For ﬁnite a, let (S1, a,
S2, a) be the interpretation of T(x) in La. Both S1, a and S2, a increase (as sets) as a
increases. Then there is an obvious way of deﬁning the ﬁrst “transﬁnite” level—
call it “Lo.” Simply deﬁne Lo = L(S1, o, S2, o), where S1, o is the union of all
S1, a for ﬁnite a, and S2, o is similarly the union of S2, a for ﬁnite a. Given Lo, we
can then deﬁne Lo+1, Lo+2, Lo+3, etc., just as we did for the ﬁnite levels. When
we get again to a “limit” level, we take a union as before.

88

Outline of a Theory of Truth

Formally, we deﬁne the languages La for each ordinal a. If a is a successor
ordinal (a = b + 1), let La = L(S1, a, S2, a), where S1, a is the set of (codes of) true
sentences of Lb, and S2, a is the set consisting of all elements of D which either
are (codes of) false sentences of Lb or are not (codes of) sentences of Lb. If l is a
limit ordinal, Ll = L(S1, l, S2, l), where S1, l = Ub<lS1, b, S2, l = Ub<lS2, b. So at
“successor” levels we take the truth predicate over the previous level, and, at limit
(transﬁnite) levels, we take the union of all sentences declared true or false at
previous levels. Even with the transﬁnite levels included, it remains true that the
extension and the antiextension of T(x) increase with increasing a.
It should be noted that ‘increase’ does not mean “strictly increase”; we have
asserted that Si, a Si, a+1 (i = 1,2), which allows equality. Does the process go on
forever with more and more statements being declared true or false, or does it
eventually stop? That is to say, is there an ordinal level s for which S1, s = S1, s+1
and S2, s = S2, s+1, so that no “new” statements are declared true or false at the
next level? The answer must be afﬁrmative. The sentences of L form a set. If new
sentences of L were being decided at each level, we would eventually exhaust L at
some level and be unable to decide any more. This can easily be converted to a
formal proof (the technique is elementary and is well known to logicians) that
there is an ordinal level s such that (S1, s, S2, s) = (S1, s+1, S2, s+1). But since
(S1, s+1, S2, s+1) = ((S1, s, S2, s)), this means that (S1, s, S2, s) is a ﬁxed point.
It can also be proved that it is a “minimal” or “smallest” ﬁxed point: any ﬁxed
point extends (S1, s, S2, s). That is, if a sentence is valuated as true or false in Ls,
it has the same truth value in any ﬁxed point.
Let us relate the construction of a ﬁxed point just given to our previous intuitive
ideas. At the initial stage (L0), T(x) is completely undeﬁned. This corresponds to
the initial stage at which the subject has no understanding of the notion of truth.
Given a characterization of truth by the Kleene valuation rules, the subject can
easily ascend to the level of L1. That is, he can evaluate various statements as true or
false without knowing anything about T(x)—in particular, he can evaluate all
those sentences not containing T(x). Once he has made the evaluation, he extends
T(x), as in L1. Then he can use the new interpretation of T(x) to evaluate more
sentences as true or false and ascend to L2, etc. Eventually, when the process
becomes “saturated,” the subject reaches the ﬁxed point Ls. (Being a ﬁxed point,
Ls is a language that contains its own truth predicate.) So the formal deﬁnition just
given directly parallels the intuitive constructions stated previously.23
23
A comparison with the Tarski hierarchy:
The Tarski hierarchy uses a new truth predicate at each level, always changing. The limit levels of
the Tarski hierarchy, which have not been deﬁned in the literature, but have been to some extent in
my own work, are cumbersome to characterize.
The present hierarchy uses a single truth predicate, ever increasing with increasing levels until
the level of the minimal ﬁxed point is reached. The limit levels are easily deﬁned. The languages in the
hierarchy are not the primary object of interest, but are better and better approximations to the
minimal language with its own truth predicate.

Outline of a Theory of Truth

89

We have been talking of a language that contains its own truth predicate.
Really, however, it would be more interesting to extend an arbitrary language to a
language containing its own satisfaction predicate. If L contains a name for each
object in D, and a denotation relation is deﬁned (if D is nondenumerable, this
means that L contains nondenumerably many constants), the notion of satisfaction can (for most purposes) effectively be replaced by that of truth: e.g., instead
of talking of A(x) being satisﬁed by an object a, we can talk of A(x) becoming true
when the variable is replaced by a name of a. Then the previous construction
sufﬁces. Alternatively, if L does not contain a name for each object, we can extend
L to L by adding a binary satisfaction predicate Sat(s,x) where s ranges over ﬁnite
sequences of elements of D and x ranges over formulas. We deﬁne a hierarchy of
languages, parallel to the previous construction with truth, eventually reaching a
ﬁxed point—a language that contains its own satisfaction predicate. If L is
denumerable but D is not, the construction with truth alone closes off at a
countable ordinal, but the construction with satisfaction may close off at an
uncountable ordinal. Below we will continue, for simplicity of exposition, to
concentrate on the construction with truth, but the construction with satisfaction
is more basic.24
The construction could be generalized so as to allow more notation in L than
just ﬁrst-order logic. For example, we could have a quantiﬁer meaning “for
uncountably many x,” a “most” quantiﬁer, a language with inﬁnite conjunctions,
etc. There is a fairly canonical way, in the Kleene style, to extend the semantics of
such quantiﬁers and connectives so as to allow truth-value gaps, but we will not
give details.
Let us check that our model satisﬁes some of the desiderata mentioned in the
previous sections. It is clearly a theory in the required sense: any language,
including those containing number theory or syntax, can be extended to a
language with its own truth predicate, and the associated concept of truth is
mathematically deﬁned by set-theoretic techniques. There is no problem about
the languages of transﬁnite level in the hierarchy.

24

Consider the case where L has a canonical name for every element of D. We can then consider
pairs (A,T), (A,F), where A is true, or false, respectively. The Kleene rules correspond to closure
conditions on a set of such pairs: e.g., if (A(a),F) ∈ S for each name of a element of D, put ((∃x)A(x),
F) in S; if (A(a),T) ∈ S, put ((∃x)A(x), T) in S, etc. Consider the least set S of pairs closed under the
analogues of the Kleene rules, containing (A,T) ((A,F)) for each true (false) atomic A of L, and
closed under the two conditions: (i) if (A,T) ∈ S, (T(k),T) ∈ S; (ii) if (A,F) ∈ S, (T(k),F) ∈ S, where
‘k’ abbreviates a name of A. It is easily shown that the set S corresponds (in the obvious sense) to the
minimal ﬁxed point [thus, it is closed under the converses of (i) and (ii).] I used this deﬁnition to
show that the set of truths in the minimal ﬁxed point (over an acceptable structure), is inductive in
Moschovakis’s sense. It is probably simpler than the deﬁnition given in the text. The deﬁnition
given in the text has, among others, the advantages of giving a deﬁnition of ‘level’, facilitating a
comparison with the Tarski hierarchy, and easy generalization to valuation schemes other than
Kleene’s.

90

Outline of a Theory of Truth

Given a sentence A of L, let us deﬁne A to be grounded if it has a truth value in
the smallest ﬁxed point Ls; otherwise, ungrounded. What hitherto has been, as
far as I know, an intuitive concept with no formal deﬁnition, becomes a precisely
deﬁned concept in the present theory. If A is grounded, deﬁne the level of A to be
the smallest ordinal a such that A has a truth value in La.
There is no problem, if L contains number theory or syntax, of constructing
Gödelian sentences that “say of themselves” that they are false (Liar sentences) or
true [as in (3)]; all these are easily shown to be ungrounded in the sense of the
formal deﬁnition. If the Gödelian form of the Liar paradox is used, for example,
the Liar sentence can get the form
ð9Þ ðxÞðP ðxÞ  T ðxÞÞ
where P ðxÞ is a syntactic (or arithmetical) predicate uniquely satisﬁed by (the
Gödel number of) (9) itself. Similarly (3) gets the form
ð10Þ ðxÞðQ ðxÞ  T ðxÞÞ
where Q ðxÞ is uniquely satisﬁed by (the Gödel number of) (10). It is easy to
prove, under these hypotheses, by induction on a, that neither (9) nor (10) will
have a truth value in any La, that is, that they are ungrounded. Other intuitive
cases of ungroundedness come out similarly.
The feature I have stressed about ordinary statements, that there is no intrinsic
guarantee of their safety (groundedness) and that their “level” depends on
empirical facts, comes out clearly in the present model. Consider, for example,
(9) again, except that now P ðxÞ is an empirical predicate whose extension
depends on unknown empirical facts. If P ðxÞ turns out to be true only of (9)
itself, (9) will be ungrounded as before. If the extension of P ðxÞ consists entirely
of grounded sentences of levels, say, 2, 4, and 13, (9) will be grounded with level
14. If the extension of P ðxÞ consists of grounded sentences of arbitrary ﬁnite
level, (9) will be grounded with level o. And so on.
Now let us consider the cases of (4) and (5). We can formalize (4) by (9),
interpreting P ðxÞ as “x is a sentence Nixon asserts about Watergate.” [Forget for
simplicity that ‘about Watergate’ introduces a semantic component into the
interpretation of P ðxÞ.] Formalize (5) as
ð11Þ ðxÞðQ ðxÞ  T ðxÞÞ
interpreting Q ðxÞ in the obvious way. To complete the parallel with (4) and (5),
suppose that (9) is in the extension of Q ðxÞ and (11) is in the extension of P ðxÞ.
Now nothing guarantees that (9) and (11) will be grounded. Suppose, however,
parallel to the intuitive discussion above, that some true grounded sentence
satisﬁes Q ðxÞ. If the lowest level of any such sentence is a, then (11) will be
false and grounded of level a + 1. If in addition all the sentences other than (11)
satisfying P ðxÞ are false, (9) will then be grounded and true. The level of (9) will

Outline of a Theory of Truth

91

be at least a + 2, because of the level of (11). On the other hand, if some sentence
satisfying P ðxÞ is grounded and true, then (9) will be grounded and false with
level b + 1, where b is the lowest level of any such sentence. It is crucial to the
ability of the present model to assign levels to (4) and (5) [(9) and (11)] that the
levels depend on empirical facts, rather than being assigned in advance.
We said that such statements as (3), though ungrounded, are not intuitively
paradoxical either. Let us explore this in terms of the model. The smallest ﬁxed
point L is not the only ﬁxed point. Let us formalize (3) by (10), where Q ðxÞ is a
syntactic predicate (of L) true of (10) itself alone. Suppose that, instead of starting
out our hierarchy of languages with T ðxÞ completely undeﬁned, we had started
out by letting T ðxÞ be true of (10), undeﬁned otherwise. We then can continue
the hierarchy of languages just as before. It is easy to see that if (10) is true at the
language of a given level, it will remain true at the next level [using the fact that
Q ðxÞ is true of (10) alone, false of everything else]. From this we can show as
before that the interpretation of T ðxÞ at each level extends all previous levels, and
that at some level the construction closes off to yield a ﬁxed point. The difference
is that (10), which lacked truth value in the smallest ﬁxed point, is now true.
This suggests the following deﬁnition: a sentence is paradoxical if it has
no truth value in any ﬁxed point. That is, a paradoxical sentence A is such that
if ((S1, S2)) = (S1, S2), then A is neither an element of S1 nor an element of S2.
(3) [or its formal version (10)] is ungrounded, but not paradoxical. This
means that we could consistently use the predicate ‘true’ so as to give (3) [or
(10)] a truth value, though the minimal process for assigning truth values does
not do so. Suppose, on the other hand, in (9), that P ðxÞ is true of (9) itself and
false of everything else, so that (9) is a Liar sentence. Then the argument of the
Liar paradox easily yields a proof that (9) cannot have a truth value in any ﬁxed
point. So (9) is paradoxical in our technical sense. Notice that, if it is merely an
empirical fact that PðxÞ is true of (9) and false of everything else, the fact that (9)
is paradoxical will itself be empirical. (We could deﬁne notions of “intrinsically
paradoxical”, “intrinsically grounded”, etc., but will not do so here.)
Intuitively, the situation seems to be as follows. Although the smallest ﬁxed
point is probably the most natural model for the intuitive concept of truth, and is
the model generated by our instructions to the imaginary subject, the other ﬁxed
points never conﬂict with these instructions. We could consistently use the word
‘true’ so as to give a truth value to such a sentence as (3) without violating the idea
that a sentence should be asserted to be true precisely when we would assert the
sentence itself. The same does not hold for the paradoxical sentences.
Using Zorn’s Lemma, we can prove that every ﬁxed point can be extended to a
maximal ﬁxed point, where a maximal ﬁxed point is a ﬁxed point that has no
proper extension that is also a ﬁxed point. Maximal ﬁxed points assign “as many
truth values as possible”; one could not assign more consistently with the
intuitive concept of truth. Sentences like (3), though ungrounded, have a truth

92

Outline of a Theory of Truth

value in every maximal ﬁxed point. Ungrounded sentences exist, however, which
have truth values in some but not all maximal ﬁxed points.
It is as easy to construct ﬁxed points which make (3) false as it is to construct
ﬁxed points which make it true. So the assignment of a truth value to (3) is
arbitrary. Indeed any ﬁxed point which assigns no truth value to (3) can be
extended to ﬁxed points which make it true and to ﬁxed points which make it
false. Grounded sentences have the same truth value in all ﬁxed points. There are
ungrounded and unparadoxical sentences, however, which have the same truth
value in all the ﬁxed points where they have a truth value. An example is:
(12) Either (12) or its negation is true.
It is easy to show that there are ﬁxed points which make (12) true and none
which make (12) false. Yet (12) is ungrounded (has no truth value in the minimal
ﬁxed point).
Call a ﬁxed point intrinsic iff it assigns no sentence a truth value conﬂicting
with its truth value in any other ﬁxed point. That is, a ﬁxed point (S1, S2) is
intrinsic iff there is no other ﬁxed point (S1{, S2{) and sentence A of L0 such that
A ∈ (S1 [ S2{) [ (S2 \ S1{). We say that a sentence has an intrinsic truth value iff
some intrinsic ﬁxed point gives it a truth value; i.e., A has an intrinsic truth value
iff there is an intrinsic ﬁxed point (S1, S2) such that A ∈ S1 [ S2. (12) is a good
example.
There are unparadoxical sentences which have the same truth value in all ﬁxed
points where they have truth value but which nevertheless lack an intrinsic truth
value. Consider P  P, where P is any ungrounded unparadoxical sentence.
Then P  P is true in some ﬁxed points (namely, those where P has a truth
value) and is false in none. Suppose, however, that there are ﬁxed points that
make P true and ﬁxed points that make P false. [For example, say, P is (3).] Then
P  P cannot have a truth value in any intrinsic ﬁxed point, since, by our
valuation rules, it cannot have a truth value unless some disjunct does.25
There is no “largest” ﬁxed point that extends every other; indeed, any two ﬁxed
points that give different truth values to the same formula have no common
extension. However, it is not hard to show that there is a largest intrinsic ﬁxed
point (and indeed that the intrinsic ﬁxed points form a complete lattice
under ). The largest intrinsic ﬁxed point is the unique “largest” interpretation
of T(x) which is consistent with our intuitive idea of truth and makes no arbitrary
choices in truth assignments. It is thus an object of special theoretical interest as a
model.
It is interesting to compare “Tarski’s hierarchy of languages” with the present
model. Unfortunately, this can hardly be done in full generality without introducing the transﬁnite levels, a task omitted from this sketch. But we can say
25
If we use the supervaluation technique instead of the Kleene rules, P  P will always be
grounded and true, and we must change the example. See p. 94 below.

Outline of a Theory of Truth

93

something about the ﬁnite levels. Intuitively, it would seem that Tarski predicates dtruene are all special cases of a single truth predicate. For example, we said
above that ‘true1’ means “is a true sentence not involving truth.” Let us carry this
idea out formally. Let A1(x) be a syntactic (arithmetical) predicate true of exactly
the formulas of L not involving T(x), i.e., of all formulas of L. A1(x), being
syntactic, is itself a formula of L, as are all other syntactic formulas below. Deﬁne
‘T1(x)’ as ‘T(x)  A1(x)’. Let A2(x) be a syntactic predicate applying to all those
formulas whose atomic predicates are those of L plus ‘T1(x)’. [More precisely the
class of such formulas can be deﬁned as the least class including all formulas of L
and T(xi)  A1(xi), for any variable xi, and closed under truth functions and
quantiﬁcation.] Then deﬁne T2(x) as T(x)  A2(x). In general, we can deﬁne
An+1(x) as a syntactic predicate applying precisely to formulas built out of the
predicates of L and Tn(x), and Tn+1(x) as T(x)  An+1(x). Assume that T(x) is
interpreted by the smallest ﬁxed point (or any other). Then it is easy to prove by
induction that each predicate Tn(x) is totally deﬁned, that the extension of
T0(x) consists precisely of the true formulas of L, while that of Tn+1(x) consists
of the true formulas of the language obtained by adjoining Tn(x) to L. This
means that all the truth predicates of the ﬁnite Tarski hierarchy are deﬁnable
within Ls, and all the languages of that hierarchy are sub-languages of Ls.26
This kind of result could be extended into the transﬁnite if we had deﬁned the
transﬁnite Tarski hierarchy.
There are converse results, harder to state in this sketch. It is characteristic of
the sentences in the Tarski hierarchy that they are safe (intrinsically grounded)
and that their level is intrinsic, given independently of the empirical facts. It is
natural to conjecture that any grounded sentence with intrinsic level n is in some
sense “equivalent” to a sentence of level n in the Tarski hierarchy. Given proper
deﬁnitions of ‘intrinsic level’, ‘equivalent’, and the like, theorems of this kind can
be stated and proved and even extended into the transﬁnite.
So far we have assumed that truth gaps are to be handled according to the
methods of Kleene. It is by no means necessary to do so. Just about any scheme
for handling truth-value gaps is usable, provided that the basic property of the
monotonicity of  is preserved; that is, provided that extending the interpretation of T ðxÞ never changes the truth value of any sentence of L, but at most gives
truth values to previously undeﬁned cases. Given any such scheme, we can use
the previous arguments to construct the minimal ﬁxed point and other
ﬁxed points, deﬁne the levels of sentences and the notions of ‘grounded’,
‘paradoxical’, etc.
26

We suppose that the Tarski hierarchy deﬁnes L0 = L, Ln+1 = L + Tn+1(x) (truth, or satisfaction,
for Ln). Alternatively, we might prefer the inductive construction L0 = L, Ln+1 = Ln + Tn+1(x) where
the language of each new level contains all the previous truth predicates. It is easy to modify the
construction in the text so as to accord with the second deﬁnition. The two alternative hierarchies
are equivalent in expressive power at each level.

94

Outline of a Theory of Truth

One scheme usable in this way is van Fraassen’s notion of super-valuation.27
For the language L, the deﬁnition is easy. Given an interpretation (S1, S2) of T(x)
in L, call a formula A true (false) iff it comes out true (false) by the ordinary
classical valuation under every interpretation (S1{, S2{) which extends (S1, S2)
and is totally deﬁned, i.e., is such that S1{ [ S2{ = D. We can then deﬁne the
hierarchy {La} and the minimal ﬁxed point Ls as before. Under the supervaluation interpretation, all formulas provable in classical quantiﬁcation theory
become true in Ls; under the Kleene valuation, one could say only that they were
true whenever they were deﬁned. Thanks to the fact that Ls contains its own
truth predicate, we need not express this fact by a schema, or by a statement of a
meta-language. If PQT ðxÞ is a syntactic predicate true exactly of the sentences of
L provable in quantiﬁcation theory, we can assert:
ð13Þ ðxÞðPQT ðxÞ  T ðxÞÞ
and (13) will be true in the minimal ﬁxed point.
Here we have used supervaluations in which all total extensions of the
interpretation of T(x) are taken into account. It is natural to consider restrictions
on the family of total extensions, motivated by intuitive properties of truth. For
example, we could consider only consistent interpretations (S1{, S2{), where (S1{,
S2{) is consistent iff S1 contains no sentence together with its negation. Then we
could deﬁne A to be true (false) with T ðxÞ interpreted by (S1, S2) iff A is true
(false) classically when A is interpreted by any consistent totally deﬁned extension
of (S1, S2).
ð14Þ ðxÞ  ðT ðxÞT ðnegðxÞÞÞ
will be true in the minimal ﬁxed point. If we restricted the admissible total
extensions to those deﬁning maximal consistent sets of sentences, in the usual
sense, not only (14) but even
ðxÞðSent ðxÞ:  :T ðxÞT ðneg ðxÞÞÞ
will come out true in the minimal ﬁxed point.28 The last-mentioned formula,
however, must be interpreted with caution, since it is still not the case, even on
the supervaluation interpretation in question, that there is any ﬁxed point that
makes every formula or its negation true. (The paradoxical formulas still lack
truth value in all ﬁxed points.) The phenomenon is associated with the fact that,
on the supervaluation interpretation, a disjunction can be true without it following that some disjunct is true.

27

See his “Singular Terms, Truth-value Gaps, and Free Logic,” Journal of Philosophy,
17 (Sept. 15, 1966): 481–495.
A version of the Liar paradox due to H. Friedman shows that there are limits to what can be
done in this direction.
LXIII,
28

Outline of a Theory of Truth

95

It is not the purpose of the present work to make any particular recommendation among the Kleene strong three-valued approach, the van Fraassen supervaluation approaches, or any other scheme (such as the Fregean weak threevalued logic, preferred by Martin and Woodruff, though I am in fact tentatively
inclined to consider the latter excessively cumbersome). Nor is it even my present
purpose to make any ﬁrm recommendation between the minimal ﬁxed point of a
particular valuation scheme and the various other ﬁxed points.29 Indeed, without
the nonminimal ﬁxed points we could not have deﬁned the intuitive difference
between ‘grounded’ and ‘paradoxical’. My purpose is rather to provide a family
of ﬂexible instruments which can be explored simultaneously and whose fertility
and consonance with intuition can be checked.
I am somewhat uncertain whether there is a deﬁnite factual question as to
whether natural language handles truth-value gaps—at least those arising in
connection with the semantic paradoxes—by the schemes of Frege, Kleene,
van Fraassen, or perhaps some other. Nor am I even quite sure that there is a
deﬁnite question of fact as to whether natural language should be evaluated by
the minimal ﬁxed point or another, given the choice of a scheme for handling
gaps.30 We are not at the moment searching for the correct scheme.
The present approach can be applied to languages containing modal operators.
In this case, we do not merely consider truth, but we are given, in the usual style
of modal model theory, a system of possible worlds, and evaluate truth and T(x)
in each possible world. The inductive deﬁnition of the languages La approximating to the minimal ﬁxed point must be modiﬁed accordingly. We cannot
give details here.31
Ironically, the application of the present approach to languages with modal
operators may be of some interest to those who dislike intensional operators and
possible worlds and prefer to take modalities and propositional attitudes as
predicates true of sentences (or sentence tokens). Montague and Kaplan have
pointed out, using elementary applications of Gödelian techniques, that such
approaches are likely to lead to semantic paradoxes, analogous to the Liar.32
29

Though the minimal ﬁxed point certainly is singled out as natural in many respects.
I do not mean to assert that there are no deﬁnite questions of fact in these areas, or even that
I myself may not favor some valuation schemes over others. But my personal views are less
important than the variety of tools that are available, so for the purposes of this sketch I take an
agnostic position. (I remark that if the viewpoint is taken that logic applies primarily to
propositions, and that we are merely formulating conventions for how to handle sentences that
do not express propositions, the attractiveness of the supervaluation approach over the Kleene
approach is somewhat decreased. See fn 18.)
31
Another application of the present techniques is to “impredicative” substitutional
quantiﬁcation, where the terms of the substitution class themselves contain substitutional
quantiﬁers of the given type. (For example, a language containing substitutional quantiﬁers with
arbitrary sentences of the language itself as substituends) It is impossible in general to introduce such
quantiﬁers into classical languages without truth-value gaps.
32
Richard Montague, “Syntactical Treatments of Modality, with Corollaries on Reﬂection
Principles and Finite Axiomatizability,” Acta Philosophica Fennica, Proceedings of a Colloquium on
30

96

Outline of a Theory of Truth

Though the difﬁculty has been known for some time, the extensive literature
advocating such treatments has usually simply ignored the problem rather than
indicating how it is to be solved (say, by a hierarchy of languages?). Now, if a
necessity operator and a truth predicate are allowed, we could deﬁne a necessity
predicate Nec(x) applied to sentences, either by ☐T ðxÞ or T(nec(x)) according
to taste,33 and treat it according to the possible-world scheme sketched in the
preceding paragraph. (I do think that any necessity predicate of sentences should
intuitively be regarded as derivative, deﬁned in terms of an operator and a truth
predicate. I also think the same holds for propositional attitudes.) We can even
“kick away the ladder” and take Nec(x) as primitive, treating it in a possible-world
scheme as if it were deﬁned by an operator plus a truth predicate. Like remarks apply
to the propositional attitudes, if we are willing to treat them, using possible worlds,
like modal operators. (I myself think that such a treatment involves considerable
philosophical difﬁculties.) It is possible that the present approach can be applied to
the supposed predicates of sentences in question without using either intensional
operators or possible worlds, but at present I have no idea how to do so.
It seems likely that many who have worked on the truth-gap approach to the
semantic paradoxes have hoped for a universal language, one in which everything
that can be stated at all can be expressed. (The proof by Gödel and Tarski that a
language cannot contain its own semantics applied only to languages without
truth gaps.) Now the languages of the present approach contain their own truth
predicates and even their own satisfaction predicates, and thus to this extent the
hope has been realized. Nevertheless the present approach certainly does not
claim to give a universal language, and I doubt that such a goal can be achieved.
First, the induction deﬁning the minimal ﬁxed point is carried out in a settheoretic meta-language, not in the object language itself. Second, there are
assertions we can make about the object language which we cannot make in
the object language. For example, Liar sentences are not true in the object
Model and Many Valued Logics, 1963: 153–167; David Kaplan and Montague, “A Paradox
Regained,” Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, I, 3 (July 1960): 79–90. See Chapter 2, this
volume, Appendices 1 and 2.
At present the problems are known to arise only if modalities and attitudes are predicates applied
to sentences or their tokens. The Montague-Kaplan arguments do not apply to standard
formalizations taking modalities or propositional attitudes as intensional operators. Even if we
wish to quantify over objects of belief, the arguments do not apply if the objects of belief are taken to
be propositions and the latter are identiﬁed with sets of possible worlds.
However, if we quantify over propositions, paradoxes may arise in connection with propositional
attitudes given appropriate empirical premises. [See, e.g., A. N. Prior, “On a Family of Paradoxes,”
Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, II 1 (January 1961): 16–32.] Also, we may wish (in connection
with propositional attitudes but not modalities), to individuate propositions more ﬁnely than by sets
of possible worlds, and it is possible that such a “ﬁne structure” may permit the application of
Gödelian arguments of the type used by Montague and Kaplan directly to propositions.
33
As a formalization of the concept intended by those who speak of modalities and attitudes as
predicates of sentences, the second version is generally better. This is true especially for the
propositional attitudes.

Outline of a Theory of Truth

97

language, in the sense that the inductive process never makes them true; but we
are precluded from saying this in the object language by our interpretation of
negation and the truth predicate. If we think of the minimal ﬁxed point, say
under the Kleene valuation, as giving a model of natural language, then the sense
in which we can say, in natural language, that a Liar sentence is not true must be
thought of as associated with some later stage in the development of natural
language, one in which speakers reﬂect on the generation process leading to the
minimal ﬁxed point. It is not itself a part of that process. The necessity to ascend
to a metalanguage may be one of the weaknesses of the present theory. The ghost
of the Tarski hierarchy is still with us.34
The approach adopted here has presupposed the following version of Tarski’s
“Convention T”, adapted to the three-valued approach: If ‘k’ abbreviates a name
of the sentence A, T(k) is to be true, or false, respectively iff A is true, or false.
This captures the intuition that T(k) is to have the same truth conditions as A
itself; it follows that T(k) suffers a truth-value gap if A does. An alternate
intuition35 would assert that, if A is either false or undeﬁned, then A is not true
and T(k) should be false, and its negation true. On this view, T(x) will be a totally
deﬁned predicate and there are no truth-value gaps. Presumably Tarski’s Convention T must be restricted in some way.
It is not difﬁcult to modify the present approach so as to accommodate such an
alternate intuition. Take any ﬁxed point L0 (S1, S2). Modify the interpretation of
T(x) so as to make it false of any sentence outside S. [We call this “closing off” T
(x).] A modiﬁed version of Tarski’s Convention T holds in the sense of the
conditional T(k)  T(neg(k)  A  T(k). In particular, if A is a paradoxical
sentence, we can now assert T(k). Equivalently, if A had a truth value before T
(x) was closed off, then A  T(k) is true.
Since the object language obtained by closing off T(x) is a classical language
with every predicate totally deﬁned, it is possible to deﬁne a truth predicate for
that language in the usual Tarskian manner. This predicate will not coincide in
extension with the predicate T(x) of the object language, and it is certainly
reasonable to suppose that it is really the metalanguage predicate that expresses
the “genuine” concept of truth for the closed-off object language; the T(x) of the
34
Note that the metalanguage in which we write this paper can be regarded as containing no
truth gaps. A sentence either does or does not have a truth value in a given ﬁxed point.
Such semantical notions as “grounded,” “paradoxical,” etc. belong to the metalanguage. This
situation seems to me to be intuitively acceptable; in contrast to the notion of truth, none of
these notions is to be found in natural language in its pristine purity, before philosophers reﬂect on
its semantics (in particular, the semantic paradoxes). If we give up the goal of a universal language,
models of the type presented in this paper are plausible as models of natural language at a stage
before we reﬂect on the generation process associated with the concept of truth, the stage which
continues in the daily life of nonphilosophical speakers.
35
I think the primacy of the ﬁrst intuition can be defended philosophically, and for this reason
I have emphasized the approach based on this intuition. The alternate intuition arises only after we
have reﬂected on the process embodying the ﬁrst intuition. See above.

98

Outline of a Theory of Truth

closed-off language deﬁnes truth for the ﬁxed point before it was closed off. So we
still cannot avoid the need for a metalanguage.
On the basis of the fact that the goal of a universal language seems elusive,
some have concluded that truth-gap approaches, or any approaches that attempt
to come closer to natural language than does the orthodox approach, are fruitless.
I hope that the fertility of the present approach, and its agreement with intuitions
about natural language in a large number of instances, cast doubt upon such
negative attitudes.
There are mathematical applications and purely technical problems which
I have not mentioned in this sketch; they would be beyond the scope of a paper
for a philosophical journal. Thus there is the question, which can be answered in
considerable generality, of characterizing the ordinal s at which the construction
of the minimal ﬁxed point closes off. If L is the language of ﬁrst-order arithmetic,
it turns out that s is o1, the ﬁrst nonrecursive ordinal. A set is the extension of a
formula with one free variable in Ls iff it is — 11, and it is the extension of a totally
deﬁned formula iff it is hyperarithmetical. The languages La approximating to
the minimal ﬁxed point give an interesting “notation-free” version of the hyperarithmetical hierarchy. More generally, if L is the language of an acceptable
structure in the sense of Moschovakis, and the Kleene valuation is used, a set is
the extension of a monadic formula in the minimal ﬁxed point iff it is inductive
in the sense of Moschovakis.36

36
Leo Harrington informs me that he has proved the conjecture that a set is the extension of a
totally deﬁned monadic formula iff it is hyperelementary. The special case of the — 11 and
hyperarithmetical sets if L is number theory is independent of whether the Kleene or the van
Fraassen formulation is used. Not so for the general case, where the van Fraassen formulation leads
to the — 11 sets rather than the inductive sets.

5
Speaker’s Reference and Semantic
Reference*

I am going to discuss some issues inspired by a well-known paper of Keith
Donnellan, “Reference and Deﬁnite Descriptions,”1 but the interest—to me—of
the contrast mentioned in my title goes beyond Donnellan’s paper: I think it is of
considerable constructive as well as critical importance to the philosophy of language. These applications, however, and even everything I might want to say relative
to Donnellan’s paper, cannot be discussed in full here because of problems of length.
Moreover, although I have a considerable interest in the substantive issues
raised by Donnellan’s paper, and by related literature, my own conclusions will
be methodological, not substantive. I can put the matter this way: Donnellan’s
paper claims to give decisive objections both to Russell’s theory of deﬁnite
descriptions (taken as a theory about English) and to Strawson’s. My concern
is not primarily with the question: is Donnellan right, or is Russell (or Strawson)?
Rather, it is with the question: do the considerations in Donnellan’s paper refute
Russell’s theory (or Strawson’s)? For deﬁniteness, I will concentrate on Donnellan versus Russell, leaving Strawson aside. And about this issue I will draw a
deﬁnite conclusion, one which I think will illuminate a few methodological
* Versions of this chapter—not read from the present manuscript—were given from 1971
onward to colloquia at New York University, M.I.T., the University of California (Los Angeles),
and elsewhere. The present version was written on the basis of a transcript of the M.I.T. version.
Donnellan himself heard the talk at U.C.L.A., and he has a paper, “Speaker Reference, Descriptions
and Anaphora,” (in Peter Cole, ed., Syntax and Semantics 9: Pragmatics. [New York: Academic
Press, 1978] pp. 47–68), that to a large extent appears to be a comment on considerations of the
type mentioned here. (He does not, however, speciﬁcally refer to the present paper.) I decided not to
alter the paper I gave in talks to take Donnellan’s later views into account: largely I think the earlier
version stands on its own, and the issues Donnellan raises in the later paper can be discussed
elsewhere. Something should be said here, however, about the pronominalization phenomena
mentioned on p. 121 below. In his paper, Donnellan seems to think that these phenomena are
incompatible with the suggestion that speaker’s reference is a pragmatic notion. On the contrary, at
the end of the present paper (and of the talk Donnellan heard), I emphasize these very phenomena
and argue that they support this suggestion. See also footnote 31 below.
1
Philosophical Review 75 (1966): 281–304. See also Keith S. Donnellan, “Putting Humpty
Dumpty Together Again,” Philosophical Review 77 (1968): 203–15.

100

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

maxims about language. Namely, I will conclude that the considerations in
Donnellan’s paper, by themselves, do not refute Russell’s theory.
Any conclusions about Russell’s views per se, or Donnellan’s, must be tentative.
If I were to be asked for a tentative stab about Russell, I would say that although
his theory does a far better job of handling ordinary discourse than many have
thought, and although many popular arguments against it are inconclusive,
probably it ultimately fails. The considerations I have in mind have to do with
the existence of “improper” deﬁnite descriptions, such as “the table,” where
uniquely specifying conditions are not contained in the description itself. Contrary to the Russellian picture, I doubt that such descriptions can always be
regarded as elliptical with some uniquely specifying conditions added. And it
may even be the case that a true picture will resemble various aspects of Donnellan’s in important respects. But such questions will largely be left aside here.
I will state my preference for one substantive conclusion (although I do not
feel completely conﬁdent of it either): that unitary theories, like Russell’s, are
preferable to theories that postulate an ambiguity. And much, though not all, of
Donnellan’s paper seems to postulate a (semantic) ambiguity between his “referential” and “attributive” uses. But—as we shall see—Donnellan is not entirely
consistent on this point, and I therefore am not sure whether I am expressing
disagreement with him even here.2
(1.) Preliminary considerations.
Donnellan claims that a certain linguistic phenomenon argues against Russell’s theory. According to Russell, if someone says, “The x such that f(x) c’s,” he
means that there is an x which uniquely satisﬁes “f(x)” and that any such x
satisﬁes “c(x).” (I.e., (∃x) (f!(x)∧c(x)), where “f!(x)” abbreviates “f(x) ∧ (y)
(f(y)  y = x).”) Donnellan argues that some phenomenon of the following kind
tells against Russell: Suppose someone at a gathering, glancing in a certain
direction, says to his companion,
(1) “The man over there drinking champagne is happy tonight.”
Suppose both the speaker and hearer are under a false impression, and that the man
to whom they refer is a teetotaler, drinking sparkling water. He may, nevertheless,
be happy. Now, if there is no champagne drinker over there, Russell would regard
(1) as false, and Frege and Strawson would give it a truth-value gap. Nevertheless,
as Donnellan emphasizes, we have a substantial intuition that the speaker said
something true of the man to whom he referred in spite of his misimpression.
Since no one is really drinking champagne, the case involves a deﬁnite
description that is empty, or vacuous, according to both Russell and Frege. So
as to avoid any unnecessary and irrelevant entanglements of the present question
2
In his later paper mentioned above in footnote 1, Donnellan seems more clearly to advocate a
semantic ambiguity; but he hedges a bit even in the later paper.

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

101

with the issues that arise when deﬁnite descriptions are vacuous, I shall modify
this case (and all other cases where, in Donnellan’s paper, the description was
vacuous).3 Suppose that “over there,” exactly one man is drinking champagne,
although his glass is not visible to the speaker (nor to his hearer). Suppose that he,
unlike the teetotaler to whom the speaker refers, has been driven to drink
precisely by his misery. Then all the classical theories (both Russellian and
Fregean) would regard (1) as false (since exactly one man over there is drinking
champagne, and he is not happy tonight). Now the speaker has spoken truly of
the man to whom he refers (the teetotaler), yet this dimension is left out in all the
classical analyses, which would assign falsehood to his assertion solely on the basis
of the misery of someone else whom no one was talking about (the champagne
drinker). Previously Linsky had given a similar example. He gave it as an empty
case; once again I modify it to make the description non-vacuous. Someone sees a
woman with a man. Taking the man to be her husband, and observing his
attitude towards her, he says, “Her husband is kind to her,” and someone else
may nod, “Yes, he seems to be.” Suppose the man in question is not her husband.
Suppose he is her lover, to whom she has been driven precisely by her husband’s
cruelty. Once again both the Russellian analysis and the Fregean analysis would
assess the statement as false, and both would do so on the basis of the cruelty of a
man neither participant in the dialogues was talking about.
Again, an example suggested to me by a remark of L. Crocker: suppose a
religious narrative (similar, say, to the Gospels) consistently refers to its main
protagonist as “The Messiah.” Suppose a historian wishes to assess the work for
historical accuracy—that is, he wishes to determine whether it gives an accurate
account of the life of its hero (whose identity we assume to be established). Does
it matter to this question whether the hero really was the Messiah, as long as the
author took him to be so, and addressed his work to a religious community that
shared this belief ? Surely not. And note that it is no mere “principle of charity”
that is operating here. On the contrary, if someone other than the person
intended were really the Messiah, and if, by a bizarre and unintended coincidence, the narrative gave a fairly true account of his life, we would not for that
reason call it “historically true.” On the contrary, we would regard the work as
historically false if the events mentioned were false of its intended protagonist.
Whether the story happened to ﬁt the true Messiah—who may have been totally
unknown to the author and even have lived after the time the work was
composed—would be irrelevant. Once again, this fact seems inconsistent with
the positions both of Frege and of Russell.
On the basis of such examples, Donnellan distinguishes two uses of deﬁnite
descriptions. In the “attributive” use, a speaker “states something about whoever
3
I will also avoid cases of “improper” descriptions, where the uniqueness condition fails. Such
descriptions may or may not be important for an ultimate evaluation of Donnellan’s position, but
none of the arguments in his paper rest on them.

102

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

or whatever is the so-and-so.” In the “referential” use, a speaker “uses the
description to enable his audience to pick out whom or what he is talking
about and states something about that person or thing. In the ﬁrst [attributive]
case, the deﬁnite description might be said to occur essentially, for the speaker
wishes to assert something about whatever or whoever ﬁts that description; but in
the referential use the deﬁnite description is merely one tool for . . . calling
attention to a person or thing . . . and . . . any other device for doing the same
job, another description or name, would do as well.”4 For example, suppose
I come upon Smith foully murdered. The condition of Smith’s body moves me
to say, “Smith’s murderer is (must be) insane.” Then we have an attributive use:
we speak of the murderer, whoever he may be. On the other hand, suppose that
Jones is on trial for Smith’s murder and that I am among the spectators in the
courtroom. Observing the wild behavior of the defendant at the dock, I may say,
“Smith’s murderer is insane.” (I forgot the defendant’s name, but am ﬁrmly
convinced of his guilt.) Then my use is referential: whether or not Jones was the
real murderer, and even if someone else was, if Jones accused me of libel, his
failure to ﬁt my description would give me no defense. All of the previous cases,
(the teetotaling “champagne” drinker, the lover taken for a husband, the false
Messiah), are all referential in Donnellan’s sense.
An intuitive mark of the attributive use is the legitimacy of the parenthetical
comment, “whoever he is.” In the ﬁrst case, we may say “Smith’s murderer,
whoever he is, is insane,” but not in the second. But we should not be misled: a
deﬁnite description may be used attributively even if the speaker believes that a
certain person, say, Jones, ﬁts it, provided that he is talking about whoever ﬁts,
and his belief that Jones in fact ﬁts is not relevant. In the case where I deduce the
murderer’s insanity from the condition of Smith’s body, I use the description
attributively even if I suspect, or even am ﬁrmly convinced, that Jones is the
culprit.
I have no doubt that the distinction Donnellan brings out exists and is of
fundamental importance, though I do not regard it as exclusive or exhaustive.
But Donnellan also believes that Russell’s theory applies, if at all, only to
attributive uses (p. 293), and that referential uses of deﬁnite descriptions are
close to proper names, even to Russell’s “logically proper” names (see p. 282 and
Section IX). And he appears to believe that the examples of the referential uses
mentioned above are inexplicable on Russell’s theory. It is these views that I wish
to examine.
(2.) Some alleged applications of the distinction.
Some alleged applications of Donnellan’s distinction have entered the oral
tradition, and even to an extent, the written tradition, that are not in Donnellan’s
4
“Reference and Deﬁnite Descriptions,” p. 285. My discussion in this paragraph and the next is
based on Donnellan’s paper, pp. 285, 289–91.

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

103

paper. I will mention some that I ﬁnd questionable. Unfortunately I will have to
discuss these applications more brieﬂy than the issues in question really deserve,
since they are ancillary to the main theme.
(2a.) De dicto-de re
Many able people, in and out of print, have implied that Donnellan’s
distinction has something to do with, can be identiﬁed with, or can replace,
the de dicto-de re distinction, or the small scope-large scope distinction in modal
or intensional contexts.
“The number of planets is necessarily odd” can mean two things, depending
on whether it is interpreted de dicto or de re. If it is interpreted de dicto, it asserts
that the proposition that the number of planets is odd is a necessary truth—
something I take to be false (there might have been eight planets). If it is
interpreted de re, it asserts that the actual number of planets (nine) has the
property of necessary oddness (essentialists like me take this to be true). Similarly, if we say, “Jones believes that the richest debutante in Dubuque will marry
him,” we may mean that Jones’s belief has a certain content, viz., that the richest
debutante in Dubuque will marry him; or we may mean that he believes, of a girl
who is (in fact) the richest in Dubuque, that she will marry him. The view in
question suggests that the de dicto case is to be identiﬁed with Donnellan’s
attributive use, the de re with the referential.
Any such assimilation, in my opinion, is confused. (I don’t think Donnellan
makes it.) There are many objections; I will mention a few. First, the de dicto use
of the deﬁnite description cannot be identiﬁed with either the referential or the
attributive use. Here the basic point was already noticed by Frege. If a description
is embedded in a (de dicto) intensional context, we cannot be said to be talking
about the thing described, either qua its satisfaction of the description or qua
anything else. Taken de dicto, “Jones believes that the richest debutante in
Dubuque will marry him,” can be asserted by someone who thinks (let us
suppose, wrongly) that there are no debutantes in Dubuque; certainly then, he
is in no way talking about the richest debutante, even “attributively.” Similarly,
“It is possible that (France should have a monarchy in 1976, and that) the king of
France in 1976 should have been bald” is true, if read de dicto; yet we are not
using “the king of France in 1976” attributively to speak of the king of France in
1976, for there is none. Frege concluded that “the king of France in 1976” refers,
in these contexts, to its ordinary sense; at any rate, if we wish to speak of
“reference” here, it cannot be to the non-existent king. Even if there were such
a king, the quoted assertion would say nothing about him, if read de dicto: to say
that he might have been bald, would be de re (indeed, this is the distinction in
question).
Second, and even more relevantly, Donnellan’s referential use cannot be
identiﬁed with the de re use. (I think Donnellan would agree.) Suppose I have
no idea how many planets there are, but (for some reason) astronomical theory

104

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

dictates that that number must be odd. If I say, “The number of planets
(whatever it may be) is odd,” my description is used attributively. If I am an
essentialist, I will also say, “The number of planets (whatever it may be) is
necessarily odd,” on the grounds that all odd numbers are necessarily odd; and
my usage is just as attributive as in the ﬁrst case. In “Smith’s murderer, whoever
he may be, is known to the police, but they’re not saying,” or, more explicitly,
“The police know concerning Smith’s murderer, whoever he is, that he committed the murder; but they’re not saying who he is,” “Smith’s murderer” is used
attributively, but is de re.
Finally: Russell wished to handle the de dicto-de re distinction by his notion of
the scope of a description. Some have suggested that Donnellan’s referentialattributive distinction can replace Russell’s distinction of scope. But no twofold
distinction can do this job. Consider:
(2) The number of planets might have been necessarily even.
In a natural use, (2) can be interpreted as true: for example, there might have
been exactly eight planets, in which case the number of planets would have been
even, and hence necessarily even. (2), interpreted as true, is neither de re nor de
dicto; that is, the deﬁnite description neither has the largest nor the smallest
possible scope. Consider:
(2a) ◊□(∃x) (There are exactly x planets and x is even)
(2b) (∃x) (There are exactly x planets and ◊□ (x is even))
(2c) ◊ (∃x) (There are exactly x planets and □ (x is even)).
(2a)–(2c) give three alternative Russellian analyses of (2). (2a) gives the description the smallest possible scope (de dicto); it says, presumably falsely, that it might
have been necessary that there was an even number of planets. (2b) gives the
description the largest possible scope (de re); it says, still falsely, of the actual
number of planets (viz., nine) that it might have been necessarily even. (2c) is the
interpretation which makes (2) true. When intensional operators are iterated,
intermediate scopes are possible. Three analogous interpretations are possible,
say, for “Jones doubts that Holmes believes that Smith’s murderer is insane”; or
(using an indeﬁnite description) for “Hoover charged that the Berrigans plotted
to kidnap a high American ofﬁcial.” (I actually read something like this last in a
newspaper and wondered what was meant.)5 This may mean: (a) there is
a particular high ofﬁcial such that Hoover charged that the Berrigans plotted
to kidnap him (largest scope, de re, this was the interpretation intended); or (b)
Hoover charged that the Berrigans plotted as follows: let’s kidnap a high ofﬁcial
(smallest scope, de dicto); or (c) Hoover charged that there was a high ofﬁcial

5
At the time, it had not yet been revealed that Kissinger was the ofﬁcial in question. (See also
Chapter 8, p. 231.)

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

105

(whose identity may have been unknown to Hoover) whom the Berrigans
planned to kidnap (intermediate scope).
As intensional (or other) constructions are iterated, there are more and more
possible scopes for a deﬁnite description. No twofold distinction can replace
Russell’s notion of scope.6 In particular, neither the de dicto-de re distinction nor
the referential-attributive distinction can do so.
(2b.) Rigid deﬁnite descriptions.
If deﬁnite descriptions, ixf(x), are taken as primitive and assigned reference,
then the conventional non-rigid assignment assigns to such a description, with
respect to each possible world, the unique object, if any, which would have f’d in
that world. (Forget the vacuous case, which requires a further convention.) For
example, “the number of planets” denotes eight, speaking of a counterfactual
situation where there would have been eight planets (and “the number of planets
is even” is true of such a situation). Another type of deﬁnite description, ixfx, a
“rigid” deﬁnite description, could be introduced semantically by the following
stipulation: let ixfx denote, with respect to all possible worlds, the unique object
that (actually) f’s (then “the number of planets is odd,” as interpreted, expresses
a necessary truth). Both kinds of deﬁnite descriptions can obviously be introduced, theoretically, into a single formal language, perhaps by the notations just
given. Some have suggested that deﬁnite descriptions, in English, are ambiguous
between the two readings. It has further been suggested that the two types of
deﬁnite descriptions, the nonrigid and the rigid, are the source of the de dicto-de
re distinction and should replace Russell’s notion of scope for the purpose.
Further, it has been suggested that they amount to the same thing as Donnellan’s
attributive-referential distinction.7
My comments will be brief, so as to avoid too much excursus. Although I have
an open mind on the subject, I am not yet convinced that there is any clear
evidence for such an ambiguity. Being a twofold distinction, the ambiguity
alleged cannot replace Russell’s notion of scope, for the reasons given above.
Once Russell’s notion is available, it can be used to handle the de dicto-de re
distinction; a further ambiguity seems unnecessary. More relevantly to the
present context, the “rigid” sense of a deﬁnite description, if it exists, cannot be
identiﬁed with Donnellan’s “referential” use. I take it that the identiﬁcation of
the referential use with the rigid deﬁnite description was inspired by some line of
6
In fact, no n-fold distinction can do so, for any ﬁxed n. Independently of the present writer,
L. Kartunnen has argued similarly that no dual or n-fold distinction can replace scope distinctions.
I discussed the matter brieﬂy in Chapter 1, p. 13, n. 10.
7
See the papers of Stalnaker and Partee in The Semantics of Natural Language, eds. D. Davidson
and G. Harman (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1972) for such suggestions and also for some of the views
mentioned in the previous section. I should emphasize that most of the stimulating discussion in
these papers can be made independent of any of the identiﬁcations of Donnellan’s distinction with
others which are rejected here.

106

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

reasoning like this: Donnellan holds that referential descriptions are those close
to proper names, even to Russell’s “logically proper names.” But surely proper
names, or, at least, Russellian “logically proper names,” are rigid. Hence Donnellan’s referential descriptions are just the rigid deﬁnite descriptions.
If we assume that Donnellan thinks of names as rigid, as I think of them, his
referential deﬁnite descriptions would most plausibly be taken to refer rigidly to their
referents. But it is not clear that he does agree with me on the rigidity of such
reference.8 More important, a rigid deﬁnite description, as deﬁned above, still
determines its referent via its unique satisfaction of the associated property—and
this fact separates the notion of such a description from that of a referential description, as Donnellan deﬁnes it. David Kaplan has suggested that a demonstrative “that”
can be used, in English, to make any deﬁnite description rigid. “That bastard—the
man who killed Smith, whoever he may be—is surely insane!” The subject term
rigidly designates Smith’s murderer, but it is still attributive in Donnellan’s sense.9
(2c.)
In Naming and Necessity,10 one argument I presented against the description
(or cluster-of-descriptions) theory of proper names concerned cases where the
referent of a name, the person named by the name, did not satisfy the descriptions usually associated with it, and someone else did. For example, the name
“Gödel” might be taken to mean “the man who proved the incompleteness of
arithmetic”; but even if Gödel had been a fraud, who had proved nothing at all
and had misappropriated his work from an unknown named “Schmidt,” our
term “Gödel” would refer to the fraud, not to the man who really satisﬁed the
deﬁnite description. Against this it has been said that although the argument does
succeed in its main purpose of refuting the description theory as a theory of
reference (that is, it shows that the descriptive properties cited do not determine
the referent), it does nothing to show that names are not abbreviated deﬁnite
8

See his paper “The Contingent A Priori and Rigid Designators,” Midwest Studies in Philosophy
Volume II: Studies in the Philosophy of Language, Peter A. French, Theodore E. Uehling, Jr., and
Howard K. Wettstein (eds.) (Morris, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1977), pp. 12–27. In that
paper, Donnellan asks whether I think proper names (in natural language) are always rigid:
obviously, he thinks, proper names could be introduced to abbreviate nonrigid deﬁnite
descriptions. My view is that proper names (except perhaps, for some quirky and derivative uses,
that are not uses as names) are always rigid. In particular this applies to “Neptune.” It would be
logically possible to have single words that abbreviated nonrigid deﬁnite descriptions, but these
would not be names. The point is not merely terminological: I mean that such abbreviated nonrigid
deﬁnite descriptions would differ in an important semantical feature from (what we call) typical
proper names in our actual speech. I merely state my position and do not argue it; nor can I digress
to comment on the other points raised in Donnellan’s paper.
9
See Kaplan’s paper “Dthat,” Syntax and Semantics, Volume 9, P. Cole (ed.) (New York:
Academic Press, 1978), pp. 221–43. In that paper, however, he also has some tendency to confuse
rigidity with Donnellan’s referentiality.
10
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1980. (Originally published as “Naming and Necessity”
in Semantics of Natural Language, op. cit., pp. 253–355, 763–69; references will be to the reprint.)

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

107

descriptions, because we could take the descriptions in question to be referential
in Donnellan’s sense. Referential descriptions can easily refer to things that fail to
satisfy the descriptions; nothing in my argument shows that names are not
synonymous with such descriptions.11
My reaction to such an argument may become clearer later. For the moment,
(too) brieﬂy: In the case of “Her husband is kind to her,” and similar cases, “her
husband” can refer to her lover, as long as we are under the misapprehension that
the man to whom we refer (the lover) is her husband. Once we are apprised of the
true facts, we will no longer so refer to him (see, for example, pp. 300–301 of
Donnellan’s paper). Similarly, someone can use “the man who proved the
incompleteness of arithmetic,” as a referential deﬁnite description, to refer to
Gödel; it might be so used, for example, by someone who had forgotten his
name. If the hypothetical fraud were discovered, however, the description is no
longer usable as a device to refer to Gödel; henceforth it can be used only to refer
to Schmidt. We would withdraw any previous assertions using the description to
refer to Gödel (unless they also were true of Schmidt). We would not similarly
withdraw the name “Gödel,” even after the fraud was discovered; “Gödel” would
still be used to name Gödel, not Schmidt. The name and the description,
therefore, are not synonymous. (See also footnote 26 below.)
(3.) The main problem.
(3a.) A disagreement with Russell?
Do Donnellan’s observations provide an argument against Russell’s theory? Do
his views contradict Russell’s? One might think that if Donnellan is right, Russell
must be wrong, since Donnellan’s truth conditions for statements containing
referential deﬁnite descriptions differ from Russell’s. Unfortunately, this is not so
clear. Consider the case of “Her husband is kind to her,” mistakenly said of the
lover. If Donnellan had roundly asserted that the quoted statement is true if and
only if the lover is kind to her, regardless of the kindness of the husband, the issue
between him and Russell would be clearly joined. But Donnellan doesn’t say this:
rather he says that the speaker has referred to a certain person, the lover, and said
of him that he is kind to her. But if we ask, “Yes, but was the statement he made
true?”, Donnellan would hedge. For if we are not under the misimpression that
the man the speaker referred to was her husband, we would not express the same
assertion by “Her husband is kind to her.” “If it [‘her husband’] is being used
referentially, it is not clear what is meant by ‘the statement.’ . . . To say that the
statement he made was that her husband is kind to her lands us in difﬁculties. For
we [in so reporting what the speaker said must use the deﬁnite description] either
11
For this view, see Jerrold J. Katz, “Logic and Language: An Examination of Recent Criticisms
of Intensionalism,” in Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. VII (Minneapolis, 1975),
pp. 36–130. See especially sections 5.1 and 5.2. As far as proper names are concerned, Katz thinks
that other arguments tell against the description theory even as a theory of meaning.

108

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

attributively or referentially. If the former, then we misrepresent the linguistic
performance of the speaker; if the latter, then we ourselves are referring to
someone,” and ordinarily we can refer to someone as “her husband” only if we
take him to be her husband.12
Since Donnellan does not clearly assert that the statement “her husband is
kind to her” ever has non-Russelian truth conditions, he has not, so far, clearly
contradicted Russell’s theory. His argument, as he presents it, that there is a
problem in reporting “the statement,” is questionable, in two ways.
First, it uses the premise that if we say, “Jones said that her husband is kind to
her,” we ourselves must use the description attributively or referentially; but, as
we saw, a deﬁnite description in indirect discourse is neither referential nor
attributive.13
Second, there is an important problem about the nature of the referentialattributive distinction. Donnellan says that his distinction is neither syntactic nor
semantic:
The grammatical structure of the sentence seems to me to be the same whether the description
is used referentially or attributively: that is, it is not syntactically ambiguous. Nor does it seem
at all attractive to suppose an ambiguity in the meaning of the words; it does not appear to be
semantically ambiguous. (Perhaps we could say that the sentence is pragmatically ambiguous:
the distinction between roles that the description plays is a function of the speaker’s intentions.) These, of course, are intuitions; I do not have an argument for these conclusions.
Nevertheless, the burden of proof is surely on the other side.14

Suppose for the moment that this is so. Then if the referential-attributive
distinction is pragmatic, rather than syntactic or semantic, it is presumably a
distinction about speech acts. There is no reason to suppose that in making an
indirect discourse report on what someone else has said I myself must have
similar intentions, or be engaged in the same kind of speech act; in fact, it is clear
that I am not. If I say “Jones said the police were around the corner,” Jones may
have said it as a warning, but I need not say it as a warning. If the referentialattributive distinction is neither syntactic nor semantic, there is no reason,
without further argument, to suppose that my usage, in indirect discourse,
should match the man on whom I report, as referential or attributive. The case
is quite different for a genuine semantic ambiguity. If Jones says, “I have never
been at a bank,” and I report this, saying, “Jones denied that he was ever at a
bank,” the sense I give to “bank” must match Jones’s if my report is to be
accurate.
12

See Donnellan, “Reference and Deﬁnite Descriptions,” p. 302.
So I argued in the talks, and rightly, if Donnellan is taken literally. See footnote 24 below,
however, for a more charitable reading, which probably corresponds to Donnellan’s intent. We
must, however, take descriptions to be semantically ambiguous if we are to maintain the reading in
question: see the point raised immediately after this one.
14
“Reference and Deﬁnite Descriptions,” p. 297.
13

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

109

Indeed, the passage seems inconsistent with the whole trend of Donnellan’s
paper. Donnellan suggests that there is no syntactic or semantic ambiguity in the
statement, “Her husband is kind to her.” He also suggests that Russell may well
give a correct analysis of the attributive use but not of the referential use. Surely
this is not coherent. It is not “uses,” in some pragmatic sense, but senses of a
sentence which can be analyzed. If the sentence is not (syntactically or) semantically ambiguous, it has only one analysis; to say that it has two distinct analyses is
to attribute a syntactic or semantic ambiguity to it.
Donnellan’s arguments for his refusal to give a truth value to the speaker’s
assertion, “Her husband is kind to her,” seem to be fallacious. My own suggested
account of the matter below—in terms of a theory of speech acts—creates no
problem about “the statement”; it is simply the statement that her husband is
kind to her. But Donnellan’s cautious refusal to say, under the circumstances
mentioned, that “Her husband is kind to her” is true, seems nevertheless to be
intuitively correct. The man to whom the speaker refers is—let us suppose—kind
to her. But it seems hard for us to say that when he uttered, “Her husband is kind
to her,” it expressed a truth, if we believe that her husband is unkind to her.
Now Donnellan thinks that he has refuted Russell. But all he has clearly
claimed, let alone established, is that a speaker can refer to the lover and say, of
him, that he is kind to her by saying “Her husband is kind to her.” So, ﬁrst, we
can ask: If this claim is correct, does it conﬂict with Russell’s views?
Second, since Donnellan’s denial that he advocates a semantic ambiguity in
deﬁnite descriptions seems inconsistent with much of his paper, we can try ignoring
the denial, and take his paper to be arguing for such an ambiguity. Then we may ask:
has Donnellan established a (semantic) ambiguity inconsistent with Russell’s theory?
(3b.) General remarks: apparatus.
We need a general apparatus to discuss these questions. Some of the apparatus
is well known, but I review it for its intrinsic importance and interest. First, let us
distinguish, following Grice,15 between what the speaker’s words meant, on a given
occasion, and what he meant, in saying these words, on that occasion. For
example, one burglar says to another, “The cops are around the corner.” What
the words meant is clear: the police were around the corner. But the speaker may
well have meant, “We can’t wait around collecting any more loot: Let’s split!”
That is not the meaning of the words, even on that occasion, though that is what he
meant in saying those words, on that occasion. Suppose he had said, “The cops are
15
For Grice, see the following papers, which I follow loosely in a good deal of the discussion at
the beginning of this section: “The Causal Theory of Perception,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society, supplementary vol. 35 (1961); “Logic and Conversation,” Peter Cole and Jerry
Morgan, eds., Syntax and Semantics, Volume 3: Speech Acts (New York: Academic Press, 1975),
pp. 43–58; “Meaning,” Philosophical Review 66 (1957): 377–88; “Utterer’s Meaning, SentenceMeaning and Word-Meaning,” Foundations of Language 4 (1968): 225–42; “Utterer’s Meaning and
Intentions,” Philosophical Review 78 (1969): 147–77.

110

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

inside the bank.” Then on that occasion, “bank” meant a commercial bank, not a
river bank, and this is relevant to what the words meant, on that occasion. (On
other occasions, the same words might mean that the police were at a river bank.)
But, if the speaker meant “Let’s split,” this is no part of the meaning of his words,
even on that occasion.
Again (inspired by an example of Grice)16: A magician makes a handkerchief
change color. Someone says, recalling the trick, “Then he put the red handkerchief on the side of the table”; and someone else interjects, cautiously, “It looked
red.” The words meant, on that occasion, that the object referred to (the
handkerchief) looked red. What we speak of when we speak of the meaning of
his words, on that occasion, includes a disambiguation of the utterance. (Perhaps,
on some occasions, where “it” refers to a book, a phonetically identical utterance
might mean, “it looked read”—well-thumbed and well-perused). But the speaker
meant, on this occasion, to suggest that perhaps the handkerchief wasn’t really red,
that perhaps the trick relied on some kind of illusion. (Note that, on this occasion,
not only do the words “it looked red” mean what they mean, but also the speaker
means that it looked red, as well as that it may not have been red. On the other
hand, the speaker has no intention of producing a belief in the hearer that the
handkerchief looked red, or a belief in the hearer that he (the speaker) believed it
looked red. Both facts are common knowledge. The same could hold for “The cops
are around the corner.”17 Do these examples contradict Grice’s analysis of “meaning”? Grice’s theory has become very complex and I am not quite sure.)
The notion of what words can mean, in the language, is semantical: it is given
by the conventions of our language. What they mean, on a given occasion, is
determined, on a given occasion, by these conventions, together with the intentions of the speaker and various contextual features. Finally, what the speaker
meant, on a given occasion, in saying certain words, derives from various further
special intentions of the speaker, together with various general principles, applicable to all human languages regardless of their special conventions. (Cf. Grice’s
“conversational maxims.”) For example, “It looks red” replaced a categorical
afﬁrmation of redness. A plausible general principle of human discourse would
have it that if a second speaker insists that a stronger assertion should be replaced
by a weaker one, he thereby wishes to cast doubt on the stronger assertion;
whence, knowing the semantics of English, and the meaning of the speaker’s
words on this occasion, we can deduce what was meant (the Gricean “conversational implicature”).18
16

In “The Causal Theory of Perception.”
Suppose the second burglar is well aware of the proximity of the police, but procrastinates
in his greed for more loot. Then the ﬁrst burglar imparts no information by saying what he does,
but simply urges the second burglar to “split.”
18
Although conversational principles are applicable to all languages, they may apply differently
to different societies. In a society where blunt statement was considered rude, where “it looks red”
replaced “it is red” just because of such a custom, “it looks red” might carry different conversational
17

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

111

Let us now speak of speaker’s reference and semantic reference: these notions
are special cases of the Gricean notions discussed above. If a speaker has a
designator in his idiolect, certain conventions of his idiolect19 (given various
facts about the world) determine the referent in the idiolect: that I call the
semantic referent of the designator. (If the designator is ambiguous, or contains
indexicals, demonstratives, or the like, we must speak of the semantic referent on
a given occasion. The referent will be determined by the conventions of the
language plus the speaker’s intentions and various contextual features.)
Speaker’s reference is a more difﬁcult notion. Consider, for example, the
following case, which I have mentioned elsewhere.20 Two people see Smith in
the distance and mistake him for Jones. They have a brief colloquy: “What is
Jones doing?” “Raking the leaves.” “Jones,” in the common language of both, is a
name of Jones; it never names Smith. Yet, in some sense, on this occasion, clearly
both participants in the dialogue have referred to Smith, and the second participant has said something true about the man he referred to if and only if Smith
was raking the leaves (whether or not Jones was). How can we account for this?
Suppose a speaker takes it that a certain object a fulﬁlls the conditions for being
the semantic referent of a designator, “d.” Then, wishing to say something about
a, he uses “d ” to speak about a; say, he says “f(d).” Then, he said, of a, on that
occasion, that it f’d; in the appropriate Gricean sense (explicated above), he
meant that a f’d. This is true even if a is not really the semantic referent of “d.” If
it is not, then that a f’s is included in what he meant (on that occasion), but not
in the meaning of his words (on that occasion).
So, we may tentatively deﬁne the speaker’s referent of a designator to be that
object which the speaker wishes to talk about, on a given occasion, and believes
fulﬁlls the conditions for being the semantic referent of the designator. He uses
the designator with the intention of making an assertion about the object in
question (which may not really be the semantic referent, if the speaker’s belief
that it fulﬁlls the appropriate semantic conditions is in error). The speaker’s
implicatures from our own. This might be the case even though the members of the society spoke
English, just as we do. Conversational principles are matters for the psychology, sociology, and
anthropology of linguistic communities; they are applicable to these communities no matter what
language they may speak, though the applicable principles may vary somewhat with the
communities (and may even, to some extent, be conditioned by the fact that they speak languages
with certain structures.) Often, of course, we can state widely applicable, “cross-cultural,” general
conversational principles. Semantic and syntactic principles, on the other hand, are matters of the
conventions of a language, in whatever cultural matrix it may be spoken. Perhaps sometimes it is
difﬁcult to draw the line, but it exists in general nonetheless.
19
If the views about proper names I have advocated in Naming and Necessity are correct
(Donnellan, in fact, holds similar views), the conventions regarding names in an idiolect usually
involve the fact that the idiolect is no mere idiolect, but part of a common language, in which
reference may be passed from link to link.
As the present chapter attests, my views on proper names in Naming and Necessity have no special
connection with the referential-attributive distinction.
20
Naming and Necessity, p. 25, n. 3.

112

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

referent is the thing the speaker referred to by the designator, though it may not
be the referent of the designator, in his idiolect. In the example above, Jones, the
man named by the name, is the semantic referent. Smith is the speaker’s referent,
the correct answer to the question, “To whom were you referring?”21
Below, the notion of speaker’s reference will be extended to include more cases
where existential quantiﬁcation rather than designation is involved.
In a given idiolect, the semantic referent of a designator (without indexicals) is
given by a general intention of the speaker to refer to a certain object whenever
the designator is used. The speaker’s referent is given by a speciﬁc intention, on a
given occasion, to refer to a certain object. If the speaker believes that the object
he wants to talk about, on a given occasion, fulﬁlls the conditions for being the
semantic referent, then he believes that there is no clash between his general
intentions and his speciﬁc intentions. My hypothesis is that Donnellan’s referential-attributive distinction should be generalized in this light. For the speaker,
on a given occasion, may believe that his speciﬁc intention coincides with his
general intention for one of two reasons. In one case (the “simple” case), his
speciﬁc intention is simply to refer to the semantic referent: that is, his speciﬁc
intention is simply his general semantic intention. (For example, he uses “Jones”
as a name of Jones—elaborate this according to your favorite theory of proper
names—and, on this occasion, simply wishes to use “Jones” to refer to Jones.)
Alternatively—the “complex” case—he has a speciﬁc intention, which is distinct
from his general intention, but which he believes, as a matter of fact, to
determine the same object as the one determined by his general intention. (For
example, he wishes to refer to the man “over there” but believes that he is Jones.)
In the “simple” case, the speaker’s referent is, by deﬁnition, the semantic referent.
21
Donnellan shows in his paper that there are “referential” uses, of a somewhat exceptional kind,
where the speaker, or even both the speaker and the hearer, are aware that the description used does
not apply to the thing they are talking about. For example, they use “the king,” knowing him to be a
usurper, but fearing the secret police. Analogous cases can be given for proper names: if Smith is a
lunatic who thinks he is Napoleon, they may humor him. Largely for the sake of simplicity of
exposition, I have excluded such both from the notion of speaker’s reference and from Donnellan’s
“referential” use (and the “D-languages” below). I do not think that the situation would be
materially altered if both notions were revised so as to admit these cases, in a more reﬁned
analysis. In particular, it would probably weaken the case for a semantic ambiguity if these cases
were allowed: for they shade into ironical and “inverted commas” cases. “He is a ‘ﬁne friend’,” may
be ironical (whether or not inverted commas are used in the transcription). “‘The king’ is still in
power”; “ ‘Napoleon’ has gone to bed” are similar, whether or not explicit inverted commas are
used. It is fairly clear that “ﬁne friend,” “brillant scholar,” etc., do not have ironical and inverted
commas senses: irony is a certain form of speech act, to be accounted for by pragmatic
considerations. The case for a semantic ambiguity in deﬁnite descriptions is similarly weakened if
we include such cases as referential uses.
In ordinary discourse, we say that the speaker was referring to someone under a wide variety of
circumstances, including linguistic errors, verbal slips, and deliberate misuses of language. (If Mrs.
Malaprop says, “The geography teacher said that equilateral triangles are equiangular,” she refers to
the geometry teacher.) The more such phenomena one includes in the notion of speaker’s reference,
the further one gets from any connection of the notion with semantical matters.

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

113

In the “complex” case, they may coincide, if the speaker’s belief is correct, but
they need not. (The man “over there” may be Smith and not Jones.) To
anticipate, my hypothesis will be that Donnellan’s “attributive” use is nothing
but the “simple” case, specialized to deﬁnite descriptions, and that the “referential” use is, similarly, the “complex” case. If such a conjecture is correct, it would
be wrong to take Donnellan’s “referential” use, as he does, to be a use of a
description as if it were a proper name. For the distinction of simple and complex
cases will apply to proper names just as much as to deﬁnite descriptions.
(3c.) Donnellan’s argument against Russell: methodological and substantive
considerations.
In the light of the notions just developed, consider the argument Donnellan
adduces against Russell. Donnellan points to a phenomenon which he alleges to
be inexplicable on a Russellian account of English deﬁnite descriptions. He
accounts for it by positing an ambiguity. Alternatively, we wish to account for
the phenomenon on pragmatic grounds, encapsulated in the distinction between
speaker’s reference and semantic reference. How can we see whether Donnellan’s
phenomenon conﬂicts with a Russellian account?
I propose the following test for any alleged counterexample to a linguistic
proposal: If someone alleges that a certain linguistic phenomenon in English is a
counterexample to a given analysis, consider a hypothetical language which (as
much as possible) is like English except that the analysis is stipulated to be correct.
Imagine such a hypothetical language introduced into a community and spoken
by it. If the phenomenon in question would still arise in a community that spoke such
a hypothetical language (which may not be English), then the fact that it arises in
English cannot disprove the hypothesis that the analysis is correct for English. An
example removed from the present discussion: Some have alleged that identity
cannot be the relation that holds between, and only between, each thing and
itself, for if so, the nontriviality of identity statements would be inexplicable. If it
is conceded, however, that such a relation makes sense, and if it can be shown
that a hypothetical language involving such a relation would generate the same
problems, it will follow that the existence of these problems does not refute the
hypothesis that “identical to” stands for this same relation in English.22
By “the weak Russell language,” I will mean a language similar to English
except that the truth conditions of sentences with deﬁnite descriptions are
stipulated to coincide with Russell’s: for example, “The present King of France
is bald” is to be true iff exactly one person is king of France, and that person is
bald. On the weak Russell language, this effect can be achieved by assigning
semantic reference to deﬁnite descriptions: the semantic referent of a deﬁnite
description is the unique object that satisﬁes the description, if any; otherwise
22

See the discussion of “schmidentity” in Naming and Necessity, p. 108.

114

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

there is no semantic referent. A sentence of the simple subject-predicate form will
be true if the predicate is true of the (semantic) referent of its subject; false, if
either the subject has no semantic referent or the predicate is not true of the
semantic referent of the subject.
Since the weak Russell language takes deﬁnite descriptions to be primitive
designators, it is not fully Russellian. By “the intermediate Russell language,”
I mean a language in which sentences containing deﬁnite descriptions are taken
to be abbreviations or paraphrases of their Russellian analyses: for example, “The
present king of France is bald” means (or has a “deep structure” like) “Exactly one
person is at present king of France, and he is bald,” or the like. Descriptions are
not terms, and are not assigned reference or meaning in isolation. The “strong
Russell language” goes further: deﬁnite descriptions are actually banned from the
language and Russellian paraphrases are used in their place. Instead of saying
“Her husband is kind to her,” a speaker of this language must say “Exactly one
man is married to her, and he is kind to her,” or even (better), “There is a unique
man who is married to her, and every man who is married to her is kind to her,”
or the like. If Russell is right, long-windedness is the only defect of these versions.
Would the phenomenon Donnellan adduces arise in communities that spoke
these languages? Surely speakers of these languages are no more infallible than
we. They too will ﬁnd themselves at a party and mistakenly think someone is
drinking champagne even though he is actually drinking sparkling water. If they
are speakers of the weak or intermediate Russell languages, they will say, “The
man in the corner drinking champagne is happy tonight.” They will say this
precisely because they think, though erroneously, that the Russellian truth conditions
are satisﬁed. Wouldn’t we say of these speakers that they are referring to the
teetotaler, under the misimpression that he is drinking champagne? And, if he is
happy, are they not saying of him, truly, that he is happy? Both answers seem
obviously afﬁrmative.
In the case of the weak Russell language, the general apparatus previously
developed seems fully adequate to account for the phenomenon. The semantic
referent of a deﬁnite description is given by the conditions laid down above: it is a
matter of the speciﬁc conventions of the (weak) Russell language, in this case that
the referent is the unique object satisfying the descriptive conditions. The speaker’s referent, on the other hand, is determined by a general theory of speech
acts, applicable to all languages: it is the object to which the speaker wishes to
refer, and which he believes fulﬁlls the Russellian conditions for being the
semantic referent. Again, in asserting the sentence he does, the speaker means
that the speaker’s referent (the teetotaler) satisﬁed the predicate (is happy). Thus
the rough theoretical apparatus above accounts fully for our intuitions about
this case.
What about the other Russellian languages? Even in the strong Russell
language, where explicit descriptions are outlawed, the same phenomena can
occur. In fact, they occur in English in “arch” uses of existential quantiﬁcation:

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

115

“Exactly one person (or: some person or other) is drinking champagne in that
corner, and I hear he is romantically linked with Jane Smith.” The circumlocution, in English, expresses the delicacy of the topic, but the speaker’s reference (in
quite an ordinary sense) may well be clear, even if he in fact is drinking sparkling
water. In English such circumlocutions are common only when the speaker
wishes to achieve a rather arch and prissy effect, but in the strong Russell
language (which of course isn’t English), they would be made more common
because the deﬁnite article is prohibited.
This example leads to an extension of the notion of speaker’s reference. When
a speaker asserts an existential quantiﬁcation, (∃x)(fx ∧ cx), it may be clear
which thing he has in mind as satisfying “fx,” and he may wish to convey to his
hearers that that thing satisﬁes “cx.” In this case, the thing in question (which
may or may not actually satisfy “fx”) is called the “speaker’s referent” when he
makes the existential assertion. In English, as I have mentioned, such cases
(“arch” uses) are rather rare; but they can be carried off even if the existential
quantiﬁcation is expressed in a highly roundabout and apparently nonreferring
fashion. “Not everyone in this room is abstaining from champagne, and any such
nonabstainer. . . . ”23
If the notion of speaker’s reference applies to the strong Russell language, it
can apply to the intermediate Russell language as well, since the speaker’s referent
of “c(ixf(x))” is then the thing he has in mind as uniquely instantiating “f(x)”
and about which he wishes to convey that it c’s.
Since the phenomenon Donnellan cites would arise in all the Russell languages, if they were spoken, the fact that they do arise in English, as actually
spoken, can be no argument that English is not a Russell language.
We may contrast the Russell languages with what may be called the Dlanguages. In the D-languages the apparent ambiguity between referential and
attributive deﬁnite descriptions is explicitly built into the semantics of the
language and affects truth conditions. (The D-languages are meant to suggest
“Donnellan,” but are not called the “Donnellan languages,” since Donnellan, as
we have seen, is “ambiguous” as to whether he posits a semantic ambiguity.) The
unambiguous D-language contains two distinct words, “the” and “ze” (rhymes
with “the”). A statement of the form “ . . . the F . . . ” is true iff the predicate
represented by the dots is true of the unique object fulﬁlling F (we need not
specify what happens if there is no such thing; if we wish to follow Russell, take it
to be false). A statement of the form “ . . . ze F . . . ” is to be true iff the predicate
represented by the dots is true of the unique thing the speaker thinks F is true of.
(Once again, we leave free what happens if there is no such thing.) The ambiguous
23
Or, using variables explicitly, “There is a person x such that . . . ” Notice that in an utterance of
“(∃x) (çx ∧ łx),” as long as it is clear which thing allegedly satisfying “çx” the speaker has in mind,
there can be a speaker’s referent, even if both the speaker and the hearer are aware that many things
satisfy “fx.”

116

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

D-language is like the unambiguous D-language except that “the,” ambiguously,
can be interpreted according to the semantics either of “the” or of “ze.” The
general impression conveyed by Donnellan’s paper, in spite of his statement at
one point to the contrary, is that English is the ambiguous D-language; only on
such a hypothesis could we say that the “referential use” (really, referential sense)
diverges from Russell’s theory. The truth-conditions of statements containing
“ze,” and therefore of one sense of “the” in the ambiguous D-language, are
incompatible with Russell’s theory.24
We have two hypotheses: one says that English is a Russell language, while the
other says that English is the ambiguous D-language. Which hypothesis is
preferable? Since, as we have argued, the phenomena Donnellan adduces
would arise in a hypothetical society that spoke any of the Russell languages,
the existence in English of such phenomena provides no argument against the
hypothesis that English is a Russell language. If Donnellan had possessed a clear
intuition that “Her husband is kind to her,” uttered in reference to the kind lover
of a woman married to a cruel husband, expressed the literal truth, then he would
have adduced a phenomenon that conforms to the ambiguous D-language but is
incompatible with any Russell language. But Donnellan makes no such assertion:
he cautiously, and correctly, conﬁnes himself to the weaker claim that the speaker
spoke truly of the man to whom he referred. This weaker claim, we have seen,
would hold for a speaker of a Russell language.
So Donnellan’s examples provide, in themselves, no evidence that English is
the ambiguous D-language rather than a Russell language. Granting that this is
so, we can ask whether there is any reason to favor the Russell language
hypothesis over the D-language hypothesis. I think there are several general
methodological considerations that are relevant.
The Russell language theory, or any other unitary account (that is, any account
that postulates no semantic ambiguity), accounts for Donnellan’s referential24
This description of the D-languages speciﬁes nothing about semantical features more
“intensional” than truth conditions. It is plausible to assume that “ze F” is a rigid designator of
the thing believed to be uniquely F, but this is not explicitly included in the extensional truth
conditions. Nor has anything been said about the behavior of “ze F” in belief and indirect discourse
contexts. If we stipulate that “ze F,” even in such contexts, designates the thing the speaker believes
uniquely F’s, then indeed “Jones said that ze man she married is kind to her,” will not be a proper
way of reporting Jones’s utterance “Ze man she married is kind to her” (even if Jones and the speaker
happen to have the same belief as to who her husband is; the difﬁculty is more obvious if they do
not.) No doubt it is this fact that lies behind Donnellan’s view that, in the referential case, it is hard
to speak of “the statement,” even though his exposition of the matter seems to be defective. Such
implications, which are not present in the Russell language, lend only further implausibility to the
supposition that English is the ambiguous D-language.
To repeat footnote 21, actually there are many other ways, other than taking something uniquely
to satisfy “F,” that might be included under referential uses of “the F.” The best short way to specify
the semantics of “ze F” would seem to be this: “ze F” refers, in the unambiguous D-language, to
what would have been the speaker’s referent of “the F” in the weak Russell language (under the same
circumstances)! But this formulation makes it very implausible that the ambiguous D-language is
anything but a chimerical model for English.

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

117

attributive phenomenon by a general pragmatic theory of speech acts, applicable
to a very wide range of languages; the D-language hypothesis accounts for these
same phenomena by positing a semantic ambiguity. The unitary account appeals
to a general apparatus that applies to cases, such as the “Smith-Jones” case, where
it is completely implausible that a semantic ambiguity exists. According to the
unitary account, far from the referential use constituting a special namelike use of
deﬁnite descriptions, the referential-attributive distinction is simply a special case
of a general distinction, applicable to proper names as well as to deﬁnite
descriptions, and illustrated in practice by the (leaf-raking) Smith-Jones case.
And anyone who compares the Smith-Jones case, where presumably no one is
tempted to posit a special semantic ambiguity, with Donnellan’s cases of deﬁnite
descriptions, must surely be impressed by the similarity of the phenomena.25
Under these circumstances, surely general methodological principles favor the
existing account. The apparatus of speaker’s reference and semantic reference,
and of simple and complex uses of designators, is needed anyway, to explain the
Smith-Jones case; it is applicable to all languages.26 Why posit a semantic
ambiguity when it is both insufﬁcient in general and superﬂuous for the special
case it seeks to explain?27 And why are the phenomena regarding proper names so
25
There is one signiﬁcant difference between the case of proper names and that of deﬁnite
descriptions. If someone uses “Jones” to refer to Smith, he has misidentiﬁed Smith as Jones, taken
Smith for someone else. To some extent I did think that Jones was raking the leaves. (I assume that
“Jones” is already in his idiolect as a name of Jones. If I am introduced to an impostor and am told,
“This man is none other than Albert Einstein,” if I am fooled I will have taken him, falsely, to be
Einstein. Someone else, who has never heard of Einstein before, may merely be mistaken as to the
impostor’s name.) On the other hand, if I think that someone is “her husband” and so refer to him,
I need not at all have confused two people. I merely think that one person possesses a property—that
of being married to her—that in fact he lacks. The real husband is irrelevant.
26
In terms of this apparatus, I can sharpen the reply to Katz, pp. 106–07, and footnote 11,
above. If Schmidt had discovered the incompleteness of arithmetic but I had thought it was Gödel
who did so, a complex (“referential”) use of the description has a semantic reference to Schmidt but
a speaker’s reference to Gödel. Once I am apprised of the true facts, speaker’s reference and semantic
reference will coincide thereafter and I will no longer use the description to refer to Gödel. The
name “Gödel,” on the other hand, has Gödel as its semantic referent: the name will always be applied
to Gödel in the presence of correct information. Whether a term would be withdrawn in the
presence of correct information (without changing the language) is a good intuitive test for
divergence of semantic reference and speaker’s reference (disregarding the cases in footnote 21).
27
There is another problem for any theory of semantic ambiguity. Donnellan says that if I say
“Smith’s murderer is insane,” solely on the basis of the grizzly condition of Smith’s body, my use of
“Smith’s murderer” is attributive (even if I in fact have a belief as to who the murderer is), but if I say
it on the basis of the supposed murderer’s behavior at the dock, my use is referential. Surely,
however, my reasons can be mixed: perhaps neither consideration would have sufﬁced by itself, but
they sufﬁce jointly. What is my use then? A user of the unambiguous D-language would have to
choose between “the” and “ze.” It seems very implausible to suppose that the speaker is confused and
uncertain about what sense he gives to his description; but what else can we say if we suppose that
English is the ambiguous D-language? (This problem arises even if the man at the dock is guilty, so
that in fact there is no conﬂict. It is more obvious if he is innocent.)
A pragmatic theory of the referential-attributive distinction can handle such cases much more
easily. Clearly there can be borderline cases between the simple and the complex use—where, to
some extent the speaker wishes to speak of the semantic referent and to some extent he wishes to

118

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

similar to those for deﬁnite descriptions, if the one case involves no semantic
ambiguity while the other does?
It is very much the lazy man’s approach in philosophy to posit ambiguities
when in trouble. If we face a putative counterexample to our favorite philosophical thesis, it is always open to us to protest that some key term is being used in a
special sense, different from its use in the thesis. We may be right, but the ease of
the move should counsel a policy of caution: Do not posit an ambiguity unless
you are really forced to, unless there are really compelling theoretical or intuitive
grounds to suppose that an ambiguity really is present.
Let me say a bit more in defense of this. Many philosophers, for example, have
advocated a “strong” account of knowledge according to which it is very hard to
know anything; stiff requirements must be satisﬁed. When such philosophers
have been confronted with intuitive counterexamples to such strong requirements
for knowledge they either have condemned them as popular and loose usages or
they have asserted that “know” is being used in a different “weak” sense. The
latter move—distinguishing two or more “strong” and “weak” senses of
“know”—strikes me as implausible. There are different senses of “know,” distinguished in German as “kennen” and “wissen,” and in French as “connaı̂tre” and
“savoir”; a person is usually known in the one sense, a fact in the other. It is no
surprise that other languages use distinct words for these various senses of “know”;
there is no reason for the ambiguity to be preserved in languages unrelated to our
own. But what about the uses of “know” that characteristically are followed by
that-clauses, knowing that p? Are these ambiguous? I would be very surprised to be
told that the Eskimos have two separate words, one for (say) Hintikka’s “strong”
sense of “know,” another for his “weak” sense. Perhaps this indicates that we think
of knowledge as a unitary concept, unlikely to be “disambiguated” by two
separate words in any language. (See Chapter 2, pp. 40ff.)
We thus have two methodological considerations that can be used to test any
alleged ambiguity. “Bank” is ambiguous; we would expect the ambiguity to be
disambiguated by separate and unrelated words in some other languages. Why
should the two separate senses be reproduced in languages unrelated to English?
First, then, we can consult our linguistic intuitions, independently of any
empirical investigation. Would we be surprised to ﬁnd languages that used two
separate words for the two alleged senses of a given word? If so, then, to that
speak of something he believes to be the semantic referent. He need not sort out his motives
carefully, since he thinks these things are one and the same!
Given such mixed motives, the speaker’s reference may be partially to one thing and partially to
another, even when the semantic reference is unambiguous. This is especially likely in the case of
proper names, since divergences between speaker’s referent and semantic referent are
characteristically misidentiﬁcations (see footnote 25). Even if the speaker’s referent of “Jones” in
“Jones is raking the leaves” is Smith, to some extent I have said of Jones that he is raking the leaves.
There are gradations, depending on the speaker’s interests and intentions, as to what extent the
speaker’s reference was to Jones and to what extent it was to Smith. The problem is less common in
the case of descriptions, where misidentiﬁcation need not have occurred.

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

119

extent our linguistic intuitions are really intuitions of a unitary concept, rather
than of a word that expresses two distinct and unrelated senses. Second, we can
ask empirically whether languages are in fact found that contain distinct words
expressing the allegedly distinct senses. If no such language is found, once again
this is evidence that a unitary account of the word or phrase in question should be
sought.
As far as our main question is concerned, the ﬁrst of these two tests, that of our
intuitive expectation, seems to me overwhelmingly to favor a unitary account
of descriptions, as opposed to the ambiguity postulated in the ambiguous
D-language. If English really is the ambiguous D-language, we should expect to
ﬁnd other languages where the referential and attributive uses are expressed by two
separate words, as in the unambiguous D-language. I at least would ﬁnd it quite
surprising to learn that say, the Eskimo, used two separate words “the” and “ze,” for
the attributive and referential uses. To the extent that I have this intuition, to that
extent I think of “the” as a unitary concept. I should have liked to be able to report
that I have reinforced this guess by an actual empirical examination of other
languages—the second test—but as of now I haven’t done so.28
Several general methodological considerations favor the Russell language (or
some other unitary account) against the ambiguous D-language as a model for
English. First, the unitary account conforms to considerations of economy in
that it does not “multiply senses beyond necessity.” Second, the metalinguistic
apparatus invoked by the unitary account to explain the referential-attributive
distinction is an apparatus that is needed in any case for other cases, such
as proper names. The separate referential sense of descriptions postulated by
the D-language hypothesis, is an idle wheel that does no work: if it were absent,
we would be able to express everything we wished to express, in the same way.
Further, the resemblance between the case of descriptions and that of proper
names (where presumably no one would be tempted to postulate an ambiguity) is
28

Of course these tests must be used with some caution. The mere fact that some language subdivides the extension of an English word into several subclasses, with their own separate words, and
has no word for the whole extension, does not show that the English word was ambiguous (think of
the story that the Eskimos have different words for different kinds of snow). If many unrelated
languages preserve a single word, this in itself is evidence for a unitary concept. On the other hand, a
word may have different senses that are obviously related. One sense may be metaphorical for
another (though in that case, it may not really be a separate sense, but simply a common metaphor).
“Statistics” can mean both statistical data and the science of evaluating such data. And the like. The
more we can explain relations among senses, and the more “natural” and “inevitable” the
relationship, the more we will expect the different senses to be preserved in a wide variety of
other languages.
The test, therefore, needs further exploration and reﬁnement. It is certainly wrong to postulate an
ambiguity without any explanation of some connection between the “senses” that explains why they
occur in a wide variety of languages. In the referential-attributive case, I feel that any attempt to
explain the connection between the referential and the attributive uses will be so close to the kind of
pragmatic account offered here as to render any assumptions of distinct senses inplausible and
superﬂuous.

120

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

so close that any attempt to explain the cases differently is automatically suspect.
Finally, we would not expect the alleged ambiguity to be disambiguated in other
languages, and this means we probably regard ourselves as possessing a unitary
concept.
Aside from methodological considerations, is there any direct evidence that
would favor one of our two rival accounts? As I remarked above, if we had a
direct intuition that “Her husband is kind to her” could be true even when her
actual husband is cruel, then we would have decisive evidence for the D-language
model; but Donnellan rightly disclaims any such intuition. On the other hand,
I myself feel that such a sentence expresses a falsehood, even when “her husband”
is used referentially to refer to a kind man; but the popularity of Donnellan’s
view has made me uncertain that this intuition should be pressed very far. In the
absence of such direct intuitions that would settle the matter conclusively, it
would seem that the actual practice of English speakers is compatible with either
model, and that only general methodological considerations favor one hypothesis
rather than another. Such a situation leaves me uneasy. If there really is no direct
evidence to distinguish the two hypotheses, how are they different hypotheses? If
two communities, one of whom spoke the ambiguous D-language and the other
of whom spoke the (weak) Russell language, would be able to intermingle freely
without detecting any linguistic difference, do they really speak two different
languages? If so, wherein is the difference?
Two hypothetical communities, one of which was explicitly taught the ambiguous D-language and the other of which was taught the (weak) Russell
language (say, in school), would have direct and differing intuitions about the
truth-value of “Her husband was kind to her”; but it is uncertain whether English
speakers have any such intuitions. If they have none, is this a respect in which
English differs from both the Russell languages and the D-languages, and thus
differentiates it from both? Or, on the contrary, is there a pragmatic consideration, deriving no doubt from the fact that the relevant rules of language are not
explicitly taught, that will explain why we lack such intuitions (if we do) without
showing that neither the D-language nor the Russell language is English?
Some commentators on the dispute between Russell and Frege and Strawson
over sentences containing vacuous deﬁnite descriptions have held that no direct
linguistic phenomena conclusively decide between the two views: we should
therefore choose the most economical and theoretically satisfying model. But if
this is so, are there really two views, and if there are, shouldn’t we perhaps say that
neither is correct? A hypothetical community that was explicitly taught Russellian or Frege-Strawsonian truth-conditions for sentences containing vacuous
deﬁnite descriptions would have no difﬁculty producing direct intuitions that
decide the Russell-Strawson dispute. If the commentators in question are correct,
speakers of English have no such intuitions. Surely this fact, too, would be a
signiﬁcant fact about English, for which linguistic theory should give an account.
Perhaps pragmatic considerations sufﬁce for such an account; or, perhaps, the

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

121

alleged lack of any such intuition must be accounted for by a feature built into
the semantics of English itself. In the latter case, neither the Russellian nor the
Frege-Strawsonian truth-conditions would be appropriate for English. Similar
considerations would apply to the issue between Donnellan and Russell.29
I am uncertain about these questions. Certainly it would be best if there were
directly observable phenomena that differentiated between the two hypotheses.
Actually I can think of one rather special and localized phenomenon that
may indeed favor the Russellian hypothesis, or some other unitary hypothesis.
Consider the following two dialogues:
Dialogue I: A. “Her husband is kind to her.”
B. “No, he isn’t. The man you’re referring to isn’t her husband.”
Dialogue II: A. “Her husband is kind to her.”
B. “He is kind to her, but he isn’t her husband.”

In the ﬁrst dialogue the respondent (B) uses “he” to refer to the semantic referent
of “her husband” as used by the ﬁrst speaker (A); in the second dialogue the
respondent uses “he” to refer to the speaker’s referent. My tendency is to think
that both dialogues are proper. The unitary account can explain this fact, by
saying that pronominalization can pick up either a previous semantic reference or
a previous speaker’s reference.30, 31 In the case of the two contrasting dialogues,
these diverge.

29
That is, the concept of truth conditions is somehow inappropriate for the semantics of English.
The vague uneasiness expressed in these paragraphs expresses my own rather confused occasional
doubts and is ancillary to the main theme. Moore’s “paradox of analysis” may be a related
problem.
Quine’s philosophy of language characteristically is based on a naturalistic doubt about building
any “rules” or “conventions” into a language that are not recoverable from actual linguistic practices,
even if such rules may be necessary to stipulate the language. In this sense, the uneasiness expressed is
Quinean in spirit. I ﬁnd Quine’s emphasis on a naturalistic approach to some extent salutary. But
I also feel that our intuitions of semantic rules as speakers should not be ignored cavalierly.
30
Geach, in his book Reference and Generality, Emended edition (Ithaca, 1970), and elsewhere,
has argued vigorously against speaking of pronominalization as picking up a previous reference. I do
not wish to argue the extent to which he is right here. I use the terminology given in the text for
convenience, but to the extent Geach’s views are correct I think the example could presumably be
reformulated to ﬁt his scheme. I think the views expressed in this paper are very much in the spirit of
Geach’s remarks on deﬁnite descriptions and speaker’s reference in the book just cited. See Geach’s
discussion, e.g., on p. 8.
31
Donnellan, in “Speaker Reference, Descriptions and Anaphora” thinks that the fact that
pronouns can pick up a previous semantic reference somehow casts doubt on a view that makes
speaker’s reference a nonsemantical notion. I don’t see why: “he,” “she,” “that,” etc., can, under
various circumstances, refer to anything salient in an appropriate way. Being physically
distinguished against its background is a property that may make an object salient; having been
referred to by a previous speaker is another. In Naming and Necessity, footnote 3, I suggested
tentatively that Donnellan’s “remarks about reference have little to do with semantics or truth
conditions.” The point would be put more exactly if I had said that Donnellan’s distinction is not
itself a semantical one, though it is relevant to semantics through pronominalization, as many other
non-semantical properties are.

122

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

If English were the ambiguous D-language, the second dialogue would be easy
to explain. “He” refers to the object that is both the semantic referent and the
speaker’s referent of “her husband.” (Recall that the notions of speaker’s reference
and semantic reference are general notions applicable to all languages, even to the
D-languages.32) The ﬁrst dialogue, however, would be much more difﬁcult, perhaps
impossible, to explain. When A said “her husband,” according to the D-language
hypothesis he was using “her husband” in the referential sense. Both the speaker’s
referent and the semantic referent would be the kind lover; only if B had misunderstood A’s use as attributive could he have used “he” to refer to the husband, but such
a misunderstanding is excluded by the second part of B’s utterance. If the ﬁrst
dialogue is proper, it seems hard to ﬁt it into the D-language model.33
(4.) Conclusion.
I said at the beginning that the main concern of this paper was methodological
rather than substantive. I do think that the considerations in this paper make it
overwhelmingly probable that an ultimate account of the phenomena behind
Donnellan’s distinction will make use of the pragmatic ambiguity between
“simple” and “complex” uses, as I deﬁned them above, rather than postulating
an ambiguity of the D-language type. But any ultimate substantive conclusion on
the issue requires a more extensive and thorough treatment than has been given
here. First, I have not here examined theories that attempt to explain Donnellan’s
Pronominalization phenomena are relevant to another point. Often one hears it argued against
Russell’s existential analysis of indeﬁnite descriptions that an indeﬁnite description may be
anaphorically referred to by a pronoun that seems to preserve the reference of the indeﬁnite
description. I am not sure that these phenomena do conﬂict with the existential analysis. (I am
not completely sure there are some that don’t, either.) In any event, many cases can be accounted for
(given a Russellian theory) by the facts that: (i) existential statements can carry a speaker’s reference;
(ii) pronouns can refer to the speaker’s referent.
32
The use of “ze” in the unambiguous D-language is such that the semantic reference
automatically coincided with the speaker’s reference, but nevertheless, the notions are applicable.
So are the notions of simple and complex uses of designators. However, speakers of the
unambiguous D-language might be less likely ever to use “the” in a complex case: for, one might
be inclined to argue, if such are their intentions, why not use “ze”?
33
Various moves might be tried, but none that I can think of seem to me to be plausible. It has
been suggested to me that sometimes the respondent in a dialogue deliberately feigns to
misunderstand an ambiguous phrase used by the ﬁrst speaker, and that, given the supposed
ambiguity of “her husband” in the ambiguous D-language, the ﬁrst dialogue can be interpreted as
such a case. For example, the following dialogue: “Jones put the money in a bank.” “He put the
money in one all right, but it wasn’t a commercial bank; he was so much afraid it would be
discovered that he hid it near the river.” It seems implausible to me that the ﬁrst dialogue in the text
ﬁts into such a very jocular model. But notice further that the joke consists in a mock conﬁrmation of
the ﬁrst speaker’s assertion. It would be rather bizarre to respond, “He didn’t put the money in the
bank, and it wasn’t a commercial bank.” The ﬁrst dialogue would have to conform to such a bizarre
pattern on the hypothesis in question.
Alternatively, it might be suggested that B uses “he” as a pronoun of laziness for A’s “her
husband,” taken in the supposed referential sense. This move seems to be excluded, since B may
well be in no position to use “her husband” referentially. He may merely have heard that she is
married to a cruel man.

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

123

distinction as a syntactic ambiguity, either of scope or of restrictive and nonrestrictive clauses in deep structure.34 Both these views, like the line suggested in
the present paper, are compatible with a unitary hypothesis such as the hypothesis that English is a Russell language. Although I am not inclined to accept either
of these views, some others have found them plausible and unless they are
rebutted, they too indicate that Donnellan’s observations cannot be taken as
providing a conclusive argument against Russell without further discussion.
Second, and most important, no treatment of deﬁnite descriptions can be
complete unless it examines the complete range of uses of the deﬁnite article and
related linguistic phenomena. Such a treatment should attempt, as I have argued
above, to make it clear why the same construction with a deﬁnite article is used
for a wide range of cases. It would be wrong for me not to mention the
phenomena most favorable to Donnellan’s intuitions. In a demonstrative use
such as “that table,” it seems plausible, as I have mentioned above,35 that the
term rigidly designates its referent. It also seems plausible that the reference of
such a demonstrative construction can be an object to which the descriptive
adjectives in the construction do not apply (for example, “that scoundrel” may be
used to refer to someone who is not, in fact, a scoundrel) and it is not clear that
the distinction between speaker’s reference and semantic reference should be
invoked to account for this. As I also said above, it seems to me to be likely that
“indeﬁnite” deﬁnite descriptions36 such as “the table” present difﬁculties for a
Russellian analysis. It is somewhat tempting to assimilate such descriptions to the
corresponding demonstratives (for example, “that table”) and to the extent that
such a temptation turns out to be plausible, there may be new arguments in such
cases for the intuitions of those who have advocated a rigid vs. non-rigid
ambiguity in deﬁnite descriptions, or for Donnellan’s intuitions concerning
the referential case, or for both.37
34
I believe that Kartunnen has advocated the view that the referential-attributive distinction
arises from a scope ambiguity; I do not know whether this has been published. Since the referentialattributive “ambiguity” arises even in simple sentences such as “Smith’s murderer is insane,” where
there appears to be no room for any scope ambiguity, such a view seems forced to rely on acceptance
of Ross’s suggestion that all English assertive utterances begin with an initial “I say that,” which is
suppressed in “surface structure” but present in “deep structure.”
For the view that derives the referential-attributive “ambiguity” from a distinction of restrictive
and non-restrictive clauses in “deep structure,” see J. M. Bell, “What Is Referential Opacity?”,
Journal of Philosophical Logic 2 (1973): 155–180. See also the work of Emmon Bach on which Bell’s
paper is based, “Nouns and Noun Phrases,” in Universals in Linguistic Theory, ed. E. Bach and
R. T. Harms (New York, 1968), pp. 91–122. For reasons of space I have not treated these views
here. But some of my arguments that Donnellan’s distinction is pragmatic apply against them also.
35
See p. 106 above; also see footnote 9 above.
36
The term is Donnellan’s. See “Putting Humpty Dumpty Together Again,” p. 204, footnote 5.
37
I believe that when Donnellan heard the present paper, he too mentioned considerations of
this kind. The cases are mentioned brieﬂy in Donnellan’s paper, “Putting Humpty Dumpty
Together Again,” ibid. Donnellan’s paper “Speaker Reference, Descriptions and Anaphora” also
makes use of the existence of such incomplete descriptions but I do not ﬁnd his arguments
conclusive.

124

Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference

Because I have not yet worked out a complete account that satisﬁes me, and
because I think it would be wrong to make any deﬁnitive claim on the basis of the
restricted class of phenomena considered here, I regard the primary lessons of this
paper as methodological. They illustrate some general methodological considerations and apparatus that I think should be applied to the problems discussed here
and to other linguistic problems. They show in the present case that the
argument Donnellan actually presents in his original paper shows nothing
against a Russellian or other unitary account, and they make it highly probable
to me that the problems Donnellan handles by semantic ambiguity should
instead be treated by a general theory of speech acts. But at this time nothing
more deﬁnitive can be said. I think that the distinction between semantic
reference and speaker’s reference will be of importance not only (as in the present
paper) as a critical tool to block postulation of unwarranted ambiguities, but also
will be of considerable constructive importance for a theory of language. In
particular, I ﬁnd it plausible that a diachronic account of the evolution of
language is likely to suggest that what was originally a mere speaker’s reference
may, if it becomes habitual in a community, evolve into a semantic reference.
And this consideration may be one of the factors needed to clear up some
puzzles in the theory of reference.38, 39, 40

38

See the Santa Claus and Madagascar cases in Naming and Necessity. See Naming and Necessity,
pp. 93, 96–97 for the Santa Claus case and p. 163 for the Madagascar case.
39
It seems likely that the considerations in this paper will also be relevant to the concept
of a supposed “ Speciﬁc” distinction for indeﬁnite descriptions, as advocated by many linguists.
40
I should like to thank Margaret Gilbert and Howard Wettstein for their assistance in the
preparation of this paper.

6
A Puzzle about Belief

In this chapter I will present a puzzle about names and belief. A moral or two will
be drawn about some other arguments that have occasionally been advanced in
this area, but my main thesis is a simple one: that the puzzle is a puzzle. And, as a
corollary, that any account of belief must ultimately come to grips with it. Any
speculation as to solutions can be deferred.
The ﬁrst section of the chapter gives the theoretical background in previous
discussion, and in my own earlier work, that led me to consider the puzzle. The
background is by no means necessary to state the puzzle: As a philosophical puzzle,
it stands on its own, and I think its fundamental interest for the problem of belief
goes beyond the background that engendered it. As I indicate in the third section,
the problem really goes beyond beliefs expressed using names, to a far wider class of
beliefs. Nevertheless, I think that the background illuminates the genesis of the
puzzle, and it will enable me to draw one moral in the concluding section.
The second section states some general principles which underlie our general
practice of reporting beliefs. These principles are stated in much more detail than is
needed to comprehend the puzzle; and there are variant formulations of the
principles that would do as well. Neither this section nor the ﬁrst is necessary for
an intuitive grasp of the central problem, discussed in the third section, though they
may help with ﬁne points of the discussion. The reader who wishes rapid access to
the central problem could skim the ﬁrst two sections lightly on a ﬁrst reading.
In one sense the problem may strike some as no puzzle at all. For, in the
situation to be envisaged, all the relevant facts can be described in one terminology without difﬁculty. But, in another terminology, the situation seems to be
impossible to describe in a consistent way. This will become clearer later.

I . PRELIMINARIES: SUBSTITUTIVITY
In other writings,1 I developed a view of proper names closer in many ways to the
old Millian paradigm of naming than to the Fregean tradition which probably
1

“Naming and Necessity,” in: The Semantics of Natural Languages, D. Davidson and G. Harman
(eds.), Dordrecht, Reidel, 1971, pp. 253–355 and 763–769. (Subsequently published as Naming and
Necessity [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1980]; references are to the reprint) “Identity and

126

A Puzzle about Belief

was dominant until recently. According to Mill, a proper name is, so to speak,
simply a name. It simply refers to its bearer, and has no other linguistic function.
In particular, unlike a deﬁnite description, a name does not describe its bearer as
possessing any special identifying properties.
The opposing Fregean view holds that to each proper name, a speaker of the
language associates some property (or conjunction of properties) which determines its referent as the unique thing fulﬁlling the associated property (or
properties). This property(ies) constitutes the ‘sense’ of the name. Presumably,
if ‘ . . . ’ is a proper name, the associated properties are those that the speaker
would supply, if asked, “Who is ‘ . . . ’?” If he would answer “ . . . is the man who
———,” the properties ﬁlling the second blank are those that determine the
reference of the name for the given speaker and constitute its ‘sense.’ Of course,
given the name of a famous historical ﬁgure, individuals may give different, and
equally correct, answers to the “Who is . . . ?” question. Some may identify
Aristotle as the philosopher who taught Alexander the Great, others as the
Stagirite philosopher who studied with Plato. For these two speakers, the sense
of ‘Aristotle’ will differ: in particular, speakers of the second kind, but not of the
ﬁrst kind, will regard “Aristotle, if he existed, was born in Stagira” as analytic.2
Frege (and Russell)3 concluded that, strictly speaking, different speakers of
Necessity” (Chapter 1, this volume). Acquaintance with this material is not a prerequisite for
understanding the central puzzle of the present paper, but is helpful for understanding the
theoretical background.
2
Frege gives essentially this example as the second footnote of “On Sense and Reference.” For
the “Who is . . . ?” to be applicable one must be careful to elicit from one’s informant properties that
he regards as deﬁning the name and determining the referent, not mere well-known facts about the
referent. (Of course this distinction may well seem ﬁctitious, but it is central to the original FregeRussell theory.)
3
For convenience Russell’s terminology is assimilated to Frege’s. Actually, regarding genuine or
‘logically proper’ names, Russell is a strict Millian: ‘logically proper names’ simply refer (to immediate
objects of acquaintance). But, according to Russell, what are ordinarily called ‘names’ are not genuine,
logically proper names, but disguised deﬁnite descriptions. Since Russell also regards deﬁnite
descriptions as in turn disguised notation, he does not associate any ‘senses’ with descriptions, since
they are not genuine singular terms. When all disguised notation is eliminated, the only singular terms
remaining are logically proper names, for which no notion of ‘sense’ is required. When we speak of
Russell as assigning ‘senses’ to names, we mean ordinary names and for convenience we ignore his view
that the descriptions abbreviating them ultimately disappear on analysis.
On the other hand, the explicit doctrine that names are abbreviated deﬁnite descriptions is due to
Russell. Michael Dummett, in his recent Frege (Duckworth and Harper and Row, 1973,
pp. 110–111) denies that Frege held a description theory of senses. Although as far as I know
Frege indeed makes no explicit statement to that effect, his examples of names conform to the
doctrine, as Dummett acknowledges. Especially his ‘Aristotle’ example is revealing. He deﬁnes
‘Aristotle’ just as Russell would; it seems clear that in the case of a famous historical ﬁgure, the
‘name’ is indeed to be given by answering, in a uniquely specifying way, the ‘who is’ question.
Dummett himself characterizes a sense as a “criterion . . . such that the referent of the name, if any, is
whatever object satisﬁes that criterion.” Since presumably the satisfaction of the criterion must be
unique (so a unique referent is determined), doesn’t this amount to deﬁning names by unique
satisfaction of properties, i.e., by descriptions? Perhaps the point is that the property in question
need not be expressible by a usual predicate of English, as might be plausible if the referent is one of

A Puzzle about Belief

127

English (or German!) ordinarily use a name such as ‘Aristotle’ in different senses
(though with the same reference). Differences in properties associated with
such names, strictly speaking, yield different idiolects.4
Some later theorists in the Frege-Russellian tradition have found this consequence unattractive. So they have tried to modify the view by ‘clustering’ the
sense of the name (e.g., Aristotle is the thing having the following long list of
properties, or at any rate most of them), or, better for the present purpose,
socializing it (what determines the reference of ‘Aristotle’ is some roughly
speciﬁed set of community-wide beliefs about Aristotle).
One way to point up the contrast between the strict Millian view and Fregean
views involves—if we permit ourselves this jargon—the notion of propositional
content. If a strict Millian view is correct, and the linguistic function of a proper
name is completely exhausted by the fact that it names its bearer, it would appear that
proper names of the same thing are everywhere interchangeable not only salva
veritate but even salva signiﬁcatione: the proposition expressed by a sentence should
remain the same no matter what name of the object it uses. Of course this will not be
true if the names are ‘mentioned’ rather than ‘used’: “‘Cicero’ has six letters” differs
from “‘Tully’ has six letters” in truth value, let alone in content. (The example, of
course, is Quine’s.) Let us conﬁne ourselves at this stage to simple sentences involving
no connectives or other sources of intensionality. If Mill is completely right, not only
should “Cicero was lazy” have the same truth value as “Tully was lazy,” but the two
sentences should express the same proposition, have the same content. Similarly
“Cicero admired Tully,” “Tully admired Cicero,” “Cicero admired Cicero,” and
“Tully admired Tully,” should be four ways of saying the same thing.5
the speaker’s acquaintances rather than a historical ﬁgure. But I doubt that even Russell, father of the
explicitly formulated description theory, ever meant to require that the description must always be
expressible in (unsupplemented) English.
In any event, the philosophical community has generally understood Fregean senses in terms of
descriptions, and we deal with it under this usual understanding. For present purposes this is more
important than detailed historical issues. Dummett acknowledges (p. 111) that few substantive
points are affected by his (allegedly) broader interpretation of Frege; and it would not seem to be
relevant to the problems of the present paper.
4
See Frege’s footnote in “On Sense and Reference” mentioned in note 2 above and especially his
discussion of ‘Dr. Gustav Lauben’ in “Der Gedanke.” (In the recent Geach-Stoothoff translation,
“Thoughts,” Logical Investigations, Oxford, Blackwell, 1977, pp. 11–12). See also Chapter 9, this volume.
5
Russell, as a Millian with respect to genuine names, accepts this argument with respect to
‘logically proper names.’ For example—taking for the moment ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully’ as ‘logically
proper names,’ Russell would hold that if I judge that Cicero admired Tully, I am related to Cicero,
Tully, and the admiration relation in a certain way: Since Cicero is Tully, I am related in exactly the
same way to Tully, Cicero, and admiration; therefore I judge that Tully admired Cicero. Again, if
Cicero did admire Tully, then according to Russell a single fact corresponds to all of ‘Cicero
admired Tully,’ ‘Cicero admired Cicero,’ etc. Its constituent (in addition to admiration) is the man
Cicero, taken, so to speak, twice.
Russell thought that ‘Cicero admired Tully’ and ‘Tully admired Cicero’ are in fact obviously not
interchangeable. For him, this was one argument that ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully’ are not genuine names,
and that the Roman orator is no constituent of propositions (or ‘facts,’ or ‘judgments’)
corresponding to sentences containing the name.

128

A Puzzle about Belief

If such a consequence of Mill’s view is accepted, it would seem to have further
consequences regarding ‘intensional’ contexts. Whether a sentence expresses a
necessary truth or a contingent one depends only on the proposition expressed
and not on the words used to express it. So any simple sentence should retain its
‘modal value’ (necessary, impossible, contingently true, or contingently false)
when ‘Cicero’ is replaced by ‘Tully’ in one or more places, since such a replacement leaves the content of the sentence unaltered. Of course this implies
that coreferential names are substitutable in modal contexts salva veritate:
“It is necessary (possible) that Cicero . . . ” and “It is necessary (possible) that
Tully . . . ” must have the same truth value no matter how the dots are ﬁlled by a
simple sentence.
The situation would seem to be similar with respect to contexts involving
knowledge, belief, and epistemic modalities. Whether a given subject believes
something is presumably true or false of such a subject no matter how that belief
is expressed; so if proper name substitution does not change the content of a
sentence expressing a belief, coreferential proper names should be interchangeable salva veritate in belief contexts. Similar reasoning would hold for epistemic
contexts (“Jones knows that . . . ”) and contexts of epistemic necessity (“Jones
knows a priori that . . . ”) and the like.
All this, of course, would contrast strongly with the case of deﬁnite descriptions. It is well known that substitution of coreferential descriptions in simple
sentences (without operators), on any reasonable conception of ‘content,’ can
alter the content of such a sentence. In particular, the modal value of a sentence is
not invariant under changes of coreferential descriptions: “The smallest prime is
even” expresses a necessary truth, but “Jones’s favorite number is even” expresses
a contingent one, even if Jones’s favorite number happens to be the smallest
prime. It follows that coreferential descriptions are not interchangeable salva
veritate in modal contexts: “It is necessary that the smallest prime is even” is true
while “It is necessary that Jones’s favorite number is even” is false.
Of course there is a ‘de re’ or ‘large scope’ reading under which the second
sentence is true. Such a reading would be expressed more accurately by “Jones’s
favorite number is such that it is necessarily even” or, in rough Russellian
transcription, as “One and only one number is admired by Jones above all others,
and any such number is necessarily even (has the property of necessary evenness).” Such a de re reading, if it makes sense at all, by deﬁnition must be subject
to a principle of substitution salva veritate, since necessary evenness is a property
of the number, independently of how it is designated; in this respect there can be
no contrast between names and descriptions. The contrast, according to the
Millian view, must come in the de dicto or “small scope” reading, which is the
only reading, for belief contexts as well as modal contexts, that will concern us in
this paper. If we wish, we can emphasize that this is our reading in various ways.
Say, “It is necessary that: Cicero was bald” or, more explicitly, “The following
proposition is necessarily true: Cicero was bald,” or even, in Carnap’s ‘formal’

A Puzzle about Belief

129

mode of speech,6 “‘Cicero was bald’ expresses a necessary truth.” Now the
Millian asserts that all these formulations retain their truth value when ‘Cicero’
is replaced by ‘Tully,’ even though ‘Jones’s favorite Latin author’ and ‘the man
who denounced Catiline’ would not similarly be interchangeable in these contexts even if they are codesignative.
Similarly for belief contexts. Here too de re beliefs—as in “Jones believes, of
Cicero (or: of his favorite Latin author) that he was bald”—do not concern
us in this paper. Such contexts, if they make sense, are by deﬁnition subject to
a substitutivity principle for both names and descriptions. Rather we are
concerned with the de dicto locution expressed explicitly in such formulations
as, “Jones believes that: Cicero was bald” (or: “Jones believes that: the man who
denounced Catiline was bald”). The material after the colon expresses the content
of Jones’s belief. Other, more explicit, formulations are: “Jones believes the
proposition—that—Cicero—was—bald,” or even in the ‘formal’ mode, “The
sentence ‘Cicero was bald’ gives the content of a belief of Jones.” In all such
contexts, the strict Millian seems to be committed to saying that codesignative
names, but not codesignative descriptions, are interchangeable salva veritate.7
Now it has been widely assumed that these apparent consequences of the Millian
view are plainly false. First, it seemed that sentences can alter their modal values by
replacing a name by a codesignative one. “Hesperus is Hesperus” (or, more
cautiously: “If Hesperus exists, Hesperus is Hesperus”) expresses a necessary truth,
while “Hesperus is Phosphorus” (or: “If Hesperus exists, Hesperus is Phosphorus”),

6
Given the arguments of Church and others, I do not believe that the formal mode of speech is
synonymous with other formulations. But it can be used as a rough way to convey the idea of scope.
7
It may well be argued that the Millian view implies that proper names are scopeless and that for
them the de dicto–de re distinction vanishes. This view has considerable plausibility (my own views
on rigidity will imply something like this for modal contexts), but it need not be argued here either
way: de re uses are simply not treated in the present paper.
Christopher Peacocke (“Proper Names, Reference, and Rigid Designation,” in: Meaning,
Reference, and Necessity, S. Blackburn (ed.), Cambridge, 1975; see Section I), uses what amounts
to the equivalence of the de dicto–de re constructions in all contexts (or, put alternatively, the lack of
such a distinction) to characterize the notion of rigid designation. I agree that for modal contexts,
this is (roughly) equivalent to my own notion, also that for proper names Peacocke’s equivalence
holds for temporal contexts. (This is roughly equivalent to the ‘temporal rigidity’ of names.) I also
agree that it is very plausible to extend the principle to all contexts. But, as Peacocke recognizes, this
appears to imply a substitutivity principle for codesignative proper names in belief contexts, which is
widely assumed to be false. Peacocke proposes to use Davidson’s theory of intensional contexts to
block this conclusion (the material in the ‘that’ clause is a separate sentence). I myself cannot accept
Davidson’s theory; but even if it were true, Peacocke in effect acknowledges that it does not really
dispose of the difﬁculty (p. 127, ﬁrst paragraph). (Incidentally, if Davidson’s theory does block any
inference to the transparency of belief contexts with respect to names, why does Peacocke assume
without argument that it does not do so for modal contexts, which have a similar grammatical
structure?) The problems are thus those of the present paper; until they are resolved I prefer at
present to keep to my earlier more cautious formulation. Incidentally, Peacocke hints a recognition
that the received platitude—that codesignative names are not interchangeable in belief contexts—
may not be so clear as is generally supposed.

130

A Puzzle about Belief

expresses an empirical discovery, and hence, it has been widely assumed, a contingent truth. (It might have turned out, and hence might have been, otherwise.)
It has seemed even more obvious that codesignative proper names are not
interchangeable in belief contexts and epistemic contexts. Tom, a normal speaker
of the language, may sincerely assent to “Tully denounced Catiline,” but not to
“Cicero denounced Catiline.” He may even deny the latter. And his denial is
compatible with his status as a normal English speaker who satisﬁes normal criteria
for using both ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully’ as names for the famed Roman (without knowing
that ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully’ name the same person). Given this, it seems obvious that
Tom believes that: Tully denounced Catiline, but that he does not believe (lacks the
belief) that: Cicero denounced Catiline.8 So it seems clear that codesignative proper
names are not interchangeable in belief contexts. It also seems clear that there must
be two distinct propositions or contents expressed by ‘Cicero denounced Catiline’
and ‘Tully denounced Catiline.’ How else can Tom believe one and deny the other?
And the difference in propositions thus expressed can only come from a difference in
sense between ‘Tully’ and ‘Cicero.’ Such a conclusion agrees with a Fregean theory
and seems to be incompatible with a purely Millian view.9
In the previous work mentioned above, I rejected one of these arguments
against Mill, the modal argument. ‘Hesperus is Phosphorus,’ I maintained,
expresses just as necessary a truth as ‘Hesperus is Hesperus’; there are no
counterfactual situations in which Hesperus and Phosphorus would have been
different. Admittedly, the truth of ‘Hesperus is Phosphorus’ was not known a
priori, and may even have been widely disbelieved before appropriate empirical
evidence came in. But these epistemic questions should be separated, I have
argued, from the metaphysical question of the necessity of ‘Hesperus is Phosphorus.’ And it is a consequence of my conception of names as ‘rigid designators’
that codesignative proper names are interchangeable salva veritate in all contexts

8

The example comes from Quine, Word and Object, M.I.T. Press, 1960, p. 145. Quine’s
conclusion that ‘believes that’ construed de dicto is opaque has widely been taken for granted. In
the formulation in the text I have used the colon to emphasize that I am speaking of belief de dicto.
Since, as I have said, belief de dicto will be our only concern in this paper, in the future the colon will
usually be suppressed, and all ‘believes that’ contexts should be read de dicto unless the contrary is
indicated explicitly. For a discussion of Quine’s views, see Chapter 11, this volume.
9
In many writings Peter Geach has advocated a view that is non-Millian (he would say ‘nonLockean’) in that to each name a sortal predicate is attached by deﬁnition (‘Geach,’ for example, by
deﬁnition names a man). On the other hand, the theory is not completely Fregean either, since
Geach denies that any deﬁnite description that would identify the referent of the name among
things of the same sort is analytically tied to the name. (See, for example, his Reference and
Generality, Cornell, 1962, pp. 43–45.) As far as the present issues are concerned, Geach’s view
can fairly be assimilated to Mill ’s rather than Frege’s. For such ordinary names as ‘Cicero’ and
‘Tully’ will have both the same reference and the same (Geachian) sense (namely, that they are
names of a man). It would thus seem that they ought to be interchangeable everywhere. (In Reference
and Generality, Geach appears not to accept this conclusion, but the prima facie argument for the
conclusion will be the same as on a purely Millian view.)

A Puzzle about Belief

131

of (metaphysical) necessity and possibility; further, that replacement of a proper
name by a codesignative name leaves the modal value of any sentence unchanged.
But although my position conﬁrmed the Millian account of names in modal
contexts, it equally appears at ﬁrst blush to imply a non-Millian account of
epistemic and belief contexts (and other contexts of propositional attitude). For
I presupposed a sharp contrast between epistemic and metaphysical possibility:
Before appropriate empirical discoveries were made, men might well have failed
to know that Hesperus was Phosphorus, or even to believe it, even though they of
course knew and believed that Hesperus was Hesperus. Does not this support a
Fregean position that ‘Hesperus’ and ‘Phosphorus’ have different ‘modes of
presentation’ that determine their references? What else can account for the
fact that, before astronomers identiﬁed the two heavenly bodies, a sentence
using ‘Hesperus’ could express a common belief, while the same context involving ‘Phosphorus’ did not? In the case of ‘Hesperus’ and ‘Phosphorus,’ it is pretty
clear what the different ‘modes of presentation’ would be: one mode determines
a heavenly body by its typical position and appearance, in the appropriate season,
in the evening; the other determines the same body by its position and appearance, in the appropriate season, in the morning. So it appears that even though,
according to my view, proper names would be modally rigid—would have the
same reference when we use them to speak of counterfactual situations as they do
when used to describe the actual world—they would have a kind of Fregean
‘sense’ according to how that rigid reference is ﬁxed. And the divergences of
‘sense’ (in this sense of ‘sense’) would lead to failures of interchangeability of codesignative names in contexts of propositional attitude, though not in modal
contexts. Such a theory would agree with Mill regarding modal contexts but with
Frege regarding belief contexts. The theory would not be purely Millian.10
10
In an unpublished paper, Diana Ackerman urges the problem of substitutivity failures against the
Millian view and, hence, against my own views. I believe that others may have done so as well. (I have the
impression that the paper has undergone considerable revision, and I have not seen recent versions.)
I agree that this problem is a considerable difﬁculty for the Millian view, and for the Millian spirit of my
own views in Naming and Necessity. (See the discussion of this in the text) On the other hand I would
emphasize that there need be no contradiction in maintaining that names are modally rigid, and satisfy a
substitutivity principle for modal contexts, while denying the substitutivity principle for belief contexts.
The entire apparatus elaborated in Naming and Necessity of the distinction between epistemic and
metaphysical necessity, and of giving a meaning and ﬁxing a reference, was meant to show, among
other things, that a Millian substitutivity doctrine for modal contexts can be maintained even if
such a doctrine for epistemic contexts is rejected. Naming and Necessity never asserted a
substitutivity principle for epistemic contexts.
It is even consistent to suppose that differing modes of (rigidly) ﬁxing the reference is responsible
for the substitutivity failures, thus adopting a position intermediate between Frege and Mill, on the
lines indicated in the text of the present paper. Naming and Necessity may even perhaps be taken as
suggesting, for some contexts where a conventional description rigidly ﬁxes the reference
(‘Hesperus–Phosphorus’), that the mode of reference ﬁxing is relevant to epistemic questions.
I knew when I wrote Naming and Necessity that substitutivity issues in epistemic contexts were
really very delicate, due to the problems of the present paper, but I thought it best not to muddy the
waters further. (See notes 43–44.)

132

A Puzzle about Belief

After further thought, however, the Fregean conclusion appears less obvious.
Just as people are said to have been unaware at one time of the fact that Hesperus
is Phosphorus, so a normal speaker of English apparently may not know that
Cicero is Tully, or that Holland is the Netherlands. For he may sincerely assent
to ‘Cicero was lazy,’ while dissenting from ‘Tully was lazy,’ or he may sincerely
assent to ‘Holland is a beautiful country,’ while dissenting from ‘The Netherlands
is a beautiful country.’ In the case of ‘Hesperus’ and ‘Phosphorus,’ it seemed
plausible to account for the parallel situation by supposing that ‘Hesperus’ and
‘Phosphorus’ ﬁxed their (rigid) references to a single object in two conventionally
different ways, one as the ‘evening star’ and one as the ‘morning star.’ But what
corresponding conventional ‘senses,’ even taking ‘senses’ to be ‘modes of ﬁxing the
reference rigidly,’ can plausibly be supposed to exist for ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully’ (or
‘Holland’ and ‘the Netherlands’)? Are not these just two names (in English) for
the same man? Is there any special conventional, community-wide ‘connotation’ in
the one lacking in the other?11 I am unaware of any.12
Such considerations might seem to push us toward the extreme Frege-Russellian view that the senses of proper names vary, strictly speaking, from speaker to
speaker, and that there is no community-wide sense but only a community-wide
After this paper was completed, I saw Alvin Plantinga’s paper “The Boethian Compromise,” The
American Philosophical Quarterly 15 (April, 1978): 129–138. Plantinga adopts a view intermediate
between Mill and Frege, and cites substitutivity failures as a principal argument for his position. He
also refers to a forthcoming paper by Ackerman. I have not seen this paper, but it probably is a
descendant of the paper referred to above.
11
Here I use ‘connotation’ so as to imply that the associated properties have an a priori tie to the
name, at least as rigid reference ﬁxers, and therefore must be true of the referent (if it exists). There is
another sense of ‘connotation,’ as in ‘The Holy Roman Empire,’ where the connotation need not be
assumed or even believed to be true of the referent. In some sense akin to this, classicists and others with
some classical learning may attach certain distinct ‘connotations’ to ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully.’ Similarly, ‘The
Netherlands’ may suggest low altitude to a thoughtful ear. Such ‘connotations’ can hardly be thought of
as community-wide; many use the names unaware of such suggestions. Even a speaker aware of the
suggestion of the name may not regard the suggested properties as true of the object; cf. ‘The Holy
Roman Empire.’ A ‘connotation’ of this type neither gives a meaning nor ﬁxes a reference.
12
Some might attempt to ﬁnd a difference in ‘sense’ between ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully’ on the grounds
that “Cicero is called ‘Cicero’ ” is trivial, but “Tully is called ‘Cicero’ ” may not be. Kneale, and in
one place (probably at least implicitly) Church, have argued in this vein. (For Kneale, see Naming
and Necessity, p. 68.) So, it may be argued, being called ‘Cicero,’ is part of the sense of the name
‘Cicero,’ but not part of that of ‘Tully.’
I have discussed some issues related to this in Naming and Necessity, pp. 68–70. (See also the
discussions of circularity conditions elsewhere in Naming and Necessity.) Much more could be said
about and against this kind of argument; perhaps I will sometime do so elsewhere. Let me mention
very brieﬂy the following parallel situation (which may be best understood by reference to the
discussion in Naming and Necessity). Anyone who understands the meaning of ‘is called’ and of
quotation in English (and that ‘alienists’ is meaningful and grammatically appropriate), knows that
“alienists are called ‘alienists’ ”expresses a truth in English, even if he has no idea what ‘alienists’
means. He need not know that “psychiatrists are called ‘alienists’” expresses a truth. None of this
goes to show that ‘alienists’ and ‘psychiatrists’ are not synonymous, or that ‘alienists’ has being called
‘alienists’ as part of its meaning when ‘psychiatrists’ does not. Similarly for ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully.’
There is no more reason to suppose that being so-called is part of the meaning of a name than of any
other word.

A Puzzle about Belief

133

reference.13 According to such a view, the sense a given speaker attributes to such
a name as ‘Cicero’ depends on which assertions beginning with ‘Cicero’ he
accepts and which of these he regards as deﬁning, for him, the name (as opposed
to those he regards as mere factual beliefs ‘about Cicero’). Similarly, for ‘Tully.’
For example, someone may deﬁne ‘Cicero’ as ‘the Roman orator whose speech
was Greek to Cassius,’ and ‘Tully’ as ‘the Roman orator who denounced Catiline.’ Then such a speaker may well fail to accept ‘Cicero is Tully’ if he is unaware
that a single orator satisﬁed both descriptions (if Shakespeare and history are
both to be believed). He may well, in his ignorance, afﬁrm ‘Cicero was bald’
while rejecting ‘Tully was bald,’ and the like. Is this not what actually occurs
whenever someone’s expressed beliefs fail to be indifferent to interchange of
‘Tully’ and ‘Cicero’? Must not the source of such a failure lie in two distinct
associated descriptions, or modes of determining the reference, of the two names?
If a speaker does, as luck would have it, attach the same identifying properties
both to ‘Cicero’ and to ‘Tully,’ he will, it would seem, use ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully’
interchangeably. All this appears at ﬁrst blush to be powerful support for the view
of Frege and Russell that in general names are peculiar to idiolects, with ‘senses’
depending on the associated ‘identifying descriptions.’
Note that, according to the view we are now entertaining, one cannot say, ‘Some
people are unaware that Cicero is Tully.’ For, according to this view, there is no
single proposition denoted by the ‘that’ clause, that the community of normal
English speakers expresses by ‘Cicero is Tully.’ Some—for example, those who
deﬁne both ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully’ as ‘the author of De Fato’—use it to express a trivial
self-identity. Others use it to express the proposition that the man who satisﬁed one
description (say, that he denounced Catiline) is one and the same as the man who
satisﬁed another (say, that his speech was Greek to Cassius). There is no single fact,
‘that Cicero is Tully,’ known by some but not all members of the community.
If I were to assert, “Many are unaware that Cicero is Tully,” I would use ‘that
Cicero is Tully’ to denote the proposition that I understand by these words. If
this, for example, is a trivial self-identity, I would assert falsely, and irrelevantly,
that there is widespread ignorance in the community of a certain self-identity.14
I can, of course, say, “Some English speakers use both ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully’ with
the usual referent (the famed Roman) yet do not assent to ‘Cicero is Tully.’”
13
A view follows Frege and Russell on this issue even if it allows each speaker to associate a
cluster of descriptions with each name, provided that it holds that the cluster varies from speaker to
speaker and that variations in the cluster are variations in idiolect. Searle’s view thus is FregeRussellian when he writes in the concluding paragraph of “Proper Names” (Mind 67 (1958):
166–173), “‘Tully = Cicero’ would, I suggest, be analytic for most people; the same descriptive
presuppositions are associated with each name. But of course if the descriptive presuppositions were
different it might be used to make a synthetic statement.”
14
Though here I use the jargon of propositions, the point is fairly insensitive to differences in
theoretical standpoints. For example, on Davidson’s analysis, I would be asserting (roughly) that
many are unaware-of-the-content-of the following utterance of mine: Cicero is Tully. This would be
subject to the same problem.

134

A Puzzle about Belief

This aspect of the Frege-Russellian view can, as before, be combined with a
concession that names are rigid designators and that hence the description used
to ﬁx the reference of a name is not synonymous with it. But there are considerable difﬁculties. There is the obvious intuitive unpalatability of the notion that
we use such proper names as ‘Cicero,’ ‘Venice,’ ‘Venus’ (the planet) with
differing ‘senses’ and for this reason do not ‘strictly speaking’ speak a single
language. There are the many well-known and weighty objections to any description or cluster-of-descriptions theory of names. And is it deﬁnitely so clear
that failure of interchangeability in belief contexts implies some difference of
sense? After all, there is a considerable philosophical literature arguing that even
word pairs that are straightforward synonyms if any pairs are—“doctor” and
“physician,” to give one example—are not interchangeable salva veritate in
belief contexts, at least if the belief operators are iterated.15
A minor problem with this presentation of the argument for Frege and Russell
will emerge in the next section: if Frege and Russell are right, it is not easy to state
the very argument from belief contexts that appears to support them.
But the clearest objection, which shows that the others should be given their
proper weight, is this: the view under consideration does not in fact account for
the phenomena it seeks to explain. As I have said elsewhere,16 individuals who
“deﬁne ‘Cicero’ ” by such phrases as “the Catiline denouncer,” “the author of De
Fato,” etc., are relatively rare: their prevalence in the philosophical literature is
the product of the excessive classical learning of some philosophers. Common
men who clearly use ‘Cicero’ as a name for Cicero may be able to give no better
answer to “Who was Cicero?” than “a famous Roman orator,” and they probably
would say the same (if anything!) for ‘Tully.’ (Actually, most people probably
have never heard the name ‘Tully.’) Similarly, many people who have heard of
both Feynman and Gell-Mann, would identify each as ‘a leading contemporary
theoretical physicist.’ Such people do not assign ‘senses’ of the usual type to the
15

Benson Mates, “Synonymity,” University of California Publications in Philosophy 25 (1950):
201–226; reprinted in: Semantics and the Philosophy of Language, L. Linsky (ed.), University of
Illinois Press, 1952. (There was a good deal of subsequent discussion. In Mates’s original paper the
point is made almost parenthetically.) Actually, I think that Mates’s problem has relatively little
force against the argument we are considering for the Fregean position. Mates’s puzzle in no way
militates against some such principle as: If one word is synonymous with another, then a sufﬁciently
reﬂective speaker subject to no linguistic inadequacies or conceptual confusions who sincerely
assents to a simple sentence containing the one will also (sincerely) assent to the corresponding
sentence with the other in its place.
It is surely a crucial part of the present ‘Fregean’ argument that codesignative names may have
distinct ‘senses,’ that a speaker may assent to a simple sentence containing one and deny the
corresponding sentence containing the other, even though he is guilty of no conceptual or linguistic
confusion, and of no lapse in logical consistency. In the case of two straightforward synonyms, this is not so.
I myself think that Mates’s argument is of considerable interest, but that the issues are confusing and
delicate and that, if the argument works, it probably leads to a paradox or puzzle rather than to a deﬁnite
conclusion. (See also notes 23, 28, and 46.)
16
Naming and Necessity, pp. 79–81.

A Puzzle about Belief

135

names that uniquely identify the referent (even though they use the names with a
determinate reference). But to the extent that the indeﬁnite descriptions attached
or associated can be called ‘senses,’ the ‘senses’ assigned to ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully,’ or
to ‘Feynman’ and ‘Gell-Mann,’ are identical.17 Yet clearly speakers of this type
can ask, “Were Cicero and Tully one Roman orator, or two different ones?” or
“Are Feynman and Gell-Mann two different physicists, or one?” without knowing the answer to either question by inspecting ‘senses’ alone. Some such speaker
might even conjecture, or be under the vague false impression, that, as he would
say, ‘Cicero was bald but Tully was not.’ The premise of the argument we are
considering for the classic position of Frege and Russell—that whenever two
codesignative names fail to be interchangeable in the expression of a speaker’s
beliefs, failure of interchangeability arises from a difference in the ‘deﬁning’
descriptions the speaker associates with these names—is, therefore, false. The
case illustrated by ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully’ is, in fact, quite usual and ordinary. So the
apparent failure of codesignative names to be everywhere interchangeable in
belief contexts is not to be explained by differences in the ‘senses’ of these names.
Since the extreme view of Frege and Russell does not in fact explain the apparent
failure of the interchangeability of names in belief contexts, there seems to be no
further reason—for present purposes—not to give the other overwhelming prima
facie considerations against the Frege-Russell view their full weight. Names of
famous cities, countries, persons, and planets are the common currency of our
common language, not terms used homonymously in our separate idiolects.18 The
apparent failure of codesignative names to be interchangeable in belief contexts
remains a mystery, but the mystery no longer seems so clearly to argue for a Fregean
17

Recall also note 12.
Some philosophers stress that names are not words of a language, or that names are not
translated from one language to another. (The phrase ‘common currency of our common language’
was meant to be neutral with respect to any such alleged issue.) Someone may use ‘Mao Tse-Tung,’
for example, in English, though he knows not one word of Chinese. It seems hard to deny, however,
that “Deutschland,” “Allemagne,” and “Germany,” are the German, French, and English names of a
single country, and that one translates a French sentence using “Londres” by an English sentence
using “London.” Learning these facts is part of learning German, French, and English.
It would appear that some names, especially names of countries, other famous localities, and some
famous people are thought of as part of a language (whether they are called ‘words’ or not is of little
importance). Many other names are not thought of as part of a language, especially if the referent is
not famous (so the notation used is conﬁned to a limited circle), or if the same name is used by
speakers of all languages. As far as I can see, it makes little or no semantic difference whether a
particular name is thought of as part of a language or not. Mathematical notation such as ‘<’ is also
ordinarily not thought of as part of English, or any other language, though it is used in combination
with English words in sentences of mathematical treatises written in English. (A French
mathematician can use the notation though he knows not one word of English.) ‘Is less than,’ on
the other hand, is English. Does this difference have any semantic signiﬁcance?
I will speak in most of the text as if the names I deal with are part of English, French, etc. But it
matters little for what I say whether they are thought of as parts of the language or as adjuncts to it.
And one need not say that a name such as ‘Londres’ is ‘translated’ (if such a terminology suggested
that names have ‘senses,’ I too would ﬁnd it objectionable), as long as one acknowledges that
sentences containing it are properly translated into English using ‘London.’
18

136

A Puzzle about Belief

view as against a Millian one. Neither differing public senses nor differing private
senses peculiar to each speaker account for the phenomena to be explained. So the
apparent existence of such phenomena no longer gives a prima facie argument for
such differing senses.
One ﬁnal remark to close this section. I have referred before to my own earlier
views in Naming and Necessity. I said above that these views, inasmuch as they
make proper names rigid and transparent19 in modal contexts, favor Mill, but
that the concession that proper names are not transparent in belief contexts
appears to favor Frege. On a closer examination, however, the extent to which
these opacity phenomena really support Frege against Mill becomes much more
doubtful. And there are important theoretical reasons for viewing the Naming
and Necessity approach in a Millian light. In that work I argued that ordinarily
the real determinant of the reference of names of a former historical ﬁgure is a
chain of communication, in which the reference of the name is passed from link
to link. Now the legitimacy of such a chain accords much more with Millian
views than with alternatives. For the view supposes that a learner acquires a name
from the community by determining to use it with the same reference as does
the community. We regard such a learner as using “Cicero is bald” to express the
same thing the community expresses, regardless of variations in the properties
different learners associate with ‘Cicero,’ as long as he determines that he will use
the name with the referent current in the community. That a name can be
transmitted in this way accords nicely with a Millian picture, according to which
only the reference, not more speciﬁc properties associated with the name, is
relevant to the semantics of sentences containing it. It has been suggested that the
chain of communication, which on the present picture determines the reference,
might thereby itself be called a ‘sense.’ Perhaps so—if we wish20—but we should
not thereby forget that the legitimacy of such a chain suggests that it is just
preservation of reference, as Mill thought, that we regard as necessary for correct
language learning.21 (This contrasts with such terms as ‘renate’ and ‘cordate,’
where more than learning the correct extension is needed.) Also, as suggested
above, the doctrine of rigidity in modal contexts is dissonant, though not
19
By saying that names are transparent in a context, I mean that codesignative names are
interchangeable there. This is a deviation for brevity from the usual terminology, according to
which the context is transparent. (I use the usual terminology in the paper also.)
20
But we must use the term ‘sense’ here in the sense of ‘that which ﬁxes the reference,’ not ‘that
which gives the meaning,’ otherwise we shall run afoul of the rigidity of proper names. If the source
of a chain for a certain name is in fact a given object, we use the name to designate that object even
when speaking of counterfactual situations in which some other object originated the chain.
21
The point is that, according to the doctrine of Naming and Necessity, when proper names are
transmitted from link to link, even though the beliefs about the referent associated with the name
change radically, the change is not to be considered a linguistic change, in the way it was a linguistic
change when ‘villain’ changed its meaning from ‘rustic’ to ‘wicked man.’ As long as the reference of
a name remains the same, the associated beliefs about the object may undergo a large number of
changes without these changes constituting a change in the language. If Geach is right, an
appropriate sortal must be passed on also. But see footnote 58 of Naming and Necessity.

A Puzzle about Belief

137

necessarily inconsistent, with a view that invokes anti-Millian considerations to
explain propositional attitude contexts.
The spirit of my earlier views, then, suggests that a Millian line should be
maintained as far as is feasible.

II.

PRELIMINARIES: SOME GENERAL PRINCIPLES

Where are we now? We seem to be in something of a quandary. On the one hand,
we concluded that the failure of ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully’ to be interchangeable salva
veritate in contexts of propositional attitude was by no means explicable in terms of
different ‘senses’ of the two names. On the other hand, let us not forget the initial
argument against Mill: If reference is all there is to naming, what semantic difference
can there be between ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully’? And if there is no semantic difference, do
not ‘Cicero was bald’ and ‘Tully was bald’ express exactly the same proposition?
How, then, can anyone believe that Cicero was bald, yet doubt or disbelieve that
Tully was?
Let us take stock. Why do we think that anyone can believe that Cicero was
bald, but fail to believe that Tully was? Or believe, without any logical inconsistency, that Yale is a ﬁne university, but that Old Eli is an inferior one? Well, a
normal English speaker, Jones, can sincerely assent to ‘Cicero was bald’ but not
to ‘Tully was bald.’ And this even though Jones uses ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully’ in
standard ways—he uses ‘Cicero’ in this assertion as a name for the Roman, not,
say, for his dog, or for a German spy.
Let us make explicit the disquotational principle presupposed here, connecting
sincere assent and belief. It can be stated as follows, where ‘p’ is to be replaced,
inside and outside all quotation marks, by any appropriate standard English
sentence: “If a normal English speaker, on reﬂection, sincerely assents to ‘p’, then he
believes that p.” The sentence replacing ‘p’ is to lack indexical or pronominal
devices or ambiguities, that would ruin the intuitive sense of the principle (e.g., if
he assents to “You are wonderful,” he need not believe that you—the reader—are
wonderful).22 When we suppose that we are dealing with a normal speaker of
English, we mean that he uses all words in the sentence in a standard way,
combines them according to the appropriate syntax, etc.: in short, he uses the
22
Similar appropriate restrictions are assumed below for the strengthened disquotational
principle and for the principle of translation. Ambiguities need not be excluded if it is tacitly
assumed that the sentence is to be understood in one way in all its occurrences. (For the principle of
translation it is similarly assumed that the translator matches the intended interpretation of the
sentence.) I do not work out the restrictions on indexicals in detail, since the intent is clear.
Clearly, the disquotational principle applies only to de dicto, not de re, attributions of belief. If
someone sincerely assents to the near triviality “The tallest foreign spy is a spy,” it follows that he
believes that: the tallest foreign spy, is a spy. It is well known that it does not follow that he believes,
of the tallest foreign spy, that he is a spy. In the latter case, but not in the former, it would be his
patriotic duty to make contact with the authorities. (Some have argued that this is not so obvious as I
supposed. For discussion, see Chapter 11.)

138

A Puzzle about Belief

sentence to mean what a normal speaker should mean by it. The ‘words’ of the
sentence may include proper names, where these are part of the common
discourse of the community, so that we can speak of using them in a standard
way. For example, if the sentence is “London is pretty,” then the speaker should
satisfy normal criteria for using ‘London’ as a name of London, and for using ‘is
pretty’ to attribute an appropriate degree of pulchritude. The qualiﬁcation “on
reﬂection” guards against the possibility that a speaker may, through careless
inattention to the meaning of his words or other momentary conceptual or
linguistic confusion, assert something he does not really mean, or assent to a
sentence in linguistic error. “Sincerely” is meant to exclude mendacity, acting,
irony, and the like. I fear that even with all this it is possible that some astute
reader—such, after all, is the way of philosophy—may discover a qualiﬁcation
I have overlooked, without which the asserted principle is subject to counterexample. I doubt, however, that any such modiﬁcation will affect any of the uses of
the principle to be considered below. Taken in its obvious intent, after all, the
principle appears to be a self-evident truth. (A similar principle holds for sincere
afﬁrmation or assertion in place of assent.)
There is also a strengthened ‘biconditional’ form of the disquotational principle, where once again any appropriate English sentence may replace ‘p’ throughout: A normal English speaker who is not reticent will be disposed to sincere reﬂective
assent to ‘p’ if and only if he believes that p.23 The biconditional form strengthens
the simple one by adding that failure to assent indicates lack of belief, as assent
indicates belief. The qualiﬁcation about reticence is meant to take account of the
fact that a speaker may fail to avow his beliefs because of shyness, a desire for
secrecy, to avoid offense, etc. (An alternative formulation would give the speaker
a sign to indicate lack of belief—not necessarily disbelief—in the assertion
propounded, in addition to his sign of assent.) Maybe again the formulation
needs further tightening, but the intent is clear.
Usually below the simple disquotational principle will be sufﬁcient for our
purposes, but once we will also invoke the strengthened form. The simple form
can often be used as a test for disbelief, provided the subject is a speaker with the
modicum of logicality needed so that, at least after appropriate reﬂection, he does
23
What if a speaker assents to a sentence, but fails to assent to a synonymous assertion? Say, he
assents to “Jones is a doctor,” but not to “Jones is a physician.” Such a speaker either does not
understand one of the sentences normally, or he should be able to correct himself “on reﬂection.” As
long as he confusedly assents to ‘Jones is a doctor’ but not to ‘Jones is a physician,’ we cannot
straightforwardly apply disquotational principles to conclude that he does or does not believe that
Jones is a doctor, because his assent is not “reﬂective.”
Similarly, if someone asserts, “Jones is a doctor but not a physician,” he should be able to
recognize his inconsistency without further information. We have formulated the disquotational
principles so they need not lead us to attribute belief as long as we have grounds to suspect
conceptual or linguistic confusion, as in the cases just mentioned.
Note that if someone says, “Cicero was bald but Tully was not,” there need be no grounds to
suppose that he is under any linguistic or conceptual confusion.

A Puzzle about Belief

139

not hold simultaneously beliefs that are straightforward contradictions of each
other—of the forms ‘p’ and ‘~p.’24 (Nothing in such a requirement prevents him
from holding simultaneous beliefs that jointly entail a contradiction.) In this case
(where ‘p’ may be replaced by any appropriate English sentence), the speaker’s
assent to the negation of ‘p’ indicates not only his disbelief that p but also his
failure to believe that p, using only the simple (unstrengthened) disquotational
principle.
So far our principle applies only to speakers of English. It allows us to infer,
from Peter’s sincere reﬂective assent to “God exists,” that he believes that God
exists. But of course we ordinarily allow ourselves to draw conclusions, stated in
English, about the beliefs of speakers of any language: we infer that Pierre
believes that God exists from his sincere reﬂective assent to “Dieu existe.” There
are several ways to do this, given conventional translations of French into
English. We choose the following route. We have stated the disquotational
principle in English, for English sentences; an analogous principle, stated in
French (German, etc.) will be assumed to hold for French (German, etc.)
sentences. Finally, we assume the principle of translation: If a sentence of one
language expresses a truth in that language, then any translation of it into any other
language also expresses a truth (in that other language). Some of our ordinary
practice of translation may violate this principle; this happens when the translator’s aim is not to preserve the content of the sentence, but to serve—in some
other sense—the same purposes in the home language as the original utterance
served in the foreign language.25 But if the translation of a sentence is to mean
the same as the sentence translated, preservation of truth value is a minimal
condition that must be observed.
Granted the disquotational principle expressed in each language, reasoning
starting from Pierre’s assent to ‘Dieu existe’ continues thus. First, on the basis of
his utterance and the French disquotational principle we infer (in French):
24

This should not be confused with the question whether the speaker simultaneously believes of
a given object, both that it has a certain property and that it does not have it. Our discussion
concerns de dicto (notional) belief, not de re belief.
I have been shown a passage in Aristotle that appears to suggest that no one can really believe both
of two explicit contradictories. If we wish to use the simple disquotational principle as a test for
disbelief, it sufﬁces that this be true of some individuals, after reﬂection, who are simultaneously
aware of both beliefs, and have sufﬁcient logical acumen and respect for logic. Such individuals, if
they have contradictory beliefs, will be shaken in one or both beliefs after they note the
contradiction. For such individuals, sincere reﬂective assent to the negation of a sentence implies
disbelief in the proposition it expresses, so the test in the text applies.
25
For example, in translating a historical report into another language, such as, “Patrick Henry
said, ‘Give me liberty or give me death!’” the translator may well translate the quoted material
attributed to Henry. He translates a presumed truth into a falsehood, since Henry spoke English;
but probably his reader is aware of this and is more interested in the content of Henry’s utterance
than in its exact words. Especially in translating ﬁction, where truth is irrelevant, this procedure is
appropriate. But some objectors to Church’s ‘translation argument’ have allowed themselves to be
misled by the practice.

A Puzzle about Belief

140

Pierre croit que Dieu existe.
26

From this we deduce,

using the principle of translation:
Pierre believes that God exists.

In this way we can apply the disquotational technique to all languages.
Even if I apply the disquotational technique to English alone, there is a sense
in which I can be regarded as tacitly invoking a principle of translation. For
presumably I apply it to speakers of the language other than myself. As Quine has
pointed out, to regard others as speaking the same language as I is in a sense
tacitly to assume a homophonic translation of their language into my own. So
when I infer from Peter’s sincere assent to or afﬁrmation of “God exists” that he
believes that God exists, it is arguable that, strictly speaking, I combine the
disquotational principle (for Peter’s idiolect) with the principle of (homophonic)
translation (of Peter’s idiolect into mine). But for most purposes, we can
formulate the disquotational principle for a single language, English, tacitly
supposed to be the common language of English speakers. Only when the
possibility of individual differences of dialect is relevant need we view the matter
more elaborately.
Let us return from these abstractions to our main theme. Since a normal
speaker—normal even in his use of ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully’ as names—can give
sincere and reﬂective assent to “Cicero was bald” and simultaneously to “Tully
was not bald,” the disquotational principle implies that he believes that Cicero
was bald and believes that Tully was not bald. Since it seems that he need not
have contradictory beliefs (even if he is a brilliant logician, he need not be able to
deduce that at least one of his beliefs must be in error), and since a substitutivity
principle for coreferential proper names in belief contexts would imply that he
does have contradictory beliefs, it would seem that such a substitutivity principle
must be incorrect. Indeed, the argument appears to be a reductio ad absurdum of
the substitutivity principle in question.
The relation of this argument against substitutivity to the classical position of
Russell and Frege is a curious one. As we have seen, the argument can be used to
give prima facie support for the Frege-Russell view, and I think many philosophers have regarded it as such support. But in fact this very argument, which has
been used to support Frege and Russell, cannot be stated in a straightforward
fashion if Frege and Russell are right. For suppose Jones asserts, “Cicero was bald,
but Tully was not.” If Frege and Russell are right, I cannot deduce, using the
disquotational principle:

26
To state the argument precisely, we need in addition a form of the Tarskian disquotation
principle for truth: For each (French or English) replacement for ‘p,’ infer “‘p’ is true” from “p,” and
conversely. (Note that “‘p’ is true” becomes an English sentence even if ‘p’ is replaced by a French
sentence.) In the text we leave the application of the Tarskian disquotational principle tacit.

A Puzzle about Belief

141

(1) Jones believes that Cicero was bald but Tully was not,
since, in general, Jones and I will not, strictly speaking, share a common idiolect
unless we assign the same ‘senses’ to all names. Nor can I combine disquotation
and translation to the appropriate effect, since homophonic translation of Jones’s
sentence into mine will in general be incorrect for the same reason. Since in fact
I make no special distinction in sense between ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully’—to me, and
probably to you as well, these are interchangeable names for the same man—and
since according to Frege and Russell, Jones’s very afﬁrmation of (1) shows that for
him there is some distinction of sense, Jones must therefore, on Frege-Russellian
views, use one of these names differently from me, and homophonic translation is
illegitimate. Hence, if Frege and Russell are right, we cannot use this example in
the usual straightforward way to conclude that proper names are not substitutable
in belief contexts—even though the example, and the ensuing negative verdict on
substitutivity, has often been thought to support Frege and Russell!
Even according to the Frege-Russellian view, however, Jones can conclude,
using the disquotational principle, and expressing his conclusion in his own
idiolect:
(2) I believe that Cicero was bald but Tully was not.
I cannot endorse this conclusion in Jones’s own words, since I do not share
Jones’s idiolect. I can of course conclude, “(2) expresses a truth in Jones’s
idiolect.” I can also, if I ﬁnd out the two ‘senses’ Jones assigns to ‘Cicero’ and
‘Tully,’ introduce two names ‘X’ and ‘Y’ into my own language with these same
two senses (‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully’ have already been preempted) and conclude:
(3) Jones believes that X was bald and Y was not.
All this is enough so that we can still conclude, on the Frege-Russellian view, that
codesignative names are not interchangeable in belief contexts. Indeed this can be
shown more simply on this view, since codesignative descriptions plainly are not
interchangeable in these contexts and for Frege and Russell names, being essentially abbreviated descriptions, cannot differ in this respect. Nevertheless, the
simple argument, apparently free of such special Frege-Russellian doctrinal
premises (and often used to support these premises), in fact cannot go through
if Frege and Russell are right.
However, if, pace Frege and Russell, widely used names are common currency
of our language, then there no longer is any problem for the simple argument,
using the disquotational principle, to (2). So, it appears, on pain of convicting
Jones of inconsistent beliefs—surely an unjust verdict—we must not hold a
substitutivity principle for names in belief contexts. If we used the strengthened
disquotational principle, we could invoke Jones’s presumed lack of any tendency
to assent to ‘Tully was bald’ to conclude that he does not believe (lacks the belief) that
Tully was bald. Now the refutation of the substitutivity principle is even stronger, for

142

A Puzzle about Belief

when applied to the conclusion that Jones believes that Cicero was bald but does not
believe that Tully was bald, it would lead to a straightout contradiction. The
contradiction would no longer be in Jones’s beliefs but in our own.
This reasoning, I think, has been widely accepted as proof that codesignative
proper names are not interchangeable in belief contexts. Usually the reasoning is
left tacit, and it may well be thought that I have made heavy weather of an
obvious conclusion. I wish, however, to question the reasoning. I shall do so
without challenging any particular step of the argument. Rather I shall present—
and this will form the core of the present paper—an argument for a paradox
about names in belief contexts that invokes no principle of substitutivity. Instead
it will be based on the principles—apparently so obvious that their use in these
arguments is ordinarily tacit—of disquotation and translation.
Usually the argument will involve more than one language, so that the principle
of translation and our conventional manual of translation must be invoked. We will
also give an example, however, to show that a form of the paradox may result within
English alone, so that the only principle invoked is that of disquotation (or, perhaps,
disquotation plus homophonic translation). It will intuitively be fairly clear, in these
cases, that the situation of the subject is ‘essentially the same’ as that of Jones with
respect to ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully.’ Moreover, the paradoxical conclusions about the
subject will parallel those drawn about Jones on the basis of the substitutivity
principle, and the arguments will parallel those regarding Jones. Only in these
cases, no special substitutivity principle is invoked.
The usual use of Jones’s case as a counterexample to the substitutivity principle
is thus, I think, somewhat analogous to the following sort of procedure. Someone
wishes to give a reductio ad absurdum argument against a hypothesis in topology.
He does succeed in refuting this hypothesis, but his derivation of an absurdity
from the hypothesis makes essential use of the unrestricted comprehension
schema in set theory, which he regards as self-evident. (In particular, the class
of all classes not members of themselves plays a key role in his argument.) Once
we know that the unrestricted comprehension schema and the Russell class lead
to contradiction by themselves, it is clear that it was an error to blame the earlier
contradiction on the topological hypothesis.
The situation would have been the same if, after deducing a contradiction from the
topological hypothesis plus the ‘obvious’ unrestricted comprehension schema, it was
found that a similar contradiction followed if we replaced the topological hypothesis
by an apparently ‘obvious’ premise. In both cases it would be clear that, even though
we may still not be conﬁdent of any speciﬁc ﬂaw in the argument against the
topological hypothesis, blaming the contradiction on that hypothesis is illegitimate:
rather we are in a ‘paradoxical’ area where it is unclear what has gone wrong.27
27
I gather that Burali-Forti originally thought he had ‘proved’ that the ordinals are not linearly
ordered, reasoning in a manner similar to our topologist. Someone who heard the present paper
delivered told me that König made a similar error.

A Puzzle about Belief

143

It is my suggestion, then, that the situation with respect to the interchangeability
of codesignative names is similar. True, such a principle, when combined with our
normal disquotational judgments of belief, leads to straightforward absurdities. But
we will see that the ‘same’ absurdities can be derived by replacing the interchangeability principle by our normal practices of translation and disquotation, or even by
disquotation alone.
The particular principle stated here gives just one particular way of ‘formalizing’ our normal inferences from explicit afﬁrmation or assent to belief; other
ways of doing it are possible. It is undeniable that we do infer, from a normal
Englishman’s sincere afﬁrmation of ‘God exists’ or ‘London is pretty,’ that he
believes, respectively, that God exists or that London is pretty; and that we would
make the same inferences from a Frenchman’s afﬁrmation of ‘Dieu existe’ or
‘Londres est jolie.’ Any principles that would justify such inferences are sufﬁcient
for the next section. It will be clear that the particular principles stated in the
present section are sufﬁcient, but in the next section the problem will be
presented informally in terms of our inferences from foreign or domestic assertion to belief.
II I . THE PUZZLE
Here, ﬁnally(!), is the puzzle. Suppose Pierre is a normal French speaker who lives
in France and speaks not a word of English or of any other language except
French. Of course he has heard of that famous distant city, London (which he of
course calls ‘Londres’) though he himself has never left France. On the basis of
what he has heard of London, he is inclined to think that it is pretty. So he says,
in French, “Londres est jolie.”
On the basis of his sincere French utterance, we will conclude:
(4) Pierre believes that London is pretty.
I am supposing that Pierre satisﬁes all criteria for being a normal French speaker,
in particular, that he satisﬁes whatever criteria we usually use to judge that a
Frenchman (correctly) uses ‘est jolie’ to attribute pulchritude and uses ‘Londres’—
standardly—as a name of London.
Later, Pierre, through fortunate or unfortunate vicissitudes, moves to England,
in fact to London itself, though to an unattractive part of the city with fairly
uneducated inhabitants. He, like most of his neighbors, rarely ever leaves this
part of the city. None of his neighbors know any French, so he must learn
English by ‘direct method,’ without using any translation of English into French:
by talking and mixing with the people he eventually begins to pick up English. In
particular, everyone speaks of the city, ‘London,’ where they all live. Let us
suppose for the moment—though we will see below that this is not crucial—that
the local population are so uneducated that they know few of the facts that Pierre

144

A Puzzle about Belief

heard about London in France. Pierre learns from them everything they know
about London, but there is little overlap with what he heard before. He learns, of
course—speaking English—to call the city he lives in ‘London.’ Pierre’s surroundings are, as I said, unattractive, and he is unimpressed with most of the rest
of what he happens to see. So he is inclined to assent to the English sentence:
(5) London is not pretty.
He has no inclination to assent to:
(6) London is pretty.
Of course he does not for a moment withdraw his assent from the French
sentence, “Londres est jolie”; he merely takes it for granted that the ugly city in
which he is now stuck is distinct from the enchanting city he heard about in
France. But he has no inclination to change his mind for a moment about the city
he stills calls ‘Londres.’
This, then, is the puzzle. If we consider Pierre’s past background as a French
speaker, his entire linguistic behavior, on the same basis as we would draw such a
conclusion about many of his countrymen, supports the conclusion ((4) above)
that he believes that London is pretty. On the other hand, after Pierre lived in
London for some time, he did not differ from his neighbors—his French
background aside—either in his knowledge of English or in his command of
the relevant facts of local geography. His English vocabulary differs little from
that of his neighbors. He, like them, rarely ventures from the dismal quarter of
the city in which they all live. He, like them, knows that the city he lives in is
called ‘London’ and knows a few other facts. Now Pierre’s neighbors would
surely be said to use ‘London’ as a name for London and to speak English. Since,
as an English speaker, he does not differ at all from them, we should say the same
of him. But then, on the basis of his sincere assent to (5), we should conclude:
(7) Pierre believes that London is not pretty.
How can we describe this situation? It seems undeniable that Pierre once
believed that London is pretty—at least before he learned English. For at that
time, he differed not at all from countless numbers of his countrymen, and we
would have exactly the same grounds to say of him as of any of them that he
believes that London is pretty: if any Frenchman who was both ignorant of
English and never visited London believed that London is pretty, Pierre did. Nor
does it have any plausibility to suppose, because of his later situation after he
learns English, that Pierre should retroactively be judged never to have believed
that London is pretty. To allow such ex post facto legislation would, as long as the
future is uncertain, endanger our attributions of belief to all monolingual
Frenchmen. We would be forced to say that Marie, a monolingual who ﬁrmly
and sincerely asserts, “Londres est jolie,” may or may not believe that London is
pretty depending on the later vicissitudes of her career (if later she learns English

A Puzzle about Belief

145

and . . . ). No: Pierre, like Marie, believed that London is pretty when he was
monolingual.
Should we say that Pierre, now that he lives in London and speaks English, no
longer believes that London is pretty? Well, unquestionably Pierre once believed
that London is pretty. So we would be forced to say that Pierre has changed his
mind, has given up his previous belief. But has he really done so? Pierre is very set in
his ways. He reiterates, with vigor, every assertion he has ever made in French. He
says he has not changed his mind about anything, has not given up any belief.
Can we say he is wrong about this? If we did not have the story of his living in
London and his English utterances, on the basis of his normal command of
French we would be forced to conclude that he still believes that London is pretty.
And it does seem that this is correct. Pierre has neither changed his mind nor
given up any belief he had in France.
Similar difﬁculties beset any attempt to deny him his new belief. His French
past aside, he is just like his friends in London. Anyone else, growing up in
London with the same knowledge and beliefs that he expresses in England, we
would undoubtedly judge to believe that London is not pretty. Can Pierre’s
French past nullify such a judgment? Can we say that Pierre, because of his
French past, does not believe that (5)? Suppose an electric shock wiped out all his
memories of the French language, what he learned in France, and his French
past. He would then be exactly like his neighbors in London. He would have the
same knowledge, beliefs, and linguistic capacities. We then presumably would be
forced to say that Pierre believes that London is ugly if we say it of his neighbors.
But surely no shock that destroys part of Pierre’s memories and knowledge can
give him a new belief. If Pierre believes (5) after the shock, he believed it before,
despite his French language and background.
If we would deny Pierre, in his bilingual stage, his belief that London is pretty
and his belief that London is not pretty, we combine the difﬁculties of both
previous options. We still would be forced to judge that Pierre once believed that
London is pretty but does no longer, in spite of Pierre’s own sincere denial that
he has lost any belief. We also must worry whether Pierre would gain the belief
that London is not pretty if he totally forgot his French past. The option does not
seem very satisfactory.
So now it seems that we must respect both Pierre’s French utterances and their
English counterparts. So we must say that Pierre has contradictory beliefs, that he
believes that London is pretty and he believes that London is not pretty. But there
seem to be insuperable difﬁculties with this alternative as well. We may suppose
that Pierre, in spite of the unfortunate situation in which he now ﬁnds himself, is
a leading philosopher and logician. He would never let contradictory beliefs pass.
And surely anyone, leading logician or no, is in principle in a position to notice
and correct contradictory beliefs if he has them. Precisely for this reason, we
regard individuals who contradict themselves as subject to greater censure than
those who merely have false beliefs. But it is clear that Pierre, as long as he is

146

A Puzzle about Belief

unaware that the cities he calls ‘London’ and ‘Londres’ are one and the same, is in
no position to see, by logic alone, that at least one of his beliefs must be false. He
lacks information, not logical acumen. He cannot be convicted of inconsistency:
to do so is incorrect.
We can shed more light on this if we change the case. Suppose that, in France,
Pierre, instead of afﬁrming “Londres est jolie,” had afﬁrmed, more cautiously, “Si
New York est jolie, Londres est jolie aussi,” so that he believed that if New York
is pretty, so is London. Later Pierre moves to London, learns English as before,
and says (in English) “London is not pretty.” So he now believes, further, that
London is not pretty. Now from the two premises, both of which appear to be
among his beliefs (a) If New York is pretty, London is, and (b) London is not
pretty, Pierre should be able to deduce by modus tollens that New York is not
pretty. But no matter how great Pierre’s logical acumen may be, he cannot in fact
make any such deduction, as long as he supposes that ‘Londres’ and ‘London’ may
name two different cities. If he did draw such a conclusion, he would be guilty of a
fallacy.
Intuitively, he may well suspect that New York is pretty, and just this suspicion
may lead him to suppose that ‘Londres’ and ‘London’ probably name distinct
cities. Yet, if we follow our normal practice of reporting the beliefs of French and
English speakers, Pierre has available to him (among his beliefs ) both the premises of
a modus tollens argument that New York is not pretty.
Again, we may emphasize Pierre’s lack of belief instead of his belief. Pierre, as
I said, has no disposition to assent to (6). Let us concentrate on this, ignoring his
disposition to assent to (5). In fact, if we wish we may change the case: Suppose
Pierre’s neighbors think that since they rarely venture outside their own ugly
section, they have no right to any opinion as to the pulchritude of the whole city.
Suppose Pierre shares their attitude. Then, judging by his failure to respond
afﬁrmatively to “London is pretty,” we may judge, from Pierre’s behavior as an
English speaker, that he lacks the belief that London is pretty: never mind
whether he disbelieves it, as before, or whether, as in the modiﬁed story, he
insists that he has no ﬁrm opinion on the matter.
Now (using the strengthened disquotational principle), we can derive a contradiction, not merely in Pierre’s judgments, but in our own. For on the basis of his
behavior as an English speaker, we concluded that he does not believe that
London is pretty (that is, that it is not the case that he believes that London is
pretty). But on the basis of his behavior as a French speaker, we must conclude
that he does believe that London is pretty. This is a contradiction.28
28
It is not possible, in this case, as it is in the case of the man who assents to “Jones is a doctor”
but not to “Jones is a physician,” to refuse to apply the disquotational principle on the grounds that
the subject must lack proper command of the language or be subject to some linguistic or
conceptual confusion. As long as Pierre is unaware that ‘London’ and ‘Londres’ are codesignative,
he need not lack appropriate linguistic knowledge, nor need he be subject to any linguistic or
conceptual confusion, when he afﬁrms ‘Londres est jolie’ but denies ‘London is pretty.’

A Puzzle about Belief

147

We have examined four possibilities for characterizing Pierre while he is in
London: (a) that at that time we no longer respect his French utterance (‘Londres
est jolie’), that is, that we no longer ascribe to him the corresponding belief;
(b) that we do not respect his English utterance (or lack of utterance); (c) that we
respect neither; (d) that we respect both. Each possibility seems to lead us to say
something either plainly false or even downright contradictory. Yet the possibilities appear to be logically exhaustive. This, then, is the paradox.
I have no ﬁrm belief as to how to solve it. But beware of one source of
confusion. It is no solution in itself to observe that some other terminology,
which evades the question whether Pierre believes that London is pretty, may be
sufﬁcient to state all the relevant facts. I am fully aware that complete and
straightforward descriptions of the situation are possible and that in this sense
there is no paradox. Pierre is disposed to sincere assent to ‘Londres est jolie’ but not
to ‘London is pretty.’ He uses French normally, English normally. Both with
‘Londres’ and ‘London’ he associates properties sufﬁcient to determine that
famous city, but he does not realize that they determine a single city. (And his
uses of ‘Londres’ and ‘London’ are historically (causally) connected with the same
single city, though he is unaware of that.) We may even give a rough statement of
his beliefs. He believes that the city he calls ‘Londres’ is pretty, that the city he calls
‘London’ is not. No doubt other straightforward descriptions are possible. No
doubt some of these are, in a certain sense, complete descriptions of the situation.
But none of this answers the original question. Does Pierre, or does he not,
believe that London is pretty? I know of no answer to this question that seems
satisfactory. It is no answer to protest that, in some other terminology, one can
state ‘all the relevant facts.’
To reiterate, this is the puzzle: Does Pierre, or does he not, believe that
London is pretty? It is clear that our normal criteria for the attribution of belief
lead, when applied to this question, to paradoxes and contradictions. One set of
principles adequate to many ordinary attributions of belief, but which leads to
paradox in the present case, was stated in Section 2; and other formulations are
possible. As in the case of the logical paradoxes, the present puzzle presents us
with a problem for customarily accepted principles and a challenge to formulate
an acceptable set of principles that does not lead to paradox, is intuitively sound,
and supports the inferences we usually make. Such a challenge cannot be met
simply by a description of Pierre’s situation that evades the question whether he
believes that London is pretty.
One aspect of the presentation may misleadingly suggest the applicability of
Frege-Russellian ideas that each speaker associates his own description or properties to each name. For as I just set up the case Pierre learned one set of facts about
the so-called ‘Londres’ when he was in France, and another set of facts about
‘London’ in England. Thus it may appear that ‘what’s really going on’ is that
Pierre believes that the city satisfying one set of properties is pretty, while he
believes that the city satisfying another set of properties is not pretty.

148

A Puzzle about Belief

As we just emphasized, the phrase ‘what’s really going on’ is a danger signal in
discussions of the present paradox. The conditions stated may—let us concede
for the moment—describe ‘what’s really going on.’ But they do not resolve the
problem with which we began, that of the behavior of names in belief contexts:
Does Pierre, or does he not, believe that London (not the city satisfying suchand-such descriptions, but London) is pretty? No answer has yet been given.
Nevertheless, these considerations may appear to indicate that descriptions, or
associated properties, are highly relevant somehow to an ultimate solution, since
at this stage it appears that the entire puzzle arises from the fact that Pierre
originally associated different identifying properties with ‘London’ and ‘Londres.’
Such a reaction may have some force even in the face of the now fairly wellknown arguments against ‘identifying descriptions’ as in any way ‘deﬁning,’ or
even ‘ﬁxing the reference’ of names. But in fact the special features of the case, as
I set it out, are misleading. The puzzle can arise even if Pierre associates exactly
the same identifying properties with both names.
First, the considerations mentioned above in connection with ‘Cicero’ and
‘Tully’ establish this fact. For example, Pierre may well learn, in France, ‘Platon’ as
the name of a major Greek philosopher, and later, in England, learns ‘Plato’ with
the same identiﬁcation. Then the same puzzle can arise: Pierre may have believed,
when he was in France and was monolingual in French, that Plato was bald (he
would have said, “Platon était chauve”), and later conjecture, in English, “Plato
was not bald,” thus indicating that he believes or suspects that Plato was not bald.
He need only suppose that, in spite of the similarity of their names, the man he
calls ‘Platon’ and the man he calls ‘Plato’ were two distinct major Greek philosophers. In principle, the same thing could happen with ‘London’ and ‘Londres.’
Of course, most of us learn a deﬁnite description about London, say ‘the largest
city in England.’ Can the puzzle still arise? It is noteworthy that the puzzle can
still arise even if Pierre associates to ‘Londres’ and to ‘London’ exactly the same
uniquely identifying properties. How can this be? Well, suppose that Pierre
believes that London is the largest city in (and capital of) England, that it
contains Buckingham Palace, the residence of the Queen of England, and he
believes (correctly) that these properties, conjointly, uniquely identify the city.
(In this case, it is best to suppose that he has never seen London, or even England,
so that he uses only these properties to identify the city. Nevertheless, he has
learned English by ‘direct method.’) These uniquely identifying properties he
comes to associate with ‘London’ after he learned English, and he expresses the
appropriate beliefs about ‘London’ in English. Earlier, when he spoke nothing
but French, however, he associated exactly the same uniquely identifying properties with ‘Londres.’ He believed that ‘Londres,’ as he called it, could be uniquely
identiﬁed as the capital of England, that it contained Buckingham Palace, that
the Queen of England lived there, etc. Of course he expressed these beliefs, like
most monolingual Frenchmen, in French. In particular, he used ‘Angleterre’ for
England, ‘le Palais de Buckingham’ (pronounced ‘Bookeengam’!) for Buckingham

A Puzzle about Belief

149

Palace, and ‘la Reine d’Angleterre’ for the Queen of England. But if any Frenchman who speaks no English can ever be said to associate exactly the properties of
being the capital of England etc., with the name ‘Londres,’ Pierre in his monolingual period did so.
When Pierre becomes a bilingual, must he conclude that ‘London’ and
‘Londres’ name the same city, because he deﬁned each by the same uniquely
identifying properties?
Surprisingly, no! Suppose Pierre had afﬁrmed, ‘Londres est jolie.’ If Pierre has
any reason—even just a ‘feeling in his bones,’ or perhaps exposure to a photograph of a miserable area which he was told (in English) was part of ‘London’—
to maintain ‘London is not pretty,’ he need not contradict himself. He need only
conclude that ‘England’ and ‘Angleterre’ name two different countries, that
‘Buckingham Palace’ and ‘le Palais de Buckingham’ (recall the pronunciation!),
name two different palaces, and so on. Then he can maintain both views without
contradiction, and regard both properties as uniquely identifying.
The fact is that the paradox reproduces itself on the level of the ‘uniquely
identifying properties’ that description theorists have regarded as ‘deﬁning’
proper names (and a fortiori, as ﬁxing their references). Nothing is more reasonable than to suppose that if two names, A and B, and a single set of properties, S,
are such that a certain speaker believes that the referent of A uniquely satisﬁes all
of S and that the referent of B also uniquely satisﬁes all of S, then that speaker is
committed to the belief that A and B have the same reference. In fact, the identity
of the referents of A and B is an easy logical consequence of the speaker’s beliefs.
From this fact description theorists concluded that names can be regarded as
synonymous, and hence interchangeable salva veritate even in belief contexts,
provided that they are ‘deﬁned’ by the same uniquely identifying properties.
We have already seen that there is a difﬁculty in that the set S of properties
need not in fact be uniquely identifying. But in the present paradoxical situation
there is a surprising difﬁculty even if the supposition of the description theorist
(that the speaker believes that S is uniquely fulﬁlled) in fact holds. For, as we have
seen above, Pierre is in no position to draw ordinary logical consequences from
the conjoint set of what, when we consider him separately as a speaker of English
and as a speaker of French, we would call his beliefs. He cannot infer a
contradiction from his separate beliefs that London is pretty and that London
is not pretty. Nor, in the modiﬁed situation above, would Pierre make a normal
modus tollens inference from his beliefs that London is not pretty and that
London is pretty if New York is. Similarly here, if we pay attention only to
Pierre’s behavior as a French speaker (and at least in his monolingual days he was
no different from any other Frenchmen), Pierre satisﬁes all the normal criteria for
believing that ‘Londres’ has a referent uniquely satisfying the properties of being
the largest city in England, containing Buckingham Palace, and the like. (If
Pierre did not hold such beliefs, no Frenchman ever did.) Similarly, on the basis
of his (later) beliefs expressed in English, Pierre also believes that the referent of

150

A Puzzle about Belief

‘London’ uniquely satisﬁes these same properties. But Pierre cannot combine the
two beliefs into a single set of beliefs from which he can draw the normal
conclusion that ‘London’ and ‘Londres’ must have the same referent. (Here the
trouble comes not from ‘London’ and ‘Londres’ but from ‘England’ and ‘Angleterre’ and the rest.) Indeed, if he did draw what would appear to be the normal
conclusion in this case and any of the other cases, Pierre would in fact be guilty of
a logical fallacy.
Of course the description theorist could hope to eliminate the problem by
‘deﬁning’ ‘Angleterre,’ ‘England,’ and so on by appropriate descriptions also.
Since in principle the problem may rear its head at the next ‘level’ and at each
subsequent level, the description theorist would have to believe that an ‘ultimate’
level can eventually be reached where the deﬁning properties are ‘pure’ properties
not involving proper names (nor natural kind terms or related terms, see below!).
I know of no convincing reason to suppose that such a level can be reached in any
plausible way, or that the properties can continue to be uniquely identifying if
one attempts to eliminate all names and related devices.29 Such speculation aside,
the fact remains that Pierre, judged by the ordinary criteria for such judgments,
did learn both ‘Londres’ and ‘London’ by exactly the same set of identifying
properties; yet the puzzle remains even in this case.
Well, then, is there any way out of the puzzle? Aside from the principles of
disquotation and translation, only our normal practice of translation of French
into English has been used. Since the principles of disquotation and translation
29
The ‘elimination’ would be most plausible if we believed, according to a Russellian epistemology,
that all my language, when written in unabbreviated notation, refers to constituents with which I am
‘acquainted’ in Russell’s sense. Then no one speaks a language intelligible to anyone else; indeed, no one
speaks the same language twice. Few today will accept this.
A basic consideration should be stressed here. Moderate Fregeans attempt to combine a roughly
Fregean view with the view that names are part of our common language, and that our conventional
practices of interlinguistic translation and interpretation are correct. The problems of the present
paper indicate that it is very difﬁcult to obtain a requisite socialized notion of sense that will enable
such a program to succeed. Extreme Fregeans (such as Frege and Russell) believe that in general
names are peculiar to idiolects. They therefore would accept no general rule translating ‘Londres’ as
‘London,’ nor even translating one person’s use of ‘London’ into another’s. However, if they follow
Frege in regarding senses as ‘objective,’ they must believe that in principle it makes sense to speak of
two people using two names in their respective idiolects with the same sense, and that there must be
(necessary and) sufﬁcient conditions for this to be the case. If these conditions for sameness of sense
are satisﬁed, translation of one name into the other is legitimate, otherwise not. The present
considerations (and the extension of these below to natural kind and related terms), however,
indicate that the notion of sameness of sense, if it is to be explicated in terms of sameness of
identifying properties and if these properties are themselves expressed in the languages of the two
respective idiolects, presents interpretation problems of the same type presented by the names
themselves. Unless the Fregean can give a method for identifying sameness of sense that is free of
such problems, he has no sufﬁcient conditions for sameness of sense, nor for translation to be legitimate.
He would therefore be forced to maintain, contrary to Frege’s intent, that not only in practice do
few people use proper names with the same sense but that it is in principle meaningless to compare
senses. A view that the identifying properties used to deﬁne senses should always be expressible in a
Russellian language of ‘logically proper names’ would be one solution to this difﬁculty but involves a
doubtful philosophy of language and epistemology.

A Puzzle about Belief

151

seem self-evident, we may be tempted to blame the trouble on the translation of
‘Londres est jolie’ as ‘London is pretty,’ and ultimately, then, on the translation of
‘Londres’ as ‘London.’30 Should we, perhaps, permit ourselves to conclude that
‘Londres’ should not, ‘strictly speaking’ be translated as ‘London’? Such an
expedient is, of course, desperate: the translation in question is a standard one,
learned by students together with other standard translations of French into
English. Indeed, ‘Londres’ is, in effect, introduced into French as the French
version of ‘London.’
Since our backs, however, are against the wall, let us consider this desperate
and implausible expedient a bit further. If ‘Londres’ is not a correct French version
of the English ‘London,’ under what circumstances can proper names be translated from one language to another?
Classical description theories suggest the answer: Translation, strictly
speaking, is between idiolects; a name in one idiolect can be translated into
another when (and only when) the speakers of the two idiolects associate the
same uniquely identifying properties with the two names. We have seen that any
such proposed restriction, not only fails blatantly to ﬁt our normal practices of
translation and indirect discourse reportage, but does not even appear to block
the paradox.31
So we still want a suitable restriction. Let us drop the references to idiolects
and return to ‘Londres’ and ‘London’ as names in French and English, respectively—the languages of two communities. If ‘Londres’ is not a correct French
translation of ‘London,’ could any other version do better? Suppose I introduced
another word into French, with the stipulation that it should always be used to
translate ‘London.’ Would not the same problem arise for this word as well? The
only feasible solution in this direction is the most drastic: decree that no sentence
containing a name can be translated except by a sentence containing the phonetically identical name. Thus when Pierre asserts ‘Londres est jolie,’ we English
speakers can at best conclude, if anything: Pierre believes that Londres is pretty.
Such a conclusion is, of course, not expressed in English, but in a word salad
of English and French; on the view now being entertained, we cannot state
Pierre’s belief in English at all.32 Similarly, we would have to say: Pierre believes

30
If any reader ﬁnds the term ‘translation’ objectionable with respect to names, let him be
reminded that all I mean is that French sentences containing ‘Londres’ are uniformly translated
into English with ‘London.’
31
The paradox would be blocked if we required that they deﬁne the names by the same
properties expressed in the same words. There is nothing in the motivation of the classical
description theories that would justify this extra clause. In the present case of French and English,
such a restriction would amount to a decree that neither ‘Londres,’ nor any other conceivable French
name, could be translated as ‘London.’ I deal with this view immediately below.
32
Word salads of two languages (like ungrammatical ‘semisentences’ of a single language) need
not be unintelligible, though they are makeshifts with no ﬁxed syntax. “If God did not exist,
Voltaire said, il faudrait l’inventer.” The meaning is clear.

152

A Puzzle about Belief

that Angleterre is a monarchy, Pierre believes that Platon wrote dialogues,
and the like.33
This ‘solution’ appears at ﬁrst to be effective against the paradox, but it is
drastic. What is it about sentences containing names that makes them—a
substantial class—intrinsically untranslatable, express beliefs that cannot be
reported in any other language? At best, to report them in the other language,
one is forced to use a word salad in which names from the one language are
imported into the other. Such a supposition is both contrary to our normal
practice of translation and very implausible on its face.
Implausible though it is, there is at least this much excuse for the ‘solution’ at
this point. Our normal practice with respect to some famous people and
especially for geographical localities is to have different names for them in
different languages, so that in translating sentences we translate the names. But
for a large number of names, especially names of people, this is not so: the
person’s name is used in the sentences of all languages. At least the restriction in
question merely urges us to mend our ways by doing always what we presently do
sometimes.
But the really drastic character of the proposed restriction comes out when we
see how far it may have to extend. In Naming and Necessity I suggested that there
are important analogies between proper names and natural kind terms, and it
seems to me that the present puzzle is one instance where the analogy will hold.
Putnam, who has proposed views on natural kinds similar to my own in many
respects, stressed this extension of the puzzle in his comments at the Conference.
Not that the puzzle extends to all translations from English to French. At the
moment, at least, it seems to me that Pierre, if he learns English and French
separately, without learning any translation manual between them, must conclude, if he reﬂects enough, that ‘doctor’ and ‘médecin,’ and ‘heureux’ and
‘happy,’ are synonymous, or at any rate, coextensive;34 any potential paradox
of the present kind for these word pairs is thus blocked. But what about ‘lapin’
and ‘rabbit,’ or ‘beech’ and ‘hêtre’? We may suppose that Pierre is himself neither
a zoologist nor a botanist. He has learned each language in its own country and
the examples he has been shown to illustrate ‘les lapins’ and ‘rabbits,’ ‘beeches’
33
Had we said, “Pierre believes that the country he calls ‘Angleterre’ is a monarchy,” the sentence
would be English, since the French word would be mentioned but not used. But for this very reason
we would not have captured the sense of the French original.
34
Under the inﬂuence of Quine’s Word and Object, some may argue that such conclusions are
not inevitable: perhaps he will translate ‘médecin’ as ‘doctor stage,’ or ‘undetached part of a doctor’!
If a Quinean skeptic makes an empirical prediction that such reactions from bilinguals as a matter of
fact can occur, I doubt that he will be proved correct. (I don’t know what Quine would think. But
see Word and Object, p. 74, ﬁrst paragraph.) On the other hand, if the translation of ‘médecin’ as
‘doctor’ rather than ‘doctor part’ in this situation is, empirically speaking, inevitable, then even the
advocate of Quine’s thesis will have to admit that there is something special about one particular
translation. The issue is not crucial to our present concerns, so I leave it with these sketchy remarks.
But see also note 36.

A Puzzle about Belief

153

and ‘les hêtres’ are distinct. It thus seems to be possible for him to suppose that
‘lapin’ and ‘rabbit,’ or ‘beech’ and ‘hêtre,’ denote distinct but superﬁcially similar
kinds or species, even though the differences may be indiscernible to the
untrained eye. (This is especially plausible if, as Putnam supposes, an English
speaker—for example, Putnam himself—who is not a botanist may use ‘beech’
and ‘elm’ with their normal (distinct) meanings, even though he cannot himself
distinguish the two trees.35 Pierre may quite plausibly be supposed to wonder
whether the trees which in France he called ‘les hêtres’ were beeches or elms, even
though as a speaker of French he satisﬁes all usual criteria for using ‘les hêtres’
normally. If beeches and elms will not serve, better pairs of ringers exist that
cannot be told apart except by an expert.) Once Pierre is in such a situation,
paradoxes analogous to the one about London obviously can arise for rabbits and
beeches. Pierre could afﬁrm a French statement with ‘lapin,’ but deny its English
translation with ‘rabbit.’ As above, we are hard-pressed to say what Pierre believes.
We were considering a ‘strict and philosophical’ reform of translation procedures
which proposed that foreign proper names should always be appropriated rather
than translated. Now it seems that we will be forced to do the same with all words
for natural kinds. (For example, on price of paradox, one must not translate
‘lapin’ as ‘rabbit’!) No longer can the extended proposal be defended, even
weakly, as ‘merely’ universalizing what we already do sometimes. It is surely
too drastic a change to retain any credibility.36
There is yet another consideration that makes the proposed restriction more
implausible: Even this restriction does not really block the paradox. Even if we
35
Putnam gives the example of elms and beeches in “The Meaning of ‘Meaning’” (in: Language,
Mind, and Knowledge, Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science 7; also reprinted in Putnam’s
Collected Papers). See also Putnam’s discussion of other examples on pp. 139–143; also my own
remarks on ‘fool’s gold,’ tigers, etc., in Naming and Necessity, pp. 118–28.
36
It is unclear to me how far this can go. Suppose Pierre hears English spoken only in England,
French in France, and learns both by direct method. (Suppose also that no one else in each country
speaks the language of the other.) Must he be sure that ‘hot’ and ‘chaud ’ are coextensive? In practice
he certainly would. But suppose somehow his experience is consistent with the following bizarre—
and of course, false!—hypothesis: England and France differ atmospherically so that human bodies
are affected very differently by their interaction with the surrounding atmosphere. (This would be
more plausible if France were on another planet.) In particular, within reasonable limits, things that
feel cold in one of the countries feel hot in the other, and vice versa. Things don’t change their
temperature when moved from England to France, they just feel different because of their effects on
human physiology. Then ‘chaud,’ in French, would be true of the things that are called ‘cold’ in
English! (Of course the present discussion is, for space, terribly compressed. See also the discussion
of ‘heat’ in Naming and Necessity. We are simply creating, for the physical property ‘heat,’ a situation
analogous to the situation for natural kinds in the text.)
If Pierre’s experiences were arranged somehow so as to be consistent with the bizarre hypothesis,
and he somehow came to believe it, he might simultaneously assent to ‘C’est chaud ’ and ‘This is
cold’ without contradiction, even though he speaks French and English normally in each country
separately.
This case needs much more development to see if it can be set up in detail, but I cannot consider
it further here. Was I right in assuming in the text that the difﬁculty could not arise for ‘médecin’ and
‘doctor’?

154

A Puzzle about Belief

conﬁne ourselves to a single language, say English, and to phonetically identical
tokens of a single name, we can still generate the puzzle. Peter (as we may as well
say now) may learn the name ‘Paderewski’ with an identiﬁcation of the person
named as a famous pianist. Naturally, having learned this, Peter will assent to
“Paderewski had musical talent,” and we can infer—using ‘Paderewski,’ as we
usually do, to name the Polish musician and statesman:
(8) Peter believes that Paderewski had musical talent.
Only the disquotational principle is necessary for our inference; no translation is
required. Later, in a different circle, Peter learns of someone called ‘Paderewski’
who was a Polish nationalist leader and Prime Minister. Peter is skeptical of the
musical abilities of politicians. He concludes that probably two people, approximate contemporaries no doubt, were both named ‘Paderewski.’ Using ‘Paderewski’ as a name for the statesman, Peter assents to, “Paderewski had no musical
talent.” Should we infer, by the disquotational principle,
(9) Peter believes that Paderewski had no musical talent
or should we not? If Peter had not had the past history of learning the name
‘Paderewski’ in another way, we certainly would judge him to be using ‘Paderewski’ in a normal way, with the normal reference, and we would infer (9) by the
disquotational principle. The situation is parallel to the problem with Pierre and
London. Here, however, no restriction that names should not be translated, but
should be phonetically repeated in the translation, can help us. Only a single
language and a single name are involved. If any notion of translation is involved
in this example, it is homophonic translation. Only the disquotational principle
is used explicitly.37 (On the other hand, the original ‘two languages’ case had the
advantage that it would apply even if we spoke languages in which all names must
denote uniquely and unambiguously.) The restriction that names must not be
translated is thus ineffective, as well as implausible and drastic.
I close this section with some remarks on the relation of the present puzzle to
Quine’s doctrine of the ‘indeterminacy of translation,’ with its attendant repudiation of intensional idioms of ‘propositional attitude’ such as belief and even
indirect quotation. To a sympathizer with these doctrines the present puzzle may
37
One might argue that Peter and we do speak different dialects, since in Peter’s idiolect
‘Paderewski’ is used ambiguously as a name for a musician and a statesman (even though these
are in fact the same), while in our language it is used unambiguously for a musician-statesman. The
problem then would be whether Peter’s dialect can be translated homophonically into our own.
Before he hears of ‘Paderewski-the-statesman,’ it would appear that the answer is afﬁrmative for his
(then unambiguous) use of ‘Paderewski,’ since he did not differ from anyone who happens to have
heard of Paderewski’s musical achievements but not of his statesmanship. Similarly for his later use
of ‘Paderewski,’ if we ignore his earlier use. The problem is like Pierre’s, and is essentially the same
whether we describe it in terms of whether Peter satisﬁes the condition for the disquotational
principle to be applicable, or whether homophonic translation of his dialect into our own is
legitimate.

A Puzzle about Belief

155

well seem to be just more grist for a familiar mill. The situation of the puzzle
seems to lead to a breakdown of our normal practices of attributing belief and
even of indirect quotation. No obvious paradox arises if we describe the same
situation in terms of Pierre’s sincere assent to various sentences, together with the
conditions under which he has learned the name in question. Such a description,
although it does not yet conform to Quine’s strict behavioristic standards, ﬁts in
well with his view that in some sense direct quotation is a more ‘objective’ idiom
than the propositional attitudes. Even those who, like the present writer, do not
ﬁnd Quine’s negative attitude to the attitudes completely attractive must surely
acknowledge this.
But although sympathizers with Quine’s view can use the present examples to
support it, the differences between these examples and the considerations Quine
adduces for his own skepticism about belief and translation should not escape us.
Here we make no use of hypothetical exotic systems of translation differing
radically from the usual one, translating ‘lapin,’ say, as ‘rabbit stage’ or ‘undetached part of a rabbit.’ The problem arises entirely within our usual and
customary system of translation of French into English; in one case, the puzzle
arose even within English alone, using at most ‘homophonic’ translation. Nor is
the problem that many different interpretations or translations ﬁt our usual
criteria, that, in Davidson’s phrase,38 there is more than one ‘way of getting it
right.’ The trouble here is not that many views as to Pierre’s beliefs get it right,
but that they all deﬁnitely get it wrong. A straightforward application of the
principles of translation and disquotation to all Pierre’s utterances, French and
English, yields the result that Pierre holds inconsistent beliefs, that logic alone
should teach him that one of his beliefs is false. Intuitively, this is plainly
incorrect. If we refuse to apply the principles to his French utterances at all, we
would conclude that Pierre never believed that London is pretty, even though,
before his unpredictable move, he was like any other monolingual Frenchman.
This is absurd. If we refuse to ascribe the belief in London’s pulchritude only
after Pierre’s move to England, we get the counterintuitive result that Pierre has
changed his mind, and so on. But we have surveyed the possibilities above: the
point was not that they are ‘equally good,’ but that all are obviously wrong. If the
puzzle is to be used as an argument for a Quinean position, it is an argument of a
fundamentally different kind from those given before. And even Quine, if he
wishes to incorporate the notion of belief even into a ‘second level’ of canonical
notation,39 must regard the puzzle as a real problem.

38
D. Davidson, “On Saying That,” in: Words and Objections, D. Davidson and J. Hintikka
(eds.), Dordrecht, Reidel, 1969, p. 166.
39
In Word and Object, p. 221, Quine advocates a second level of canonical notation, “to dissolve
verbal perplexities or facilitate logical deductions,” admitting the propositional attitudes, even
though he thinks them “baseless” idioms that should be excluded from a notation “limning the
true and ultimate structure of reality.”

156

A Puzzle about Belief

The alleged indeterminacy of translation and indirect quotation causes relatively little trouble for such a scheme for belief; the embarrassment it presents to
such a scheme is, after all, one of riches. But the present puzzle indicates that the
usual principles we use to ascribe beliefs are apt, in certain cases, to lead to
contradiction, or at least, patent falsehoods. So it presents a problem for
any project, Quinean or other, that wishes to deal with the ‘logic’ of belief on
any level.40

IV . CONCLUSION
What morals can be drawn? The primary moral—quite independent of any of
the discussion of the ﬁrst two sections—is that the puzzle is a puzzle. As any
theory of truth must deal with the Liar Paradox, so any theory of belief and
names must deal with this puzzle.
But our theoretical starting point in the ﬁrst two sections concerned proper
names and belief. Let us return to Jones, who assents to “Cicero was bald” and to
“Tully was not bald.” Philosophers, using the disquotational principle, have
concluded that Jones believes that Cicero was bald but that Tully was not.
Hence, they have concluded, since Jones does not have contradictory beliefs,
belief contexts are not ‘Shakespearean’ in Geach’s sense: codesignative proper
names are not interchangeable in these contexts salva veritate.41
I think the puzzle about Pierre shows that the simple conclusion was unwarranted. Jones’s situation strikingly resembles Pierre’s. A proposal that ‘Cicero’
40
In one respect the considerations mentioned above on natural kinds show that Quine’s
translation apparatus is insufﬁciently skeptical. Quine is sure that the native’s sentence “Gavagai!”
should be translated “Lo, a rabbit!”, provided that its afﬁrmative and negative stimulus meanings for the
native match those of the English sentence for the Englishman; skepticism sets in only when the linguist
proposes to translate the general term ‘gavagai’ as ‘rabbit’ rather than ‘rabbit stage,’ ‘rabbit part,’ and the
like. But there is another possibility that is independent of (and less bizarre than) such skeptical
alternatives. In the geographical area inhabited by the natives, there may be a species indistinguishable
to the nonzoologist from rabbits but forming a distinct species. Then the ‘stimulus meanings,’ in
Quine’s sense, of ‘Lo, a rabbit!’ and ‘Gavagai!’ may well be identical (to nonzoologists), especially if the
ocular irradiations in question do not include a speciﬁcation of the geographical locality. (‘Gavagais’
produce the same ocular irradiation patterns as rabbits.) Yet ‘Gavagai!’ and ‘Lo, a rabbit!’ are hardly
synonymous; on typical occasions they will have opposite truth values.
I believe that the considerations about names, let alone natural kinds, emphasized in Naming and
Necessity go against any simple attempt to base interpretation solely on maximizing agreement with
the afﬁrmations attributed to the native, matching of stimulus meanings, etc. The ‘Principle of
Charity’ on which such methodologies are based was ﬁrst enunciated by Neil Wilson in the special
case of proper names as a formulation of the cluster-of-descriptions theory. The argument of
Naming and Necessity is thus directed against the simple ‘Principle of Charity’ for that case.
41
Geach introduced the term ‘Shakespearean’ after the line, “a rose / By any other name, would
smell as sweet.”
Quine seems to deﬁne ‘referentially transparent’ contexts so as to imply that coreferential names
and deﬁnite descriptions must be interchangeable salva veritate. Geach stresses that a context may be
‘Shakespearean’ but not ‘referentially transparent’ in this sense.

A Puzzle about Belief

157

and ‘Tully’ are interchangeable amounts roughly to a homophonic ‘translation’
of English into itself in which ‘Cicero’ is mapped into ‘Tully’ and vice versa, while
the rest is left ﬁxed. Such a ‘translation’ can, indeed, be used to obtain a paradox.
But should the problem be blamed on this step? Ordinarily we would suppose
without question that sentences in French with ‘Londres’ should be translated
into English with ‘London.’ Yet the same paradox results when we apply this
translation too. We have seen that the problem can even arise with a single name
in a single language, and that it arises with natural kind terms in two languages
(or one: see below).
Intuitively, Jones’s assent to both ‘Cicero was bald’ and ‘Tully was not bald’
arises from sources of just the same kind as Pierre’s assent to both ‘Londres est
jolie’ and ‘London is not pretty.’
It is wrong to blame unpalatable conclusions about Jones on substitutivity.
The reason does not lie in any speciﬁc fallacy in the argument but rather in the
nature of the realm being entered. Jones’s case is just like Pierre’s: both are in an
area where our normal practices of attributing belief, based on the principles of
disquotation and translation or on similar principles, are questionable.
It should be noted in this connection that the principles of disquotation and
translation can lead to ‘proofs’ as well as ‘disproofs’ of substitutivity in belief
contexts. In Hebrew there are two names for Germany, transliteratable roughly
as ‘Ashkenaz’ and ‘Germaniah’—the ﬁrst of these may be somewhat archaic.
When Hebrew sentences are translated into English, both become ‘Germany.’
Plainly a normal Hebrew speaker analogous to Jones might assent to a Hebrew
sentence involving ‘Ashkenaz’ while dissenting from its counterpart with ‘Germaniah.’ So far there is an argument against substitutivity. But there is also an
argument for substitutivity, based on the principle of translation. Translate a
Hebrew sentence involving ‘Ashkenaz’ into English, so that ‘Ashkenaz’ goes into
‘Germany.’ Then retranslate the result into Hebrew, this time translating ‘Germany’ as ‘Germaniah.’ By the principle of translation, both translations preserve
truth value. So: the truth value of any sentence of Hebrew involving ‘Ashkenaz’
remains the same when ‘Ashkenaz’ is replaced by ‘Germaniah’—a ‘proof ’ of
substitutivity! A similar ‘proof ’ can be provided wherever there are two names in
one language, and a normal practice of translating both indifferently into a single
name of another language.42 (If we combine the ‘proof’ and ‘disproof’ of
42
Generally such cases may be slightly less watertight than the ‘London’–‘Londres’ case. ‘Londres’
just is the French version of ‘London,’ while one cannot quite say that the same relation holds
between ‘Ashkenaz’ and ‘Germaniah.’ Nevertheless:
(a) Our standard practice in such cases is to translate both names of the ﬁrst language into the single
name of the second.
(b) Often no nuances of ‘meaning’ are discernible differentiating such names as ‘Ashkenaz’ and
‘Germaniah,’ such that we would not say either that Hebrew would have been impoverished had
it lacked one of them (or that English is improverished because it has only one name for
Germany), any more than a language is impoverished if it has only one word corresponding to

158

A Puzzle about Belief

substitutivity in this paragraph, we could get yet another paradox analogous to
Pierre’s: our Hebrew speaker both believes, and disbelieves, that Germany is
pretty. Yet no amount of pure logic or semantic introspection sufﬁces for him to
discover his error.)
Another consideration, regarding natural kinds: Previously we pointed out
that a bilingual may learn ‘lapin’ and ‘rabbit’ normally in each respective
language yet wonder whether they are one species or two, and that this fact can
be used to generate a paradox analogous to Pierre’s. Similarly, a speaker of
English alone may learn ‘furze’ and ‘gorse’ normally (separately), yet wonder
whether these are the same, or resembling kinds. (What about ‘rabbit’ and
‘hare’?) It would be easy for such a speaker to assent to an assertion formulated
with ‘furze’ but withhold assent from the corresponding assertion involving
‘gorse.’ The situation is quite analogous to that of Jones with respect to ‘Cicero’
and ‘Tully.’ Yet ‘furze’ and ‘gorse,’ and other pairs of terms for the same natural
kind, are normally thought of as synonyms.
The point is not, of course, that codesignative proper names are interchangeable in belief contexts salva veritate, or that they are interchangeable in simple
contexts even salva signiﬁcatione. The point is that the absurdities that disquotation plus substitutivity would generate are exactly paralleled by absurdities
generated by disquotation plus translation, or even ‘disquotation alone’ (or:
disquotation plus homophonic translation). Also, though our naive practice
may lead to ‘disproofs’ of substitutivity in certain cases, it can also lead to ‘proofs’
of substitutivity in some of these same cases, as we saw two paragraphs back.
When we enter into the area exempliﬁed by Jones and Pierre, we enter into an
area where our normal practices of interpretation and attribution of belief are
subjected to the greatest possible strain, perhaps to the point of breakdown. So is
the notion of the content of someone’s assertion, the proposition it expresses. In
the present state of our knowledge, I think it would be foolish to draw any
conclusion, positive or negative, about substitutivity.43

‘doctor’ and ‘physician.’ Given this, it seems hard to condemn our practice of translating both
names as ‘Germany’ as ‘loose’; in fact, it would seem that Hebrew just has two names for the
same country where English gets by with one.
(c) Any inclinations to avoid problems by declaring, say, the translation of ‘Ashkenaz’ as ‘Germany’
to be loose should be considerably tempered by the discussion of analogous problems in the text.
43

In spite of this ofﬁcial view, perhaps I will be more assertive elsewhere.
In the case of ‘Hesperus’ and ‘Phosphorus’ (in contrast to ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully’), where there is a
case for the existence of conventional community-wide ‘senses’ differentiating the two—at least, two
distinct modes of ‘ﬁxing the reference of two rigid designators’—it is more plausible to suppose that
the two names are deﬁnitely not interchangeable in belief contexts. According to such a supposition,
a belief that Hesperus is a planet is a belief that a certain heavenly body, rigidly picked out as seen in
the evening in the appropriate season, is a planet; and similarly for Phosphorus. One may argue that
translation problems like Pierre’s will be blocked in this case, that ‘Vesper’ must be translated as
‘Hesperus,’ not as ‘Phosphorus.’ As against this, however, two things:

A Puzzle about Belief

159

Of course nothing in these considerations prevents us from observing that
Jones can sincerely assert both “Cicero is bald” and “Tully is not bald,” even
though he is a normal speaker of English and uses ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully’ in normal
ways, and with the normal referent. Pierre and the other paradoxical cases can be
described similarly. (For those interested in one of my own doctrines, we can still
say that there was a time when men were in no epistemic position to assent to
‘Hesperus is Phosphorus’ for want of empirical information, but it nevertheless
expressed a necessary truth.)44 But it is no surprise that quoted contexts fail to
satisfy a substitutivity principle within the quotation marks. And, in our present
state of clarity about the problem, we are in no position to apply a disquotation
principle to these cases, nor to judge when two such sentences do, or do not,
express the same ‘proposition.’
Nothing in the discussion impugns the conventional judgment that belief
contexts are ‘referentially opaque,’ if ‘referential opacity’ is construed so that
failure of coreferential deﬁnite descriptions to be interchangeable salva veritate is
sufﬁcient for referential opacity. No doubt Jones can believe that the number of
planets is even, without believing that the square of three is even, if he is under a
misapprehension about the astronomical, but not the arithmetical facts. The
question at hand was whether belief contexts were ‘Shakespearean,’ not whether
(a) We should remember that sameness of properties used to ﬁx the reference does not appear to
guarantee in general that paradoxes will not arise. So one may be reluctant to adopt a solution in
terms of reference-ﬁxing properties for this case if it does not get to the heart of the general
problem.
(b) The main issue seems to me here to be—how essential is a particular mode of ﬁxing the
reference to a correct learning of the name? If a parent, aware of the familiar identity, takes a
child into the ﬁelds in the morning and says (pointing to the morning star) “That is called
‘Hesperus,’” has the parent mistaught the language? (A parent who says, “Creatures with
kidneys are called ‘cordates,’ deﬁnitely has mistaught the language, even though the
statement is extensionally correct.) To the extent that it is not crucial for correct language
learning that a particular mode of ﬁxing the reference be used, to that extent there is no ‘mode of
presentation’ differentiating the ‘content’ of a belief about ‘Hesperus’ from one about
‘Phosphorus.’ I am doubtful that the original method of ﬁxing the reference must be
preserved in transmission of the name.
If the mode of reference ﬁxing is crucial, it can be maintained that otherwise identical beliefs
expressed with ‘Hesperus’ and with ‘Phosphorus’ have deﬁnite differences of ‘content,’ at least in an
epistemic sense. The conventional ruling against substitutivity could thus be maintained without
qualms for some cases, though not as obviously for others, such as ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully.’ But it is
unclear to me whether even ‘Hesperus’ and ‘Phosphorus’ do have such conventional ‘modes of
presentation.’ I need not take a deﬁnite stand, and the verdict may be different for different
particular pairs of names. For a brief related discussion, see Naming and Necessity, p. 78.
44
However, some earlier formulations expressed disquotationally such as “It was once unknown
that Hesperus is Phosphorus” are questionable in the light of the present paper (but see the previous
note for this case). I was aware of this question by the time Naming and Necessity was written, but
I did not wish to muddy the waters further than necessary at that time. I regarded the distinction
between epistemic and metaphysical necessity as valid in any case and adequate for the distinctions
I wished to make. The considerations in this chapter are relevant to the earlier discussion of the
‘contingent a priori’ as well; perhaps I will discuss this elsewhere. (For discussion, see Chapter 10.)

160

A Puzzle about Belief

they were ‘referentially transparent.’ (Modal contexts, in my opinion, are ‘Shakespearean’ but ‘referentially opaque.’)45
Even were we inclined to rule that belief contexts are not Shakespearean, it
would be implausible at present to use the phenomenon to support a FregeRussellian theory that names have descriptive ‘senses’ through ‘uniquely identifying properties.’ There are the well-known arguments against description theories, independent of the present discussion; there is the implausibility of the
view that difference in names is difference in idiolect; and ﬁnally, there are the
arguments of the present chapter that differences of associated properties do not
explain the problems in any case. Given these considerations, and the cloud our
paradox places over the notion of ‘content’ in this area, the relation of substitutivity to the dispute between Millian and Fregean conclusions is not very clear.
We repeat our conclusions: Philosophers have often, basing themselves on
Jones’s and similar cases, supposed that it goes virtually without saying that belief
contexts are not ‘Shakespearean.’ I think that, at present, such a deﬁnite conclusion is unwarranted. Rather Jones’s case, like Pierre’s, lies in an area where our
normal apparatus for the ascription of belief is placed under the greatest strain
and may even break down. There is even less warrant at the present time, in the
absence of a better understanding of the paradoxes of this paper, for the use of
alleged failures of substitutivity in belief contexts to draw any signiﬁcant theoretical conclusion about proper names. Hard cases make bad law.46
45
According to Russell, deﬁnite descriptions are not genuine singular terms. He thus would have
regarded any concept of ‘referential opacity’ that includes deﬁnite descriptions as profoundly
misleading. He also maintained a substitutivity principle for ‘logically proper names’ in belief and
other attitudinal contexts, so that for him belief contexts were as ‘transparent,’ in any
philosophically decent sense, as truth-functional contexts.
Independently of Russell’s views, there is much to be said for the opinion that the question
whether a context is ‘Shakespearean’ is more important philosophically—even for many purposes
for which Quine invokes his own concept—than whether it is ‘referentially opaque.’
46
I will make some brief remarks about the relation of Benson Mates’s problem (see note 15) to
the present one. Mates argued that such a sentence as (*)‘Some doubt that all who believe that
doctors are happy believe that physicians are happy,’ may be true, even though ‘doctors’ and
‘physicians’ are synonymous, and even though it would have been false had ‘physicians’ been
replaced in it by a second occurrence of ‘doctors.’ Church countered that (*) could not be true,
since its translation into a language with only one word for doctors (which would translate both
‘doctors’ and ‘physicians’) would be false. If both Mates’s and Church’s intuitions were correct, we
might get a paradox analogous to Pierre’s.
Applying the principles of translation and disquotation to Mates’s puzzle, however, involves
many more complications than our present problem. First, if someone assents to ‘Doctors are
happy,’ but refuses assent to ‘Physicians are happy,’ prima facie disquotation does not apply to him
since he is under a linguistic or conceptual confusion. (See note 23.) So there are as yet no grounds,
merely because this happened, to doubt that all who believe that doctors are happy believe that
physicians are happy.
Now suppose someone assents to ‘Not all who believe that doctors are happy believe that
physicians are happy.’ What is the source of his assent? If it is failure to realize that ‘doctors’ and
‘physicians’ are synonymous (this was the situation Mates originally envisaged), then he is under a
linguistic or conceptual confusion, so disquotation does not clearly apply. Hence we have no reason
to conclude from this case that (*) is true. Alternatively, he may realize that ‘doctors’ and ‘physicians’

A Puzzle about Belief

161

are synonymous; but he applies disquotation to a man who assents to ‘Doctors are happy’ but not to
‘Physicians are happy,’ ignoring the caution of the previous paragraph. Here he is not under a simple
linguistic confusion (such as failure to realize that ‘doctors’ and ‘physicians’ are synonymous), but he
appears to be under a deep conceptual confusion (misapplication of the disquotational principle).
Perhaps, it may be argued, he misunderstands the ‘logic of belief.’ Does his conceptual confusion
mean that we cannot straightforwardly apply disquotation to his utterance, and that therefore we
cannot conclude from his behavior that (*) is true? I think that, although the issues are delicate, and
I am not at present completely sure what answers to give, there is a case for an afﬁrmative answer.
(Compare the more extreme case of someone who is so confused that he thinks that someone’s
dissent from ‘Doctors are happy’ implies that he believes that doctors are happy. If someone’s
utterance, ‘Many believe that doctors are happy,’ is based on such a misapplication of disquotation,
surely we in turn should not apply disquotation to it. The utterer, at least in this context, does not
really know what ‘belief’ means.)
I do not believe the discussion above ends the matter. Perhaps I can discuss Mates’s problem at
greater length elsewhere. Mates’s problem is perplexing, and its relation to the present puzzle is
interesting. But it should be clear from the preceding that Mates’s argument involves issues even
more delicate than those that arise with respect to Pierre. First, Mates’s problem involves delicate
issues regarding iteration of belief contexts, whereas the puzzle about Pierre involves the application
of disquotation only to afﬁrmations of (or assents to) simple sentences. More important, Mates’s
problem would not arise in a world where no one ever was under a linguistic or a conceptual
confusion, no one ever thought anyone else was under such a confusion, no one ever thought anyone
ever thought anyone was under such a confusion, and so on. It is important, both for the puzzle
about Pierre and for the Fregean argument that ‘Cicero’ and ‘Tully’ differ in ‘sense,’ that they would
still arise in such a world. They are entirely free of the delicate problem of applying disquotation to
utterances directly or indirectly based on the existence of linguistic confusion. See notes 15 and 28,
and the discussion in the text of Pierre’s logical consistency.
Another problem discussed in the literature to which the present considerations may be relevant is
that of ‘self-consciousness,’ or the peculiarity of ‘I.’ Discussions of this problem have emphasized
that ‘I,’ even when Mary Smith uses it, is not interchangeable with ‘Mary Smith,’ nor with any other
conventional singular term designating Mary Smith. If she is ‘not aware that she is Mary Smith,’ she
may assent to a sentence with ‘I,’ but dissent from the corresponding sentence with ‘Mary Smith.’ It
is quite possible that any attempt to clear up the logic of all this will involve itself in the problem of
the present chapter. (For this purpose, the present discussion might be extended to demonstratives
and indexicals.) (For discussion, see Chapter 10.)
The writing of this chapter had partial support from a grant from the National Science
Foundation, a John Simon Guggenheim Foundation Fellowship, a Visiting Fellowship at All
Souls College, Oxford, and a sabbatical leave from Princeton University. Various people at the
Jerusalem Encounter and elsewhere, who will not be enumerated, inﬂuenced the paper through
discussion.

7
Nozick on Knowledge*

1 . A COUNTERFACTUAL ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
Like many other recent theorists, Robert Nozick advocates what has been called an
“externalist,” or “reliabilist,” analysis of knowledge.1 In his text Nozick states his
indebtedness to those philosophers, such as Alvin Goldman, who give causal
accounts of knowledge (Goldman 1967). His own contribution is to abandon
causation in favor of a counterfactual analysis, which, he believes, will allow a
uniform treatment of mathematical and ethical knowledge along with the straightforward empirical cases that seem to be more readily amenable to a causal analysis.
However, as Nozick acknowledges in a footnote (689, note 53), actually he has
rediscovered an approach that was in the published literature at least a decade
before his book appeared. Among recent writers, Nozick mentions Fred Dretske,
L. S. Carrier, David Armstrong, and Goldman himself; and there are others.2
Carrier’s formulation is a counterfactual theory very similar to Nozick’s. Dretske’s
theory, which had already been developed in extensive detail, resembles Nozick
* This manuscript was prepared in 1986 for a review of Robert Nozick’s Philosophical
Explanations (Nozick 1981; page references without speciﬁcation will always be to this book).
I decided to concentrate on his treatment of knowledge, which was probably the most professionally
inﬂuential part of the book. However, as is obvious, the result became very long for a conventional
review. Many revisions and improvements have been made for the present version, although, except
where I explicitly note otherwise, the basic ideas were in the original. The sheer detail and volume of
the criticisms may actually make the points harder to grasp; I hope they don’t create a problem of
“background noise”! (689, note 53).
Throughout this paper I use ordinary quotation even when, according to Quine, technically
I should use his corners. I do not think the reader will be confused.
Let me end this initial footnote with a tribute to Bob Nozick, and remark on the loss to
philosophy that his early death meant to those of us who knew him. One had to experience his
exceptional and extraordinary skills as a discussant and dialectician to realize exactly how great the
loss was.
1
The second characterization is qualiﬁed below.
2
See 689, note 53, for the references. (Shatz, cited below, says that the ranks of theorists with
views similar to Dretske “have swelled so greatly that a full listing would be impossible” [1981:406];
in addition to those already listed, he mentions A. J. Holland.) According to Nozick, Goldman’s
own paper using counterfactuals (Goldman 1976) appeared after Nozick’s basic work had been
completed.

Nozick on Knowledge

163

even more closely. Two of its basic elements—an analysis of knowledge in terms of
counterfactuals and a denial that knowledge is closed under known logical implication (as an answer to the skeptic)3—are identical to the basic elements of
Nozick’s theory. Moreover, some of Nozick’s predecessors (Dretske and Goldman,
in particular) have noted some signiﬁcant problems that Nozick overlooks.4
Nozick gives four individually necessary and jointly sufﬁcient conditions for a
person S to know that p:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

p is true
S believes that p
If p weren’t true, S wouldn’t believe that p
If p were true, S would believe that p

Condition 3 is supposed to be violated if S might have believed that p, (even) if
p were false; it is not required for a violation to occur that S deﬁnitely would have
believed that p. (This view agrees with David Lewis (1973), as against Robert
Stalnaker (1968);5 Nozick does not mention that he is taking sides on a question
controversial in the literature, but here we will stipulatively assume that counterfactuals are to be interpreted in the manner suggested.) Condition 4 involves
more problems of interpretation and will be discussed below. (Actually, to
exclude contradictory beliefs about p, Nozick amends condition 4 so that its
consequent reads “S would believe that p and would not believe that not p.”
Ordinarily, this amendment is irrelevant to the discussion, and I will follow
Nozick and ignore it. Aside from the major modiﬁcation involving “holding the
method ﬁxed” that I explain immediately below, Nozick mentions other tentative possible modiﬁcations later in the chapter. I will cite these only when they
seem relevant.) When the third and fourth conditions hold, Nozick says that S ’s
belief that p tracks the fact that p. This notion of “tracking” is the key to Nozick’s
analysis of knowledge, and is closely connected with ideas that Nozick applies
elsewhere in the book, notably to his analysis of free will.
3
I ﬁrst heard this answer to the skeptic in question in a paper, or perhaps an informal
presentation, given at Berkeley to a group of assistant professors there, by Thompson Clarke. My
best guess for the time of the talk is the spring of 1965, but almost surely in the period 1963–66. As
far as I know, the paper has never been published. This paper and the accompanying discussion gave
as convincing support as I have heard for the idea that skepticism is to be overcome by denying that
known logical implication preserves knowledge.
However, I myself certainly do not wish to endorse this strategy myself. The tangles Nozick gets
into, and the way his intuitions actually conﬂict with his predecessor Dretske, in and of itself might
indicate that this approach runs into trouble. Moreover, I am sympathetic to those philosophers
who regard this idea as intrinsically implausible or even preposterous. But I am not going to
presuppose such a strong rejection of the strategy in the discussion below.
4
See Goldman (1976) and Dretske (1970, 1971). For Goldman, see, for example, my section
8 below.
5
It might be noted that Stalnaker later proposed a supervaluationist interpretation of his view
that might make it in effect closer to Lewis’s, even though formally it would still differ in the way
suggested in the text. See also the survey article in Harper (1981).

164

Nozick on Knowledge

Nozick fails to note one amusing fact. Given his last two conditions, either one
of the ﬁrst two can be dropped. For, whatever else we believe about counterfactual logic, surely counterfactuals imply the corresponding material conditionals;
in particular, (3) and (4) do. But then, obviously, (1) and (4) jointly entail (2);
and (2) and (3) jointly entail (1).6 Hence both (1), (3), (4), and (2), (3), (4) are
equivalent to the original redundant set.7 Nevertheless, we will normally follow
Nozick and refer to the redundant formulation with four conditions.
Counterexamples lead Nozick to modify these beguilingly simple conditions,
and to deﬁne a technical locution—S knows, via method M, that p —iff (1)
holds8 and:
(20 ) S believes, via method M, that p.
(30 ) If p weren’t true and S were to use M to arrive at a belief whether (or not) p,
then S wouldn’t believe, via M, that p.
(40 ) If p were true and S were to use M . . . (as in 30 ), then S would believe, via M,
that p.
If S arrives at his belief that p using only one method M, then Nozick says that S
knows that p iff S knows that p via M. Nozick’s treatment of more complicated
cases, where S ’s belief is “overdetermined” by more than one method, will be
discussed later; but usually it sufﬁces to consider the simple case of only one
method.
The revised account is meant to eliminate counterexamples like this:
“A grandmother sees her grandson is well when he comes to visit; but if he
were sick or dead, others would tell her he was well to spare her upset” (179). The
original condition 3 is violated, but surely the grandmother knows that her
grandson is well. The counterexample disappears if we “hold the method
ﬁxed”: since the grandmother comes to believe her grandson is well by the
method M of looking at him when he visits, the revised version 30 would be
violated only if her powers of observation were so poor that she would have
believed, using that method, the he was well even if he were sick.
The problem was that although the grandmother actually used the method
M of looking at her grandson to see whether he was well (p), if p had not been
true, M would not have been used, and another method M0 would have been
6
If there are any “relevance logicians” among the readers of the present paper, then one would
have to note that the counterfactuals presumably imply the corresponding relevant conditionals.
7
Michael Levin has called my attention to the fact that Luper (2004) also notes that (1) is
redundant. I am relying on Levin for my information; I confess that, as of this time, I have not read
Luper.
Nozick’s way of putting the matter, in spite of the redundancies, is natural. It is an answer to the
question: what conditions are needed to make a true belief into knowledge? Then the additional
conditions are given in terms of counterfactuals. Probably this is why Nozick did not notice the
redundancies.
8
Actually, since (1) follows from (20 ) and (30 ), it can be dropped. Alternatively, given (1) and
(40 ), (20 ) could be weakened to “S uses M to arrive at a belief whether p.”

Nozick on Knowledge

165

used in its place. Condition 30 avoids the problem by stipulating in its antecedent
that we are concerned with counterfactual situations where p is false but nevertheless M is used. (Carrier seems to give essentially the simple formulation that
Nozick abandons here; Dretske seems to avoid such counterexamples by a
different, though related, device.) I will follow Nozick (185) in mentioning the
revised formulation only when it seems to cause confusion not to do so. Often
the reader can simply verify for herself that the discussion does indeed “hold the
method ﬁxed.”9
For future reference, I add two comments Nozick makes about method. First,
Nozick writes that:
[A]ny method experientially the same, the same “from the inside,” will count as the same
method. Basing our beliefs on experiences, you and I and the person ﬂoating in the tank
are using, for these purposes, the same method. (184–85)

While Nozick’s concept of knowledge is radically “externalist,” his concept of
method is “internalist.” Second, under the inﬂuence of Wittgenstein (1969),
Nozick thinks that some statements whose “centrality ensures that they will not
escape notice” (185) regardless of the application of any particular methods, are
best regarded as believed independently of any particular method(s). (Examples
he gives are “I have two hands” and “the world has existed for many years
already.”) For these beliefs, Nozick recommends that we revert to the simple
conditions 3 and 4.10 Only for conclusions that would not have been drawn had
I not applied some particular method or methods (even if the method were as
simple as merely looking in front of me) do we need to use the more complicated
30 and 40 . (Even in such cases, as we just said, in practice it often causes no
confusion to replace 30 and 40 by 3 and 4.)

2. RELEVANT ALTERNATIVES AND NOZICK’S
THIRD CONDITION
Condition 3 or 30 (which has parallels in Dretske and Carrier) is Nozick’s most
important condition. Very early in his discussion, Nozick claims that condition
3 takes care of cases for which others have invoked the need to rule out “relevant
alternatives.” He quotes Gail Caldwell Stine’s discussion, commenting principally

9
But I am writing as if the idea of “holding the method ﬁxed” is a clear one, when, in fact, as
I remark below, I am not so sure it always is.
10
However, Wittgenstein (1969) may be reluctant to call these basic framework propositions
“knowledge,” and, if so, Nozick may not be following him. On this possible difference between
Wittgenstein and Nozick, my own sympathies are with Nozick.
Nozick should have mentioned that the two examples he gives come from Moore (1925) and
(1939). These papers were important sources for Wittgenstein (1969).

166

Nozick on Knowledge

on Goldman and Dretske, but also others, of an example she attributes to
Carl Ginet:11
[W]hat makes an alternative relevant in one context and not another? . . . if on the basis of
visual appearances obtained under optimum conditions while driving through the
countryside Henry identiﬁes an object as a barn, normally we say that Henry knows
that it is a barn. Let us suppose, however, that unknown to Henry, the region is full of
expertly made papier-mâché facsimiles of barns.12 In that case, we would not say that
Henry knows that the object is a barn, unless he has evidence against it being a papiermâché facsimile, which is now a relevant alternative. So much is clear, but what if no such
facsimiles exist in Henry’s surroundings, although they [do in Sweden? What if they do
not now exist in Sweden, but they] once did? Are either of these circumstances sufﬁcient
to make the hypothesis (that it’s a papier-mâché object) relevant? Probably not, but the
situation is not so clear. (Stine 1976:252)13

Nozick argues that condition 3 gives a precise formulation that handles this
range of cases. For example, if, unknown to Henry, papier-mâché barns abound
in the area, then even if there had been no (genuine) barn in the ﬁeld, Henry
might have believed that there was (owing to the presence of a counterfeit). So
condition 3 is violated, and Henry does not know that there is a real barn in the
ﬁeld. On the other hand, if the area is a normal one without papier-mâché barns,
then condition 3 is satisﬁed. If there had been no barn in the ﬁeld, there would
have been no counterfeit in its place, so Henry would not have judged that there
11
Stine heard a version of Goldman’s paper read in 1973 (see Stine 1976:252, and her note 1),
which she says attributed the example to Carl Ginet. Goldman’s paper later appeared in print
(1976). Goldman calls the subject “Henry,” and Stine follows him, as will I.
12
Actually, Goldman (1976:773) emphasizes that “these facsimiles look from the road exactly
like barns, but are really just façades, without back walls or interiors, quite incapable of being used as
barns.” They might just as well have been made of real wood, and they would have been equally
deceptive. The material of which they are made is not really the main point. Nevertheless, both
Goldman and, following him, Stine uses the term “papier-mâché facsimiles,” and therefore I, too,
use this terminology.
13
Quoted by Nozick (174–75). Nozick’s quotation inadvertently omits the words in square
brackets, so that the passage has an apparent different sense and it is somewhat garbled. What are
“either of these circumstances?” As quoted by Nozick, there is only one, viz., that the false barns used
to be in Henry’s surroundings, but are there no longer. Stine originally intended two other cases,
that there are false barns in Sweden, though not in Henry’s surroundings (probably in the United
States), or that there used to be false barns in Sweden, but that they disappeared there. No doubt the
case where there used to be false barns in Henry’s surroundings, but they are there no longer, is also
an interesting one; but Nozick’s later discussion explicitly refers to “another country” where the
papier-mâché barns are or were scattered.
One should add that the problem about the barns being in Sweden, not just the basic example,
already appeared in Goldman (1976:775). Note also that Goldman, like Nozick, assumes that the
presence of barn facsimiles in the area implies a counterfactual about the particular ﬁeld Henry is
looking at: “But if the object on that site were a facsimile, Henry would mistake it for a barn” (773).
We will see immediately that the presence of counterfeit barns in the area does not imply that one
might have been on this particular ﬁeld. However, Goldman goes on to emphasize that the bearing
of the facsimiles on the case is that they create a relevant alternative, and does not attempt to reduce
this notion to counterfactuals (775). He makes quite different remarks about the case of Sweden
(775–76), rather than attempting to deﬁne relevant alternatives in terms of counterfactuals.

Nozick on Knowledge

167

was a barn in the ﬁeld. Nozick claims that whether false barns are or were in
another country (Sweden) is plainly irrelevant.14 In those cases where Stine
thinks that a “relevant alternatives” account gives unclear results, we supposedly
have clear intuitions about condition 3. Nozick thinks condition 3 can replace
“relevant alternatives” throughout; he writes:
Thus, condition 3 handles cases that befuddle the “relevant alternatives” account; though
that account can adopt the above subjunctive criterion for when an alternative is relevant,
it then becomes merely an alternate and longer way of stating condition 3. (175)15

It seems to me that Nozick is quite wrong about this; his third condition does
not capture the idea of “relevant alternatives,” even in the very case of the barn. It
is not difﬁcult to adapt counterexamples noted already by David Shatz (1981)
and even Fred Dretske (1971)16 (in his original paper on his own counterfactual
account theory of knowledge) to show this. Let us suppose that papier-mâché
barns are indeed prevalent in the area, but that they cannot be built on a few
exceptional ﬁelds with unfavorable soil conditions. Suppose Henry knows nothing of the papier-mâché barns, nor of the soil conditions, nor of their relevance
to the feasibility of building a counterfeit barn. He naively looks at a ﬁeld with
a real barn on it, whose soil conditions in fact would not have supported a

14
In terms of Nozick’s counterfactual formulation (condition 3), is it so clear what is relevant?
Suppose that there are no counterfeit barns in the area, but that there are in a nearby area, and only
by accident did Henry (driving around) arrive at this area rather than the neighboring one. Then
again, what if Henry accidentally called off a trip to Sweden at the last minute? What if the farmers
in this area were considering whether to follow the Swedish example, but decided at the last minute
not to do so? I don’t need to take a stand on all these questions, but Nozick is surely being too quick
when he claims that his counterfactual formulation shows that the presence of facsimiles in another
country is irrelevant. Nozick must show that in these cases, too, his counterfactual formulation
captures our intuitions (of course, I think it doesn’t anyway).
15
If we agree with Nozick on this point, does this not show decisively that the relevantalternatives account should be replaced by the account in terms of condition 3? Does this not
“coerce” the relevant-alternatives theorist into abandoning his theory in favor of a counterfactual
account? See Nozick’s introduction (4–8) for his attack on “coercive philosophy.” This, of course, is
just one of many examples of Nozick’s own argumentation that make it questionable that he is really
following his own precepts.
There is a minor problem. Nozick, as quoted, says that condition 3 handles cases that “befuddle
the ‘relevant alternatives’ account,” and goes on to say that “that account can adopt the above
subjunctive criterion” for when an alternative is relevant, and so on as quoted. Here he seems to
regard the subjunctive condition as a novel replacement for the relevant-alternatives account, but
elsewhere (689, note 53) he attributes to Dretske exactly the counterfactual deﬁnition of when an
alternative is relevant. Since it is likely that Dretske’s paper introduced the idea of relevant
alternatives into the literature, this would mean that the counterfactual formulation is what
“relevant alternatives” meant all along. I will not pursue this question, but the arguments below,
following Shatz, seem to me to establish that the counterfactual formulation does not capture the
intuitive idea of eliminating relevant alternatives.
16
Although Shatz’s paper appeared before Nozick’s book was published, it appeared too late for
Nozick to take it into account.
Both papers are well worth reading for the type of counterexample discussed here. Shatz’s paper
includes much interesting material that I do not reproduce in detail.

168

Nozick on Knowledge

papier-mâché counterfeit, and judges that there is a barn in the ﬁeld. Condition 3
is satisﬁed, since, had there been no real barn there, there would not have been a
counterfeit in its place, and Henry would not have believed that there was a barn
there. (Note that “the method is held ﬁxed.”) Yet the same intuitions that would
lead someone to deny in the original case that Henry knows that there is a barn in
the ﬁeld also apply in this modiﬁed case; the soil conditions, which Henry has
never heard about, can hardly help. Not only does condition 3 not handle this
case, as Nozick thought, but condition 4 is also satisﬁed. I will discuss the
interpretation of condition 4 below, but already at this point it should be clear
that if it holds in a normal countryside (without papier-mâché barns), it holds
here. So Nozick’s conditions are satisﬁed; and, according to his analysis, Henry
knows that there is a barn in the ﬁeld.
David Lumsden and Mark Johnston have pointed out that unfavorable soil
conditions are not really crucial to the example.17 Even though imitation barns
may be plentiful in the area, would we say of a particular ﬁeld with a real barn
that if the barn had not been there, there would (or even might) have been an
imitation in its place? Normally, I think, not unless the owner of the ﬁeld (or
other responsible person) had potential plans possibly to erect an imitation barn.
If the owner had been deciding, say, between a (genuine) barn and a silo, with no
thought of a papier-mâché barn, then normally it simply does not matter that
fairly nearby ﬁelds contain papier-mâché barns; if a real barn had not been built,
a silo, not a counterfeit barn, would have been there in its place (and Henry
would not have been deceived). In general, there is no particular reason to
suppose that if there had not been a real barn there, what would, or might, be
there is a counterfeit barn. Maybe the ﬁeld would have been empty, maybe
something else would have been built.
The stipulations in the previous paragraph, rendering it physically impossible
to erect a papier-mâché barn on the ﬁeld, are really just icing on the cake, making
the point even more watertight. On the other hand, if the owner (who eventually
opted for a real one) had been deciding between a real and a papier-mâché barn
(and both were feasible), then if the real barn had not been built, there would
have been a counterfeit there in its place, even if in fact there have never been any
papier-mâché barns in the entire area.18 Really, Nozick is wrongly trying to
identify two distinct and largely independent issues, either of which might be
thought to make papier-mâché barns into a relevant alternative19—whether in
fact there are papier-mâché barns on other ﬁelds in the area, and whether a
papier-mâché barn would or might have been erected on this particular ﬁeld.
17

Here I modify and add to their remarks in ways for which they are not responsible.
And whether there are or were such barns in Sweden could be (indirectly) relevant to the
counterfactual. Maybe the owner of the ﬁeld comes from Sweden, and wonders whether to play the
same trick they used to play in the old country!
19
I am using the term “relevant alternative” intuitively. If Dretske deﬁnes it along the lines
suggested in note 15, then I am not following his deﬁnition.
18

Nozick on Knowledge

169

Someone might try to “defend” Nozick in a way that actually points to one of
the greatest objections to his theory. Suppose Henry’s belief were formulated as a
belief that a real barn is on the ﬁeld in front of him, where the deﬁnite description
is taken to be non-rigid, in contrast to the demonstrative at the end of the
previous paragraph. (One could even give an explicit Russellian analysis, say, that
a real barn is on any ﬁeld uniquely in front of him.) Then whether other ﬁelds in
the area contain the fake barns (façades) is no longer irrelevant to the satisfaction
of Nozick’s condition 3. For Henry may be in front of this particular ﬁeld by
pure accident, and might just as well have stopped on another ﬁeld. Then the
other ﬁeld might have contained one of the barn façades, and Henry’s belief
would indeed have been false. So Nozick’s third condition is violated after all, for
the newly stated belief.
But is this really a “defense” of Nozick? Surely intuitively, Henry knows that
there is a real barn on the ﬁeld in front of him if and only if he knows that there is a
real barn on this particular ﬁeld. For Henry knows that this particular ﬁeld is the
ﬁeld in front of him, and hence for Henry the two conditions are epistemically
equivalent. (Henry might even be familiar with the ﬁeld in question under a
proper name, say “Dracula Field,” and therefore know that there is a real barn on
the ﬁeld in front of him if and only if there is a real barn on Dracula Field. But
since the proper name is rigid, the counterfactual as to whether a counterfeit barn
might have been on Dracula Field will give a different result from the one as to
whether a counterfeit barn might have been on the ﬁeld in front of him, if he
might have been in front of a different ﬁeld.) Thus Nozick’s condition 3,
involving a counterfactual, gives different results regarding formulations that
are obviously epistemically equivalent for Henry, given what he knows. The
counterfactual formulation is in plain conﬂict with obvious intuitions.
The reader will recognize the relation of this point to Naming and Necessity
and its distinction between a priority and metaphysical necessity. Here, however,
it is only a highly analogous point about the relation between garden-variety
knowledge, that may well be empirical and a posteriori, and the truth of various
ordinary counterfactuals. And, of course, the distinction between designators
that are rigid or non-rigid with respect to counterfactual situations is explicitly
invoked. This major objection to Nozick’s theory should have been obvious from
a consideration of my earlier work and very likely threatens many of the other
related theories that attempt to deﬁne knowledge in terms of counterfactuals
(and similar devices), though each particular one would have to be checked.20
20
I only now (2009) realized how basic this objection to Nozick’s theory is and how it is related
to my earlier work. Although many other changes have been made to my original version, no
addition is as important or improves the original nearly as much as this one, so I explicitly note it.
Actually, I ﬁnd that I do anticipate this objection in a special case in section 9 (see especially the
discussion of the blue barn and note 81, though some of the rest of the discussion is relevant, too).
But I should have highlighted the problem much earlier and made the connection with the
distinction between metaphysical and epistemological notions.

170

Nozick on Knowledge

The artiﬁcial character of the situation in the preceding example—papier-mâché
barns and their like abound only in philosophical discussions of knowledge21—
obscures its full force. (Shatz used another standard artiﬁcial situation—two twins,
one of whom is observed stealing a book.)22 Actually, Nozick’s analysis gives the
accolade of “knowledge” to the fruits of much sloppy experimentation and
research. It is inimical to the very idea of proper experimental controls. Consider
a medical experimenter, testing the efﬁcacy of a new drug on a certain disease.
Suppose he neglects to apply proper experimental controls. To take an extreme
case, suppose he neglects to give a placebo to a control group. If his patients in fact
tend to have signiﬁcantly above-average recovery rates, and he concludes that he
Moreover, in note 23 below, I explicitly distinguish between beliefs involving “this object,” which
is essentially a barn and could not be a barn façade, and beliefs about a non-rigidly designated object
before me, but I note that I have kept the designation of the ﬁeld rigid. Shouldn’t I have thought
there of the case where the designation of the ﬁeld is not kept rigid?
21
Actually, perhaps the examples need not be so artiﬁcial as I thought when I originally wrote
this paper. In my 2009 spring seminar on epistemology, various people mentioned real examples.
Harold Teichman mentioned a Hollywood set. Rohit Parikh mentioned situations where military
camouﬂage or other decoys are involved; Jeff Buechner also suggested such examples. Nevertheless,
it is important to Goldman’s discussion of the example (1976) that, in the situation he is talking
about, papier-mâché barn façades are unlikely to occur to anyone (since they are a wild and
undreamt of speculation with no particular purpose), so that Henry is entirely reasonable in his
conclusions, even with the weakest notion of relevant alternative. Later, I vary the example to a case
where Henry has been warned and is plainly irrational.
Other counterfeits that actually take place might replace the papier-mâché barns, but depending
on our purposes and the examples, we would have to check how much the features of the original
example in Goldman’s paper are preserved, given that his original example deliberately depended on
the wild and exceptional nature of papier-mâché barns.
Counterfeit money might abound in a certain area, or counterfactually might have. (In World War
II the Germans plotted to ﬂood Britain with counterfeit money in pounds. The money was actually
printed, but the plot was never realized. What about counterfeit government identiﬁcation—false
passports, green cards, social security cards, etc.?) I have just read (2009) a newspaper report about
truly diabolical people who proﬁt by the manufacture of false drugs against malaria, to be given to
sufferers in Africa (remember Harry Lime in the ﬁlm The Third Man). There is art forgery (as in the
Vermeer–Van Meegeren case), false ancient artifacts, false gems, the Piltdown Man, false designer
clothing, and many other examples. See note 43.
22
Shatz derives the twin example, where one “Tom Grabit” is the thief, from Lehrer and Paxson
(1969). Originally Lehrer and Paxson use the twin example to discuss the famous Gettier problem
(see Gettier 1963), whereas Shatz uses it speciﬁcally in a discussion of reliabilism and relevant
alternatives, which is directly relevant to Nozick’s theory. For this reason I have cited Shatz now and
before. (My thanks to Jonathan Adler for urging me to add a footnote about this.)
Similarly, Goldman (1976, 778) also mentions the case of two twins, Judy and Trudy. The
subject, Sam, sees Judy but does not know that it is Judy in front of him since he cannot
discriminate her from Trudy. (He may not even know about her). Goldman states a condition
(inﬂuenced by Armstrong) that would give the intuitively proper result here, but goes on to state
objections to it. However, the main point, stated by Goldman in his review of Nozick, is that
Nozick’s condition 3 is plainly insufﬁcient for the case (Goldman 1983:84). It is not enough to
require that if Judy had not been there, Trudy would (or even might) have. Maybe if Judy had not
been there, no one would have. But this does not capture Sam’s inability to distinguish the two
twins. This case is really similar to some of the problems with Nozick’s condition 3 in my main text.
(My thanks to Michael Levin for calling my attention to Goldman’s review in connection with
something else.)

Nozick on Knowledge

171

has tested a drug that is (chemically) effective against the disease,23 the scientiﬁc
community would judge that his research is worthless (or, at least, highly inconclusive). He has not ruled out the possibility that his favorable results are due to a
placebo effect. If anything is a case of failure to rule out relevant alternatives, surely
this one is.
Suppose, however, that in fact placebos are completely (or nearly completely)
ineffective against this particular disease, although neither the experimenter nor
anyone else in the medical community has any reason to suppose that this is so.
Then, if the experimenter concludes that he has tested a drug that is chemically
effective against the disease, his belief satisﬁes Nozick’s conditions for knowledge.
In particular, despite the fact that any medical scientist would say that the
experimenter has not ruled out a relevant alternative,24 Nozick’s condition 3,
or better, 30 , is satisﬁed. For if the experimenter had tested a drug that was not
chemically effective against the disease, little improvement in the patient would
have resulted, since the disease is impervious to placebo effects. Therefore, using
the same method M he actually used, he would not have concluded that he had
tested a drug effective against the disease; so condition 30 is satisﬁed. Similarly, it
seems clear that condition 40 is satisﬁed. But if this is a case of knowledge,
knowledge is not what it is cracked up to be.25
Even this case is artiﬁcially dramatic—the experimenter is so very sloppy. But
in many parallel cases, Nozick’s conditions endorse an experimenter who ignores
a relevant control. Condition 3, which should have been designed to guard
against such failures, is often satisﬁed so long as the experiment would still
have been successful, had the controls been applied (even though no one
knows, or has any reason to believe, that this is so). It is unnecessary that the
controls actually be applied.
My discussion of the experimenter could be applied to Henry and the barn,
creating an even more blatant problem for the case. In the description above,
Henry, who has never heard of the counterfeit barns (nor of their relation to
23
Here I say “that he has tested a drug that is (chemically) effective against the disease,” not “that
this drug is (chemically) effective against the disease.” Thus the proposition p in question would
have been false if the experimenter had tested a different (ineffective) drug. Similarly, the belief of
Henry that I have considered is that the ﬁeld contains a real barn, not that this object in the ﬁeld is
real and not counterfeit. This allows us, in considering counterfactuals for the third condition, to
suppose that the ﬁeld contains a different (counterfeit) “barn.” I adopt these formulations, which
may appear cumbersome, so that I do not have to go into questions about the “essential properties”
of the drug and the barn. For the latter case, about this barn and the like, see below. (But note that
this ﬁeld and this disease are supposed to be kept ﬁxed, even when we consider condition 3.)
24
In fact, a known relevant alternative, in the intuitive sense. The false barns are supposed to be a
relevant alternative even if Henry has never heard of them. See the discussion of the difference
immediately below. Moreover, though “relevant alternative” is a technical philosophical term, here
it, or something like it, represents precisely the attitude of the appropriate scientiﬁc community,
who would use some such phrase in complete ignorance of the philosophical literature.
25
See my discussion below of “gnowledge,” where the term is stipulatively deﬁned as satisfaction
of Nozick’s conditions.

172

Nozick on Knowledge

soil conditions), is perfectly rational in drawing his conclusion. Hence, his case
is a counterexample, in the spirit of Gettier (1963), to the classical “justiﬁed
true belief ” analysis. (Shatz’s [1981] and Dretske’s [1971] original cases were
similar.)26 In contrast, the medical experimenter I have just described is by no
means perfectly rational—most of us who know about proper experimental
controls would say that his conclusion was neither justiﬁed nor rational. None
of this irrationality prevents Nozick’s conditions from being satisﬁed. It might be
argued that much of the recent tradition that Nozick follows is content with just
such a result—many of its advocates do not think that justiﬁcation should be a
necessary condition for knowledge. But it seems to me to be obvious that even
the philosophers who follow this trend ought to acknowledge that cases of the
present kind—where the believer really is irrational—go too far.
Let me modify Henry’s case further. Suppose Henry is perfectly familiar with
the papier-mâché barns in the area—they are known to everyone, and he himself
has inspected a few counterfeits at close range. On the other hand, he has no idea
that in some ﬁelds soil conditions render the erection of counterfeit barns
impossible; perhaps he even assumes, wrongly, that a papier-mâché barn could
be erected on any ﬁeld in the vicinity. Suppose that, looking at a ﬁeld with a real
barn (where, unbeknownst to him, soil conditions would have precluded the
erection of a counterfeit), Henry very stupidly and irrationally ignores the
possibility that the barn might be a counterfeit and concludes that there is a
genuine barn in the ﬁeld. Even in this case, where Henry’s irrationality is so
blatant that it is hard to imagine how it could possibly arise in practice, Nozick’s
conditions are still satisﬁed. In particular, they are satisﬁed in the forms 30 and 40 :
Henry’s “method M” is irrationally to follow the crude evidence of his eyes,
ignoring the possibility that he is looking at a papier-mâché counterfeit. Similarly, unbeknownst to Henry, the owner of the ﬁeld may have intended to build a
silo, had he not built a barn, or to have left the ﬁeld empty, or any number of
things. As we said above, the unfavorable soil conditions are not necessary. The
owner may not so much as have heard of the papier-mâché barns. Nevertheless,
Nozick’s conditions are still satisﬁed.
Similarly, we may modify the medical case so that the experimenter is even
more irrational. Suppose that he has been told many times of the necessity for the
use of control groups to exclude the placebo effect, that he has well understood
the argument, and that he has acknowledged its cogency. If the experimenter,
ignoring what he has learned before, nevertheless irrationally proceeds with his
26
Shatz did, in fact, as I already mentioned in note 22, derive his case from Lehrer and Paxson
(1969), who explicitly proposed the case in a discussion of Gettier (1963). Shatz explicitly gives his
case as a counterexample to exactly Nozick’s third condition, regarded as a replacement for, or
analysis of, the relevant alternatives account. See his page 394, condition * (which is Nozick’s third
condition, though he writes in ignorance of Nozick and under the inﬂuence of Goldman and
Dretske). Shatz’s counterexample strengthens Dretske’s earlier formulation of the counterexample
(see Shatz 1981:408, note 14).

Nozick on Knowledge

173

sloppy procedure, none of these additional stipulations prevents Nozick’s
conditions from being satisﬁed.
In a paper that Nozick cites, Laurence Bonjour27 gives other cases where the
subject’s belief is irrational. Bonjour puts forth a large number of examples, but
almost all concern a subject who irrationally regards himself as clairvoyant and
believes, on the basis of his supposed powers, that the president is in New York.
Combining various features of Bonjour’s cases, let us suppose that the subject
has been presented with overwhelming evidence that the president is actually in
Washington, that he knows that often he has deﬁnitely been wrong in the past
when he drew conclusions on the basis of his supposed clairvoyance, and that
scientiﬁc researchers have concluded that clairvoyance is impossible. Let us
suppose that nevertheless the subject really is clairvoyant and the president is in
fact in New York. (The evidence that the president is in Washington came from
White House “disinformation” disseminated so that the public would be unaware of a secret presidential mission. Sometimes in the past, special interfering
conditions, unknown to the subject, prevented his clairvoyance from operating;
but these interferences are not present in the case at hand.) It should be clear that
all of Nozick’s conditions for knowledge are satisﬁed and that the method is
“held ﬁxed.” Nevertheless, by ordinary standards of rationality the subject’s belief
is irrational, and Bonjour argues that he clearly does not know that the president
is in New York. (Originally, Bonjour’s argument was directed at Armstrong’s
[1973] analysis.)
Nozick suggests (196) that it might be appropriate to supplement his conditions with an added clause requiring that S not believe the negations of 3 and 4.
He thinks that it would be too strong to require, positively, that the subject
believe that 3 and 4 hold. His sole comment on Bonjour’s paper is to say, in the
footnote where he cites it: “It is along these lines that we should treat the
examples in Laurence Bonjour . . . .” This comment is puzzling, since clearly
the extra conditions are irrelevant to Bonjour’s example, whether or not Bonjour’s intuitions are correct and whether or not some other argument refutes
him.28 Since Bonjour’s subject believes in his own clairvoyance, he satisﬁes even
the stronger condition that he believes that 3 and 4 hold, not to mention the
weaker condition that he does not disbelieve them. The point is that his belief is
irrational. Could we supplement the conditions with something like, “It would
not be irrational for S to believe that 3 and 4 hold”? Indeed such a supplementary
clause would exclude Bonjour’s case, but it would reopen the problem of
philosophical skepticism and would no longer be “externalist.” A skeptic might
27

Bonjour (1980), cited by Nozick (686, note 41). For those who are familiar with the events of
June 2009, the whereabouts of the governor of South Carolina might be a more appropriate
example.
28
I am indebted to Christopher Peacocke for calling my attention to Bonjour’s paper and to the
irrelevance to it of Nozick’s extra clause.

174

Nozick on Knowledge

argue that our normal beliefs do not really satisfy the extra clause. A principal
goal of externalist views of knowledge like Nozick’s has been to exclude such
questions by making knowledge solely a matter of whether the relevant counterfactuals hold in fact.
As I said, many “externalists” have explicitly held that knowledge need not
imply justiﬁcation. Others, like Goldman and, following him, Nozick, give an
externalist analysis of justiﬁcation as well as knowledge. However: (i) I trust that
such philosophers do not really think that such highly irrational beliefs as the
worst cases just given are knowledge, let alone justiﬁed. (ii) Even if they do—after
all, we could stipulatively deﬁne a term “gnowledge” as satisfaction of Nozick’s
conditions—this would simply show that knowledge (or “gnowledge”) is no
great virtue. Similarly, we could invent a term “gustiﬁed” with the same result.
A skeptic could concede arguendo that we may “know” (or “gnow”) our customary beliefs (and be “gustiﬁed” in having them) but claim that we have no more
business having them than do some of the subjects just mentioned. We have seen
(i) that Nozick’s externalized conditions do not rule out cases where the subject is
highly irrational, and that (ii) even when the subject is rational and justiﬁed in
the intuitive sense (and also when he is not) the third condition does not capture
the idea of relevant alternatives. I should add (iii) that his conditions do not
capture the idea of a “reliable method” either—not that he says that they do.
Ignoring proper experimental controls and forgetting about counterfeit barns in
an area where they abound are highly unreliable methods. True, in some sense
Nozick’s conditions guarantee that the method used is reliable for the case of the
particular judgment p at hand. The trouble is that the intuitive concept of
reliability seems to require reliability over a range of similar actual and hypothetical cases. In one paragraph Nozick realizes that his third condition may be
“undercut” if it endorses a method that fails for cases similar enough to the case at
hand (187). However, he drops the problem quickly, apparently failing to
appreciate its full force. He explicitly realizes (abstractly, see 267) that there is
a problem about the relation of his concept of “tracking” to that of a reliable
method; but again he does not realize the problem created for his theory,
and drops the matter quickly (“I prefer to leave this question unsettled”). All
three problems mentioned in this paragraph seem to me to be related to each
other, and to illustrate why Nozick’s third condition seems not to achieve its
intended effects.
Before (temporarily!) leaving Henry and his barn, let me mention another type
of problem. Suppose the situation is as Nozick imagines it—because the area
abounds in counterfeit barns, the owner of Henry’s ﬁeld would (or might) have
erected a ringer there, too, had he not decided to build a real barn. (Henry knows
nothing of all this.) But now suppose another oddity, unknown to Henry or
anyone else, since the situation has not actually arisen. Had a papier-mâché barn
been erected on the ﬁeld, a subtle interaction of chemicals in the counterfeit with
Henry’s optic nerve would temporarily have disordered his perceptual apparatus.

Nozick on Knowledge

175

He would not have seen a barn, but rather a mirage of a clear-water pond. Almost
everyone else reacts to the counterfeit barn normally—only a unique defect in
Henry’s optic nerve produces the illusion. No one, including Henry, has the
slightest awareness of the defect; the situation that would call it forth has never
arisen. As usual, papier-mâché barns abound in the area. But now Henry clearly
satisﬁes the third condition—had a real barn not been there, he would not have
believed there was a real barn in the ﬁeld.
Can we really believe that because of a bizarre defect in his perceptual apparatus, giving him an extraordinary illusion under certain circumstances that in fact
may never be realized, Henry knows something that a normal percipient cannot
know? Henry is not a person with a ﬁnely “discriminating” perceptual apparatus
enabling him to distinguish counterfeit barns from genuine ones. Such a person
is obviously conceivable, one with a ﬁne visual acuity—sensitive to differences
between counterfeit and real barns—that a normal person lacks. But Henry is not
like this. He would be even more badly deceived in the presence of a papiermâché barn than would a normal person. A papier-mâché barn really does
resemble a real one very closely, and a normal percipient, unlike Henry, sees
this. By accident, so to speak, Henry’s very poor perception in this case would
lead him not to make the erroneous judgment that a real barn is before him.
Remember that he himself (like everyone else) is unaware of the defect and it has
never in fact been realized. It would be very strange to describe his perceptual
apparatus as one that enables him to discriminate counterfeit barns from real
ones—and hence, when he looks at a real barn, thereby to know something he
wouldn’t have known had he not had this defect! The same problem arises if
Henry’s eyes simply would go dim in the presence of counterfeit barns, so that he
would see nothing clearly (rather than having a hallucination). Not only Nozick,
but others, even many of those who have restricted their theories to perceptual
knowledge, seem to me to be vulnerable to this point.29
The situation would be different if Henry knew of the defect and could argue,
“This barn must be real, since I am not seeing a pond.” But we are supposing that
neither Henry nor anyone else knows anything of his peculiarity. (We could even
suppose that Henry has never confronted a papier-mâché barn, never experienced the mirage.) Then Nozick’s theory (in common with other related theories) says that Henry knows that there is a barn there, even though no normal
person would know this, just because of a bizarre defect in Henry’s vision that has
never in fact been realized!
The point seems to me to be of great importance for many current theories of
perceptual knowledge. Too often the capacity of a perceptual apparatus to attain
knowledge is equated with counterfactual conditions that allow knowledge to be
a result of a defect in, rather than of a virtue of, the perceptual system. It is one
29

See, e.g., Goldman (1976).

176

Nozick on Knowledge

thing to say that if we know that a thermometer or an electric eye (or even a
human eye) has the right kind of defect, under certain circumstance the thermometer (or other apparatus) is usable for certain purposes where a better device
would fail. It is another thing to say, when everyone, including Henry, is totally
unaware of the defect, that Henry himself has knowledge.
By suitably modifying the example, we can separate it from or combine it with
our previous themes at will. If we suppose that Henry gets the mirage whenever
he looks at a papier-mâché barn, then in some sense he has a “reliable method”
for telling when something is a real barn—unlike other people, he never erroneously thinks he is looking at a real barn. Even so, it seems to me that this hardly
can give him “knowledge” that others lack.30 Moreover, we may suppose, if we
wish, that Henry gets the mirage from papier-mâché barns only in conjunction
with certain soil conditions peculiar to the ﬁeld at hand—papier-mâché barns on
other neighboring ﬁelds look the same to Henry as to anyone else.
Alternatively, some particular chemicals in the particular papier-mâché barn
that the owner would have erected had he not decided to erect a real one would
have produced the illusion in Henry, but these chemicals are not present in any
actual counterfeit barns in the area. (He has often been fooled by the false barns
in the past, though he does not know it.) Then Henry no longer has a “reliable”
method for telling a real barn, even in the Pickwickian sense that held before.
Nevertheless, Henry still “knows” there is a real barn, according to Nozick’s
conditions.
Return to the case we have mentioned before, where Henry has been warned
many times of the presence of counterfeit barns in the area, but irrationally
ignores it. That could be added to the present case where he has a perceptual
defect, never realized and never known to anyone, himself included, making the
case even worse because of Henry’s irrationality. Actually, in the case where
Henry has been warned in this way, I am inclined to worry about the knowledge
claim even if Henry does have some special visual acuity (in the ordinary sense)
that enables him to discriminate counterfeit from real barns. Suppose Henry has
never been in the presence of a counterfeit barn; but if he had been, he would
have said to his surprise that some subtle features of the barn make him sure that
it is not genuine. However, neither he nor anyone else is aware of his powers. In
that case, had he been warned of the danger of counterfeits, he would have been
30

Nor can the existence of a “reliable method” in this sense give justiﬁcation. Goldman (1979)
equates justiﬁed belief with possession of a reliable method. Nozick accepts Goldman’s proposal.
The present case is not a counterexample to this equation, since intuitively Henry is justiﬁed here.
(But see the case below where Henry is irrational.) So is a normal person, without Henry’s defect;
possibly Goldman would regard the general reliability of vision (regardless of subtleties about the
reaction to counterfeit barns) as a reliable enough method. However, without working out the
details, it seems to be all too obvious that the type of problem involved here signals trouble for
Goldman’s “externalist” account of justiﬁcation as well. (Though I think there are more basic
troubles.)

Nozick on Knowledge

177

irrational to conclude that a real barn was in front of him. (Remember that in this
case the barn is in fact real and that he has never looked at a counterfeit barn,
even though he has been correctly warned that they abound in the area.) But
then, unless blatant irrationality is compatible with knowledge, he wouldn’t
know. (And if they are compatible, then, as I argued above, “knowledge” is no
great virtue, since the subject could “know” something he has no business
believing.)
Given that counterfeit barns do abound in the area (and that he is making his
judgment on the presupposition that they do not), should he be said to know
even in the case where he hasn’t been warned? Does the absence of a warning give
him knowledge? Without going further into the problem here, these considerations suggest that in some cases knowledge obtained through the normal use of
normal human senses is different from “knowledge” based on counterfactuals
involving abnormal capacities peculiar to one subject, capacities that he has never
exercised and of which he is unaware.

3. THE FOURTH CONDITION
Given that the ﬁrst two conditions are satisﬁed, the fourth condition is a
counterfactual whose antecedent and consequent are both true. Rarely do we
knowingly assert such “factual counterfactuals”; my own intuitions about their
truth conditions are shaky. Robert Stalnaker (1968) and David Lewis (1973)
independently count them as automatically true. This stipulation, which Nozick
explicitly rejects, would render the fourth condition completely superﬂuous.
I am much less conﬁdent than Nozick seems to be that we have a clear intuitive
understanding of counterfactuals of this type, and I wish he had given much
more elaborate discussion and defense of his views on this question than he does.
It is hard to agree with Nozick (176) that the reader can rely on her “intuitive
understanding” of these conditionals; and, as Nozick seems to recognize, his
tentative technical remarks do not really ﬁll the gap.31 Nevertheless, he does give
some indications of what he has in mind. For a counterfactual with true
31
On 680–81, note 8, Nozick sketches a modiﬁed possible-world semantics. But he does not
wish substantive philosophical points to depend on this tentative and sketchy discussion.
I can think of other possible ways to illuminate Nozick’s intuitions on “factual counterfactuals.”
We might take one as true if it could reasonably be asserted by a speaker ignorant of the truth of the
antecedent, or, perhaps, if it could be asserted without clairvoyance before the events in question had
occurred. I will not elaborate on this here.
Nozick’s conﬁdence that we have an “intuitive understanding” of these counterfactuals strikes me
as quite unfortunate, since I myself doubt this assertion and he invokes such counterfactuals often.
(Notice that he implies that both Lewis and Stalnaker, the leading writers in this area, must lack
such an intuitive understanding.) One aspect of our treatment, therefore, is lucky. We will show that
the fourth condition is toothless, on any understanding, so we don’t have to worry about the
interpretation of it. See my section 4(a) below.

178

Nozick on Knowledge

antecedent to be true, the consequent must be true, not only in the actual world
but also in a range of “very near” possible worlds where the antecedent is true.
(Lewis mentions a similar variant [1973: section 1.7].) Nozick seems to think
that a counterfactual with a true antecedent can be true only if the consequent is
in some sense inevitable, given the antecedent. After stating condition 4, Nozick
mentions a case.
Compare: not only was the photon emitted and did it go to the left, but (it was then true
that): if it were emitted it would go to the left. The truth of antecedent and consequent is
not alone sufﬁcient for the truth of a subjunctive; 4 says more than 1 and 2. (176)

In a footnote Nozick elaborates:
If it is truly a random matter which slit a photon goes through, then its going through
(say) the right slit does not establish the subjunctive: if a photon were ﬁred at that time
from that source it would go through the right-hand slit. For when p equals A photon is
ﬁred at that time from that source, and q equals the photon goes through the right-hand
slit, q is not true everywhere in the p neighborhood of the actual world. (680-61, note 8)

The discussion of the photon in note 8 is tentative only in its reference to the
possible-world semantics tentatively proposed there. Nozick believes categorically in the photon example and is elaborating on the mention of it in the text.
We need not discuss whether Nozick is right about ordinary language. Rather,
we can take his remarks as a partial indication of how he intends “factual
counterfactuals” to be understood, and, in particular, how he understands the
fourth condition.32
Given these remarks, I ﬁnd it very hard to see how condition 4, or condition 40 ,
can be a necessary condition for knowledge. Consider the photon case. Suppose
that Mary is a physicist who places a detector plate so that it detects any photon
that happens to go to the right. If the photon goes to the left, she will have no idea
whether a photon has been emitted or not. Suppose a photon is emitted, that it
does hit the detector plate (which is at the right), and that Mary concludes that a
photon has been emitted. Intuitively, it seems clear that her conclusion indeed
does constitute knowledge. But is Nozick’s fourth condition satisﬁed? No, for it is
not true, according to Nozick’s conception of such counterfactuals, that if a
photon had been emitted, Mary would have believed that a photon was emitted.
The photon might well have gone to the left, in which case Mary would have had
no beliefs about the matter. (Here the method is held ﬁxed.)
Change Mary’s belief (which she certainly will have) to the belief that a photon
has been emitted and gone to the right. In that case, on Nozick’s view, there is
nothing wrong with condition 4. Indeed, if a photon had been emitted and gone
32
Notice that Nozick in the two examples changes the actual path of the photon from the left in
the ﬁrst quotation to the right in the second one. In my own discussion, I have assumed the second
case.

Nozick on Knowledge

179

to the right, Mary would have believed it, even on Nozick’s understanding of the
condition. But hasn’t failure of deductive closure33 run amok here? Can we really
suppose that Mary knows that a photon has been emitted and gone to the right,34
but not that a photon has been emitted simpliciter ? As I have said, it is the second
part that I ﬁnd counterintuitive by itself, but the failure of deductive closure is
also counterintuitive. This case anticipates a theme that will be developed in the
next section. (It also somewhat resembles, now in the context of condition 4, the
red barn case discussed below.)
As I just formulated the case, Mary rightly is aware that the photon may be
undetected if it goes to the left. Suppose, however, that Mary erroneously
calculates that her detector will detect any photon emitted from the source. So
she concludes that a photon has been emitted if the detector registers an emission
and that none has been emitted if the detector registers no emission. Intuitively,
her error does not affect the soundness of her conclusion that a photon has been
emitted, or its status as knowledge, when a photon does hit the detector. That she
would err in drawing a negative conclusion about the emission from the failure of
the photon to hit the detector is intuitively irrelevant to her knowledge in the
positive case. Nevertheless, Nozick’s condition 4 and his condition 40 still fail, so
we do not have knowledge in Nozick’s sense.
Nozick mentions a case where someone knows that a bank robber is Jesse James
after he sees a mask accidentally slip off his face, and Nozick claims that the case
“causes no difﬁculty for condition 4, properly understood” (193, case (h)). He
speaks of a method that can be used in some situations to draw the desired
conclusion but is such that “some other situations might not allow that method to
be used—these situations do not yield any belief.” I ﬁnd the statement that there is
no difﬁculty here for condition 4 “properly understood” (?) doubtful even in the
bank robber case, but I ﬁnd it very hard to see how this comment could apply to the
case of the photon. Perhaps Nozick means that the method M is looking at the
33

Often I speak in connection with theories like Nozick’s of failure of knowledge to be
“deductively closed,” or a failure of “deductive closure,” as shorthand for what Nozick more
properly calls “failure of knowledge to be closed under known logical implication” (the “known”
here creates a problem, since Nozick must mean for his analysis of knowledge to apply to this case,
too, but I do not go into it here, and let Nozick take the term “known” to be understood simply
intuitively for this case). No one thinks that knowledge is literally deductively closed;
mathematicians do add to our knowledge by their clever deductions. Perhaps occasionally even
philosophers do.
34
Of course, one must check that Nozick’s ﬁrst three conditions hold for the belief that a photon
has been emitted and gone to the right. The ﬁrst two are clearly veriﬁed since the statement in
question is a true belief. For the third, what if it had not been the case that a photon was emitted and
went to the right? Well, whatever the source of the failure may have been, either that a photon was
not emitted or that it did not go to the right, Mary would not have believed the conjunction, and
indeed would not have believed the ﬁrst conjunct, since the detector plate would not have been hit
(and this is the method to be held ﬁxed). So the conjunctive statement will be knowledge in Nozick’s
sense, since on his interpretation the fourth condition holds too. See also section 4(a) in the text
below, where the conditions are checked in this way in greater generality.

180

Nozick on Knowledge

robber’s unmasked face and that it is impossible to apply M if the mask has not
slipped. But the method of looking at the detector plate is always applicable. We
cannot say that it is inapplicable if the photon goes to the left, since Mary has no
independent test, other than by the use of her detector plate, for whether a photon
has been emitted or not, or where it went. (Recall that Nozick’s concept of method
requires that the subject should be able to tell, even “from the inside,” whether he is
applying a given method or not.) Further, it is irrelevant to the case whether Mary
forms no belief about whether a photon has been emitted if no photon has registered
on the detector, as we have just seen. If Nozick wishes to push the strategy of the Jesse
James case far enough, and specify the method used in an ad hoc way, perhaps he can
still avoid the counterexample. He could legislate that Mary applies two methods—
a positive method that says that a photon has been emitted if one shows up on the
detector plate, and a “separate,” negative method that (erroneously) says that none
has been emitted if it does not show up or, alternatively, gives no belief at all in that
case. Then, if the positive method is applied at all, Mary must conclude that a
photon has been emitted. It is equally obvious that if we stretch the speciﬁcation of
the method used this far, we could declare the fourth condition satisﬁed in every
case, even those where Nozick wants it to fail. There is nothing to be gained from
this kind of body English. (See my section 7 below.)
Hence, as far as I can see, Nozick’s own paradigm of the photon emission
shows that his fourth condition is not necessary. On the other hand, some of
Nozick’s own uses of the fourth condition to rule out various cases satisfying the
other three strike me as dubious. For example:
As an effect of brain damage a person is led (irrationally) to believe he has brain damage,
which he would not believe if he didn’t have brain damage. However, condition 4 is
not satisﬁed: if the brain damage had been slightly different, though using the same route
to belief he would not believe he had it. (190)35

Is this really a satisfactory treatment of the case? Suppose the case had been just as
Nozick describes, except that if the brain damage had been slightly different, it
would still have caused him to have an irrational belief that he has brain damage.
Does this modiﬁcation really change our intuitions about the case? I ﬁnd it hard to
see that it does. Isn’t it the irrationality of the belief that is crucial? Even the very
ﬁrst example Nozick uses to motivate the introduction of the fourth condition
(two paragraphs) seems to me to be questionable in a similar way.
Nozick’s third condition has a clear intuitive basis. “Even if p had been false,
you’d still have believed it!” sounds like an objection to a knowledge claim.
(Nevertheless, eventually I will argue that the third condition is very far from
being a necessary condition for knowledge. See my section 5.)36 But I ﬁnd it hard
35

He derives this case from Sosa (1969:39).
Also, in the other direction, I will argue in section 4(b) that the third condition can very often
be defanged by strengthening the knowledge claim.
36

Nozick on Knowledge

181

to see why the fourth condition should have been thought to be necessary at all.
Why should the method by which one comes to believe that p make it inevitable,
or even make it merely highly probable, that one should have believed that p if
p is true, as long as the method never can lead to an erroneous conclusion that p?
The photon example is meant to bring this out, and any number of examples
could be given in this vein. Because of the difﬁculty about the exact intuitive
meaning of Nozick’s condition 4, I have stuck to the rather special photon
example, which corresponds to a case on which we have Nozick’s explicit ipse
dixit. But any case where the subject has a method that never leads to an
erroneous conclusion that p, but will not inevitably yield a positive result given
p, really goes against the fourth condition. Nozick says (682, note 12) that his
fourth condition was chosen after experimenting among a large number of
candidates for a supplement to the ﬁrst three, but it seems to me to suffer from
a lack of a deﬁnite intuitive motivation.
So far it looks as if we are arguing that the fourth condition is not a necessary
condition for knowledge. In fact, I think it is not, but as we will see presently this
is not the most important defect of the condition. Rather than ruling out too
much, its real problem is that it does not effectively exclude even those cases that
it apparently excludes. This remark will become clear in the next section.

4 . LOGICAL PROPERTIES OF NOZICK’S THEORY:
STRENGTHENED BELIEFS AND CONJUNCTIONS

4(a). The Fourth Condition: Strengthening the Belief
There is a more fundamental problem with the fourth condition, which ultimately affects the third condition as well. We can illustrate the problem with the
fourth condition using an example Nozick (177) takes from Gilbert Harman.
A dictator dies; the death is reported in the ﬁrst edition of the ofﬁcial newspaper;
but later an ofﬁcial denial is broadcast and printed everywhere. Almost everyone
in the country is fooled by the denial, but one person, S, somehow misses all
reports of the denial. S ’s belief that the dictator has died satisﬁes the ﬁrst three
conditions, but Nozick agrees with Harman’s intuition that he does not know.
Nozick thinks that the fourth condition fails. It is not true that had the dictator
died, S would have believed that he died, since S’s belief is the accidental result of
his failure to hear the denial (otherwise he, too, would have been fooled).
However, S also believes the conjunction that the dictator has died and that he
(S ) has heard an uncontradicted newspaper report to this effect.37 The method
he uses to believe this conjunction is a combination of reading the undenied
37
Here and elsewhere in this discussion I use “he (S ),” or simply “he,” in Castañeda’s wellknown sense (see Castañeda 1968, and many other publications); S would say, “I have heard an

182

Nozick on Knowledge

newspaper report for the ﬁrst conjunct and remembering what he has read and
heard for the second. Then, on Nozick’s understanding of the fourth condition,
it does appear to be the case that if the conjunction had been true, then, using the
method he actually uses, S would have believed it. (Note that the second conjunct
guarantees that our attention is conﬁned to counterfactual situations where S
hears no denial.) There seems to be no problem with the ﬁrst three conditions. So
here, according to Nozick, S does know the conjunction!
As we shall discuss below, Nozick denies that knowledge is closed under
known logical implication, and even holds that one can know a conjunction
without knowing one of the conjuncts. However, from Nozick one would get the
impression that these phenomena are normally conﬁned to special cases related
to philosophical skepticism; one would have no idea of their ubiquity in his
theory. Is the present case really credible? Does it really capture Harman’s
intuition to say that although S does not know that the dictator died, he
knows a simple conjunction with that death as the ﬁrst conjunct?38
Here Harman’s intuition was that S does not know, and the anomaly was that
Nozick’s theory restores knowledge by a simple strengthening of the belief. But
as I already mentioned in the previous section, the problem applies to Mary the
physicist as well. She did not satisfy Nozick’s fourth condition for knowing that a
photon was emitted, contrary to our intuition that she does know. But note that
she certainly does know, even according to Nozick’s theory, that a photon was
emitted and that it went to the right. Really this problem was obvious from
the previous discussion. Here strengthening the belief restores intuition rather
than destroying it. Assuming that Harman’s intuition about the dictator case
is correct, the present case may be worse, but the real problem is that we can
so easily restore the fourth condition in this trivial way.39
The crucial problem for the fourth condition is really one of great generality.
Suppose S arrives at the belief p by a method M. Now consider S ’s conjunctive
belief (q), that p and that he (himself ) believes that p via M, or, equivalently (in a
form that is not a conjunction), that he correctly believes via M that p. Then q
almost always satisﬁes the fourth condition, whether or not S ’s original belief
that p does. (If we are considering the simple conditions, without mention of
method, then we are dealing simply with S ’s belief that he correctly believes
uncontradicted newspaper report . . . ” However, in most cases it would not matter if “I” were
replaced by “S,” since we can presume that S knows that he is S.
38
The problem need not be put in terms of conjunctions, it is about strengthening the belief
appropriately. In Harman’s dictator case, it can be phrased as: “I have heard a correct
uncontradicted newspaper report . . .”
39
The general moral about the ineffectiveness of the fourth condition does not depend on
agreement with Harman’s intuition about this particular illustrative case. As we shall see, it applies
virtually whenever the fourth condition is invoked to exclude a particular true belief as knowledge.
In fact, in my spring 2009 seminar on epistemology, several participants, especially Melvyn
Nathanson and Romina Padró, gave serious reasons to doubt Harman’s (and Nozick’s) intuitions
about this particular case.

Nozick on Knowledge

183

that p.) The point is that normally (alleged special exceptions aside) belief is selfintimating: a subject who believes that p is aware that he believes p (and aware by
what method M he came to believe it). Without thereby presupposing any
particular philosophical doctrine, let us use “self-awareness” as a name for the
method by which S comes to be aware of his own belief that p (and of the method
M applied).40 The method M0 by which S comes to believe the conjunction q is
a combination of M plus self-awareness: M for the ﬁrst conjunct, and selfawareness for the second. The second conjunct of q —that S does believe p via
M—guarantees that application of M0 will lead to a belief that q. (The second
conjunct says that S believes the ﬁrst conjunct via M, and guarantees, given the
self-intimating character of belief, that S will believe the second conjunct itself.)
So for q, except in very exceptional cases, the fourth condition is trivially satisﬁed.
If the other three conditions held for S ’s belief that p, then normally they will
still hold for his belief that q. What q says is that the ﬁrst two conditions hold for
p (i.e., that p is truly believed via M), so the old (1) and (2) imply that q is true,
the new ﬁrst condition. As was noted previously, the ﬁrst and the fourth
conditions (for q) jointly entail the second. So we need only consider the third
condition. Suppose it held for p. Now if q had been false, either p would have
been false or S would not have believed p via M. But if p had been false, then by
hypothesis (since the third condition is supposed to have held for p), S would not
have believed p via M and hence would not have believed q via M0 . On the other
hand, if S had not believed p via M, then, given normally reasonable assumptions
about self-awareness, he would not have believed that he believed it (via M)
either, and hence (normally) would not have believed that q. This shows that,
normally,41 if the third condition holds for p, it holds for q.
What we have shown is that preﬁxing “I correctly believe (via M) that . . .” or,
if a method M is not involved, simply “I correctly believe that . . .” normally
preserves the ﬁrst three conditions if they held already and creates a new belief
satisfying the fourth condition whether that condition held already or not. Below
we will argue that there is also an interesting class of special cases for which the
preﬁx generates a new belief satisfying not only the fourth condition but also the
third, whether or not either one held already. But this class is relatively more
special than the very general class of cases described above.
40
Alternatively, we can suppose the original belief that p to have been formed without a method
and modify the discussion accordingly. We would then have a case of a conjunction, one conjunct of
which is believed by a particular method while the other conjunct is not. One defect of Nozick’s
discussion is that he does not consider such cases. (Recall that Nozick, under the inﬂuence of
Wittgenstein 1969, regards certain basic cases of knowledge as so central that they are not formed
by any particular method. See note 10.)
41
Various exceptions are possible. The usual properties of self-awareness may fail. Or, perhaps,
he somehow inconsistently would have believed q, but not its conjunct p. Or, perhaps, the
hypothesis that p fails and S applies M0 has different counterfactual implications from the
hypothesis that p fails and S applies M. And so on. Similar possibilities can arise for all the cases
below, but in practice they will be very rare.

184

Nozick on Knowledge

Nozick originally proposed the fourth condition because of various examples
where the ﬁrst three conditions hold but nevertheless (he thinks) S does not
know. The preceding discussion shows that in every one of these examples S ’s
belief that p will satisfy all four of Nozick’s conditions if we change it to “I
correctly believe that p (via M).” Doesn’t this consideration show that the fourth
condition is almost without force, a broken reed? What can be the point of a
condition whose rigor can almost always be overcome by conjoining “and
I believe (via M) that p,” or equivalently, by preﬁxing “I correctly believe (via
M) that . . . ”? (A subject who wishes to be sure that he will satisfy the fourth
condition can begin all his utterances with “I correctly believe . . . ”) And whatever we may think of deductive closure in general, surely there is something
counterintuitive, almost silly, about the idea that although the subject does not
know some proposition, he does know that he correctly believes it!
Harman’s dictator case illustrates another relevant point. Usually the somewhat artiﬁcial conjunct “and I believe that p (via M)” can be replaced by another
clause. This clause must state conditions that actually obtain and counterfactually
imply that S would believe p; moreover, they must be self-intimating in the sense
that, were they to obtain, S could not normally avoid being aware of them.
(These counterfactuals are to be understood as Nozick understands counterfactuals with true antecedents.) In Harman’s case, the added conjunct—that S
learned his information from a newspaper report and has heard no denial—
succeeds because it satisﬁes these requirements. Usually such a condition will
exist; usually S ’s belief that p arises because of an independently speciﬁable source
of which S himself is aware and which makes his belief nearly inevitable, given his
predispositions. As we saw above, even for S ’s original belief that p these conditions often could be built into a narrower speciﬁcation of the method M used.
Except when, intuitively speaking, S ’s belief is overdetermined by multiple
methods, Nozick’s theory allows us to argue here over the “proper” description
of “the” method M, and hence over whether condition 40 is “really” satisﬁed. No
such leeway is allowed when we consider whether S believes the strengthened
proposition q. Once again, Harman’s case illustrates these general points.42
The problem with the fourth condition looks almost obvious once it is
pointed out. After all, the consequent of the fourth condition says that S believes
that p; and an obvious way to ensure that the consequent of a conditional is
implied by the antecedent is to add either the consequent itself, or some
condition causally implying it, to the antecedent. What needs to be checked is
that the addition of this clause to the antecedent actually guarantees the fourth
42
Aside from generating strengthened beliefs that may look somewhat more natural than beliefs
of the form “I correctly believe that p,” the possibility of adding conjuncts that causally or
counterfactually imply that I believe that p shows that it would be pointless to try to remedy the
situation by adding an ad hoc clause somehow exempting beliefs about the subject’s own beliefs
from the general theory and trying to handle these separately—not that such an ad hoc move would
have much plausibility (or much chance of success) in any case.

Nozick on Knowledge

185

condition for the entire conjunction, and that the other three conditions are
preserved if they held before.

4(b). The Third Condition: Strengthening the Belief
Nozick praises his third condition as “powerful and intuitive, not so easy to
satisfy” (173). The condition does seem to ﬁt the characterization. “Even if p had
not been the case, you still would have believed it” does sound like an objection
to a knowledge claim, as I have already remarked. Moreover, Nozick seems right
to claim that the condition places a strong constraint. The fourth condition, by
contrast, seems to me to be more artiﬁcial, hard to understand, and added in an
attempt to eliminate some residual counterexamples. The third condition is
surely what is basic to Nozick’s theory.
It is therefore somewhat surprising that in a large number of cases even the
intuitively more plausible third condition is vulnerable to similar strengthening
tricks like the fourth. Here we cannot simply add a conjunct implying the old
consequent. The trouble is that p, the subject’s belief, is negated in the antecedent
of the third condition. Hence any added conjunct q changes p to p & q in the
antecedent, and this weakens the antecedent rather than strengthens it. So we
cannot use as simple a device as we did before. Nevertheless, very often there is a
conjunct we can add that will ensure that the third condition holds for the
conjunctive belief, even if it failed for the original belief that p. The construction
will be such that the added conjunct is also a true belief, so that the ﬁrst two
conditions are preserved if they held for p. Ordinarily we can carry out the
construction so that the fourth condition is also preserved if it held already.
However, preservation of the fourth condition is of relatively little importance.
We can almost always go through a second stage and fulﬁll the fourth condition
by prefacing “I correctly believe that . . . ” to the new belief. The other three
conditions hold already and, as we argued above, are normally preserved when
the preface is added. What we intend to show is that in a large class of cases, so
long as p is a true belief, only two steps sufﬁce to obtain a stronger belief
satisfying all four of Nozick’s conditions. Very often the construction can stop
even at the ﬁrst step with all four conditions satisﬁed, but this fact is of relatively
less importance.
There are two major classes of these cases. We illustrate the ﬁrst class with an
example. Return to Henry and the barn. Suppose that the case really accords with
Nozick’s picture of it: that is, there is a real barn in the ﬁeld Henry looks at, while
unbeknownst to Henry counterfeit barns abound in the area, and but for the
building of this real barn a counterfeit would surely have been built in its place.
Henry naively judges that there is a real barn in the ﬁeld, but the third condition
is not satisﬁed (though the others are); had there been no genuine barn there, the
counterfeit there in its place would have taken Henry in. So, according to
Nozick’s theory, Henry does not know that there is a barn in the ﬁeld.

186

Nozick on Knowledge

So far so good, but now let us suppose that the barn is red. Suppose further
that any counterfeit erected in its place would have been green. (We can suppose,
if we wish, that for some chemical reason the cardboard in the counterfeit barns
cannot be painted red. Alternatively, those who erected counterfeit barns deﬁnitely preferred green ones, or even deﬁnitely preferred a green one in this
particular location.) Now consider Henry’s true belief (thus satisfying the ﬁrst
two conditions) that there is a (genuine) red barn in the ﬁeld. Now the third
condition is satisﬁed. If there had not been a red barn in the ﬁeld, then there
would have been a green counterfeit, and Henry would not have believed that
there was a red barn in the ﬁeld. There is no trouble with the fourth condition. So
according to Nozick’s criterion, although Henry may not know that there is a
genuine barn in the ﬁeld, he does know that there is a genuine red barn there!
Surely even someone who follows Nozick (and others mentioned before) in
rejecting deductive closure in general cannot be very comfortable with this
particular result. Notice that it is not essential that in the absence of a real barn
a counterfeit deﬁnitely would have been erected—all that is required is that had
any counterfeit been erected, it would not have been red. (If no object resembling
a barn is in the ﬁeld, clearly Henry will not believe that there is a red barn there.)
Notice also that there would have been no problem with the result (and no failure
of deductive closure) if Henry had been aware that redness is a distinguishing
mark of real, as opposed to counterfeit, barns. The problem is that Nozick’s
theory says that Henry knows there is a red barn there even if he is entirely
unaware of the connection of genuineness with color, or even of the danger
that the barn might be counterfeit.43
It might be thought that the situation described is very special. After all, the
strong connection we have postulated between color and genuineness is extremely unlikely in practice! In fact, the situation is by no means special. If, for any
feature whose presence or absence is perceptible to Henry, the actual genuine
43

The following is an actual case involving counterfeit money. (See note 21.) In 1998 the
United States Bureau of Printing and Engraving issued special, new twenty-dollar bills that were
much harder to counterfeit than the previous ones. There was a gross and perceptible difference
between the new bills and their predecessors, though many of the changes made to deter
counterfeiting were not perceptible to an ordinary user. Suppose these changes to be so successful
that counterfeit bills never have the new appearance, only the old. Then, if Henry is holding a new
twenty-dollar bill but is unaware that new, but not old, bills are never counterfeit, then analogously
to the red barn, Nozick’s theory (based on the third condition) dictates that although he does not
know (just by looking at the bill) that he is holding a real twenty-dollar bill, he does know that he is
holding a real new twenty-dollar bill. Here “new,” or better, an actual description of the appearance
of the new bills, plays the role of redness for the barn. Most people are aware of the existence of
counterfeiting, but in practice when they handle small bills this does not occur to them, so that the
case somewhat resembles Goldman’s (1976) intentions with papier-mâché barns, as in note 21,
though the bizarreness of the fake barns is not preserved. At a greater extreme, we might suppose the
subject ignorant of counterfeiting altogether, making the case even more like that of Henry, though
then it would be counterfactual or at least very rare. (My thanks to Romina Padró for suggesting this
example.)

Nozick on Knowledge

187

barn is distinguishable from the supposed counterfeit—the one that would have
been erected in its place—then the argument goes through (with redness replaced
by the appropriate feature). Once again, we suppose that Henry is entirely
unaware of the connection of genuineness with the feature, and is even unaware
of the danger of counterfeit barns. Such a feature might be, say, a somewhat
different shape of the roof of the barn, or the exact position of some smokestack.
Alternatively, suppose that it rained the previous night, leaving a visible smudge
on the real barn. Unless the counterfeit would have exhibited exactly the same
smudge (as far as Henry would have been able to see), then the presence of this
smudge will serve as an appropriate perceptible feature.
Here we have spoken of “the” counterfeit barn that would have been erected in
the absence of the real barn and “the” feature that distinguishes the two. But it is
not necessary that these be unique. Suppose that the real barn has various
perceptible features Fi, such that at least one would have failed in any counterfeit
that might have been erected in its place. In other words, the real barn satisﬁes
F1∧ . . . ∧ Fn; any counterfeit would have satisﬁed F1∨ . . . ∨ Fn. (A perceptible feature is one whose presence or absence Henry can detect.) Then the
statement p that there is a real barn there with all the Fi’s satisﬁes Nozick’s
conditions. In particular, for the third condition, had p been false, then the ﬁeld
would have contained either: nothing; or, some object or objects not resembling
a barn; or, a counterfeit barn (or barn-like object) palpably lacking one of the
Fi’s. In any of these cases, Henry would not have believed that there is a real barn
there with all the Fi’s, which veriﬁes the third condition. The argument can be
avoided only if a counterfeit barn, indistinguishable in every perceptible respect
from the particular genuine one that is actually there, might well have been
erected had the genuine one been absent.44 But counterfeiters are unlikely to be
so extraordinarily skilled as to produce an object indistinguishable by every
perceptible mark from a genuine one, nor are they likely to want to do so.
(Even a counterfeit barn that would fool an expert, let alone Henry, need not
satisfy such a strong condition.) But here even this skill is not sufﬁcient—they
would have to be able to duplicate this particular barn in every perceptible
respect. And even if they had the ability to do so, why should they try? Remember
that in the circumstances in question they would have to be duplicating a barn
that would never have been built. Probably even plans for the genuine barn
would never have existed. And an initial perfect duplication is not sufﬁcient.
Subsequently, the perceptible features of the counterfeit barn would have to be

44
Suppose that Henry fails to notice the presence of some particular one of the Fi in the real barn
that he sees or, alternatively, would have failed to notice its absence in the counterfeit barn that
would have been erected. Then the argument in the text wouldn’t go through. But could we really
hold that Henry’s failure to notice something, real or hypothetical, gives him knowledge that there is
a real barn there, knowledge that he would otherwise lack? See my similar discussion of a defect in
Henry’s optic nerve above.

188

Nozick on Knowledge

affected (e.g., by the rainstorm postulated above) in exactly the same way as those
of the genuine one! This is highly unlikely.
Let us consider the problem in even greater generality. Let p be any true belief
of a subject S. Suppose that the third condition fails. Suppose further, however,
that there is some feature of S ’s experience that would have been absent had p not
been true. Suppose that S is in general able to discern the presence or absence of
the experiential feature in question but is unaware of its connection with p. Let q
be S ’s true belief that the experiential feature in question is present. Then,
normally, the conjunction p & q satisﬁes the ﬁrst three of Nozick’s conditions.
This is obvious for the ﬁrst two conditions. For the third condition, notice that,
by hypothesis, if p & q had been false, no matter which conjunct was responsible
for the falsity of the conjunction, the experiential feature in question would have
been absent. Since S is supposed to be able to detect the absence of the feature,
this means that he would not believe that q, and hence would not believe that
p & q.45
Thus, unless p is a proposition whose falsity would have made no detectable
difference to S ’s experiences, we can normally ﬁnd a conjunct q such that p & q
satisﬁes all of the ﬁrst three conditions. It is easy to argue that, normally, if S ’s
belief that p satisﬁed the fourth condition, so does the conjunction; this case is
illustrated by the red barn. If p, and hence p & q, did not satisfy the fourth
condition, normally little is lost. Simply preﬁx “I correctly believe (via M0 ) that”
to the new conjunction; normally, the result satisﬁes all four conditions. (An
alternative trick that usually works is to reverse the order of the two procedures.
Replace p by “I correctly believe that p” and then add the same q as before.)
Actually, the falsity of p need not necessarily affect S ’s experiences in the strict
sense to make the argument work. Suppose that for some causal reason, had
p been false, S ’s beliefs would have been affected even though his experiences in a
narrow sense would have remained unchanged. Suppose in particular that had
p failed, S would not have believed that q, even though he actually does believe q.
Then the conjunction “p, and I believe that q” satisﬁes all the ﬁrst three
conditions, as before. (The situation with the fourth condition is as before.)
Another way of looking at the matter is this:46 Suppose there is a method M1
that would have served as a method for believing p satisfying Nozick’s third
45
Here we have omitted mention of the method M by which p is believed. Normally, adding
mention of the method makes no essential change to the argument. The method M0 for the
conjunction is a combination of M for the ﬁrst conjunct p and introspective awareness of one’s
own experiences for the second conjunct q. Then it is crucial that if p had been false, q would have
been false in those near situations where the method M0 is applied to p & q. Normally, the
assumption that M0 is applied will not interfere with the counterfactual if it holds otherwise,
although in general, the counterfactual could become false if its antecedent is strengthened by
mention of M. Similarly, other tacit steps in the argument normally pose no problem, though
there may be exceptions.
46
I believe that the ideas about methods in this and subsequent paragraphs may be connected
with suggestions by John Collins.

Nozick on Knowledge

189

condition, had S applied it. (That is, in fact, M1 yields a belief that p but
would not have done so had p been false.)47 Suppose further that S knows
nothing of M1’s reliability in this sense, but in fact he comes to believe that
p by a method M2 that does not satisfy the third condition. Nevertheless,
normally there will be a conjunct q such that S believes that p & q by a method
satisfying Nozick’s ﬁrst three conditions. (As before, if the fourth condition
held for p, it is normally preserved under conjunction with q; otherwise preﬁx
“I correctly believe that . . . ”) Ordinarily, the reason that M1 would have been
successful must consist in some fact q whose presence is discernible to S but
would have been absent had p been false; take this q as the second conjunct.
Thus, in the sense just explained, Nozick’s theory is not really able to distinguish
effectively between beliefs that p that the subject S actually obtains by a method
“reliable” in the sense of condition 3, and beliefs that S merely could have so
obtained. This situation is hardly satisfactory and is not alleviated by the denial of
deductive closure.
Notice that, as the case of the red barn illustrates, the method M by which S
believes p & q is in fact “reliable” (in the sense of Nozick’s third condition), but
for reasons completely different from what S supposes. (Henry does not know
that redness guarantees the genuineness of his barn and naively ignores the
danger of a counterfeit altogether.) In this sense, the cases considered here
resemble Nozick’s “hologram” case (case (c), 190), discussed below. The present
discussion indicates that such cases are ubiquitous in the theory.
Even worse, notice that in one respect the red barn case, as described, need not
be typical. Henry’s conclusion that there is a barn there is at least rational, even if
it is not knowledge. However, the rationality of the method M2 by which S
actually comes to believe that p is, in fact, completely irrelevant to the construction given above. S can use any “method” M2, no matter how irrational—reading
tea leaves, consulting a guru, succumbing to paranoia. It does not matter: as long as
a method M1 was available to S that would have satisﬁed Nozick’s third condition,
the construction allows us to ﬁnd a conjunction p & q that S “knows” as far as
Nozick’s ﬁrst three conditions are concerned. (If necessary, another conjunct can
be added for Nozick’s fourth condition.) The nature of the method M2 by which S
actually comes to believe that p is completely irrelevant, as far as Nozick’s third
condition is concerned, to the epistemic status of his belief that p & q.
Although I cannot make a survey here (and have not myself examined all the
relevant proposals),48 I think the red barn case is a major problem for many
existing theories that analyze knowledge using counterfactual conditionals or
similar ideas. Even if the account is restricted to perceptual (“noninferential,” or
47
In our paradigm case of the red barn, the method would be noting the color of the barn, and
deducing that it must be real from its color. See also the discussion of the point attributed to Mark
Johnston below.
48
At the time when this paper was originally written, let alone now (in 2009).

190

Nozick on Knowledge

“basic”) knowledge—and I think such theories are much more plausible if so
restricted—the red barn problem can still arise.49 The problem also seems to
affect theories that connect not only knowledge but also justiﬁcation50 with
reliability. We have seen that Nozick’s third condition, in itself, cannot really be
equated with reliability of the method used. Nevertheless, it is obviously possible,
in the situation described, that Henry should have invoked a totally reliable
method for judging whether there is a red barn there, even though one of its
components is a totally unreliable (or, in one of the cases above, even irrational)
method for judging whether there is a barn there simpliciter. One could hardly
hold that Henry is justiﬁed in thinking that the thing he sees is a red barn but not
that it is a barn.51
Before we leave the case typiﬁed by the red barn, yet another feature of the case
is worthy of note. Mark Johnston has pointed out that in this case Nozick’s
conditions for preservation of knowledge by deduction are satisﬁed. So far, we
have assumed that Henry concludes that there is a barn in the ﬁeld by simple
observation. But suppose instead he deduces this conclusion from his belief that
there is a red barn in the ﬁeld. Nozick says (231) that deduction preserves
knowledge, provided that the subject would not have believed the premise had
the conclusion been false. But this condition is satisﬁed.52 For if the conclusion
had been false, that is, if there had not been a barn there, either there would have
been no barn-like object there or, instead, a counterfeit barn that was not red. In
either case, Henry would not have believed (the premise) that there was a red
barn there—essentially this repeats what we said before.
In the case of any true belief p resembling the red barn situation, this
observation threatens to give the subject a method, not only for “knowing”
49
See, e.g., Armstrong (1973), Goldman (1976), and others. Goldman’s article is formulated
carefully to avoid some of the problems that do affect Nozick’s (later) theory; but, although there are
some ambiguities, it still seems to be affected by the red barn problem.
50
See note 30 above.
51
And note that, intuitively, in the case where Henry is irrational, the belief that it is a barn is not
justiﬁed. Hence the situation cannot be saved by accepting deductive closure and declaring that
logical consequences of beliefs obtained by reliable methods are justiﬁed. (Arguably, this follows
from the equation of justiﬁability and reliability, since deduction from reliably obtained beliefs is
itself reliable. But what would really follow is a paradox—if Henry concludes directly, from
observation, that there is a barn there, he is not justiﬁed; but if he deduces the same thing from
the belief that there is a red barn there, he is justiﬁed! See discussion of a remark by Mark Johnston
in the text immediately below.)
Goldman does not simply equate justiﬁcation and reliability, but proposes modiﬁcations (not
completely worked out) to save the theory from counterexamples. To some extent the modiﬁcations are
relevant here and would have to be discussed in a full treatment. Since the topic of justiﬁcation is not
our concern here, I shall not do this. (However, I doubt that in fact the modiﬁcations will dispel the
problem.)
52
See however, my discussion in section 5(a) of Nozick’s condition for preservation of
knowledge by deduction. There, I argue that some of Nozick’s principal applications of the
condition are fallacious. Further, I argue that though Nozick appears to have formulated an
appropriate condition in terms of his own theory, in fact it makes no intuitive sense. I was not
aware of these points in the original version of this paper.

Nozick on Knowledge

191

some appropriate conjunction p & q, but also for “knowing” p simpliciter by
deduction therefrom. However, there are some possible ways out and delicate
considerations.53
I now move on to yet another type of case that creates logical trouble for
Nozick’s third condition, again by adding a conjunct to the original belief.
Consider again a true belief p of S that may not satisfy condition 3. Previously,
we looked for a true conjunct q that would have been false if p had been false. It
follows that if p & q had been false, q would have been false. Now instead we look
for a true conjunct q such that p is false in possible worlds (much) “farther from”
or “less similar to” the real world than any world in which q is false. Then if p & q
had been false, q would have been false, simply because the worlds in which p is
false are too remote, compared to those in which q is false, to be relevant to the
antecedent of the counterfactual. In David Lewis’s terminology, not-q is “more
possible” than not-p. The phenomenon is a familiar point of counterfactual
logic,54 validated by the systems of Lewis and Stalnaker; as we shall see, eventually Nozick himself explicitly accepts and invokes it. Given this, we can argue just
as before that as long as S ’s belief that q satisﬁes Nozick’s ﬁrst three conditions, so
does S ’s belief that p & q. Once again, this will be true even if the method by
which S obtained his belief that p fails Nozick’s third condition, and even if it is
completely irrational. And once again, if the methods by which p and q were
believed satisfy the fourth condition, so will the belief that p & q; otherwise,
consider “I correctly believe that p & q,” and the fourth condition will hold.
Let us give some examples. Suppose that Jones is an actress. If we evaluate a
counterfactual such as “If Jones had not been an actress, Jones would have been a
lawyer,” generally we consider only those counterfactual situations in which
Jones, still a woman, is not in the acting profession. Actually, the antecedent
would also have been realized in counterfactual situations in which (at the
relevant time) Jones is not a woman (say, because of a sex-change operation).55
Apparently our intuition is that, when we evaluate counterfactuals with “If Jones
had not been an actress” as antecedent, such situations are so much more remote
from the actual situation than those in which Jones is a woman but not in the
acting profession as to be irrelevant. That is, if Jones had not been an actress, that
53
In the original version of this paper, I discussed delicate considerations about the
individuation of methods that might affect this example (preservation of knowledge by
deduction). See my section 7 on leeway below. Since I now think that Nozick’s conditions for
preservation of knowledge seem to be subject to much more fundamental objections, I omit this
elaborate discussion in the present version.
54
See Lewis (1973:52–56). Notice that the relation need not be deﬁned in terms of possibleworlds semantics but can be deﬁned in terms of the counterfactual itself. q is “more possible” than
p if q, but not p, would have been true if at least one of p and q had been true. So we could make our
discussion independent of any technical possible-worlds semantics for counterfactuals.
55
I am supposing that a woman becomes a man if such an operation occurred. Perhaps in
another sense, at the chromosomal level, being a woman is an essential property of Jones that could
not have been different. In this case, what one is supposing in the counterfactual is hard to evaluate.

192

Nozick on Knowledge

would have been because she did not go into acting, not because she was not a
woman.
Suppose S truly believes that Jones is an actress, or equivalently, that Jones is a
woman (p) and is in the acting profession (q). The third condition asks whether S
would have believed this conjunction if Jones had not been an actress, that is, had
not been both a woman and in the acting profession. Then the remarks in the
previous paragraph indicate that the antecedent amounts to the supposition that
Jones is not in the acting profession. It follows that (normally), if the third
condition holds for the second component of p & q alone, it holds for the entire
conjunction. For if the third condition holds for q, then, if p & q were false, q
would be false, S would not have believed that q, and hence (normally) would not
have believed that p & q. Notice that the third condition will hold for p & q no
matter how irrational the method M that S uses to arrive at the belief that p may
be, and no matter how much S ’s belief that p via M may violate Nozick’s third
condition. (In other words, S may believe that Jones is a woman for quite
irrational reasons and would have believed this even if Jones had not been a
woman.) Nevertheless, in the situation in question, S ’s belief that Jones is an
actress (the conjunction) would satisfy Nozick’s third condition, because of our
remarks about the logical properties of the situation, as stated above.56
The logical situation parallels that in the red barn case, but for different
reasons. In the former case (though Henry didn’t know it), redness was
connected to genuineness of the barn, but here acting is in no way connected
to gender. It seems very likely—perhaps almost inevitable—that if S has a true
belief that someone is a woman, that belief can be promoted to “knowledge” if a
suitable conjunct is added. All we need is another true belief, satisfying the third
condition, whose falsity would have changed the world less (in the sense relevant
to counterfactuals) than a loss of the subject’s sex (or humanity). The extra
conjunct need not even be about the woman in question, though if some fact
about her life is available—for example, that she was just elected to the Senate—
it almost surely will do. If the conjunction satisﬁes the fourth condition, it will
constitute “knowledge” in Nozick’s sense; otherwise, the usual preﬁxing trick will
get the fourth condition and make it into knowledge in Nozick’s sense.
Another case: Suppose p is a (true) scientiﬁc law. Just as in the case of any other
statement, S can believe p on irrational grounds that strongly violate Nozick’s
third condition. Nevertheless, regardless of the quality of the grounds, ordinarily
we can ﬁnd a statement q such that S satisﬁes Nozick’s ﬁrst three conditions in
56
Notice, however, that if we replace “Jones” in the belief “Jones is an actress” by a deﬁnite
description taken as non-rigid, such as “the star of such-and-such movie is an actress,” then the
situation about the counterfactual becomes quite different. Now, if the star had not been an actress,
no doubt the star would still have been in the acting profession but would not have been a woman
(i.e., there would have been a different star, a man). Yet the beliefs that Jones is an actress and that
the star is an actress may intuitively be epistemically equivalent. This is another illustration of the
situation emphasized above in my section 2, p. 169.

Nozick on Knowledge

193

relation to p & q. For it is a familiar point about counterfactuals that normally we
keep scientiﬁc laws ﬁxed as much as possible when we evaluate them; if to
imagine the antecedent of the counterfactual true we do not need to imagine
the law violated, we do not do so.57 Let q be any statement such that not-q, in
this sense, does not require abandonment of the law p. Then normally we should
suppose that not-p is “less possible” than not-q; in other words, that if p & q were
false, q, rather than p, would be false. Suppose further that in relation to q, S
satisﬁes all of Nozick’s ﬁrst three conditions. Then, by the familiar argument, p &
q satisﬁes all three conditions also, regardless of how grossly S fails to satisfy the
third condition in relation to p.
Notice that q need not have anything to do with p, as long as p is a law we
would hold ﬁxed in considering counterfactuals with not-q as antecedents.
Nevertheless, the case may be more intuitively natural if p is a law that we
would in fact invoke to support counterfactuals with not-q as antecedent. Usually
it is easy to ﬁnd a q with this feature as well.
As usual, if S satisﬁed the fourth condition in relation to p and to q, satisfaction
will normally be preserved for the conjunction; otherwise, we just add an
additional conjunct “and I believe that p & q.” However, it is amusing that
sometimes a simpler device may be possible. Suppose p is a scientiﬁc law that S
believes by a method M satisfying neither the third nor the fourth condition. Let
q be “I believe that p via M.” Then very often p & q, or equivalently, “I correctly
believe that p via M,” satisﬁes all four conditions. That the fourth condition
holds is by now familiar to us. As to the third condition, note that it probably is
much “less possible” that the law p should fail than that S somehow should fail to
conclude that p when he applies M (even though p holds). The fourth condition
failed for p simpliciter. This means that there is no nomological necessity that
application of M should lead to a conclusion that p. Hence, if either p must be
false or application of M should fail to lead to the conclusion that p, a preference
for the preservation of nomological necessity dictates that it is the second
alternative, not the ﬁrst, that should hold. In general, whether p is a scientiﬁc
law or not, preﬁxing “I correctly believe (via M) that” to a true belief p violating
both of the last two conditions will restore both these conditions in one fell
swoop, provided that close worlds in which p holds, but where S ’s application of
M fails to lead to the conclusion that p, are much closer to the real world than
worlds in which p fails outright.

57
This formulation is somewhat crude and inexact. The antecedent may entail not that a
particular law is false but that at least one of several laws must be false. Also, the desire to “hold
the past ﬁxed” in counterfactuals may conﬂict with preservation of law, so that we are forced to
choose between wholesale “backtracking” changes of the past and a slight local violation of the law.
In this case, we may well choose the latter. (See Lewis 1973:72–77, for one discussion.) These
complications do not materially affect the substantive point and are ignored to simplify the
formulation.

194

Nozick on Knowledge

How general is the second class of cases? Unlike the technique exempliﬁed by
the red barn case, this technique does not require even that there should be a
method satisfying condition 3 available to S (if only he had known of it) that
would have led him to conclude that p. Even if the failure of p would have made
no difference to S ’s experiences, and even if no method is available in principle to
S that would have enabled him to “know” (in Nozick’s sense) that p, nevertheless,
if the second technique is applicable, we can ﬁnd a conjunct q such that S
“knows” that p & q. We have seen that the technique applies whenever S truly
believes a scientiﬁc law. The case of “Jones is a woman” shows that the phenomenon is not conﬁned to laws. In general, to apply the technique to p, we need to
ﬁnd a q passing Nozick’s ﬁrst three tests, and such that not-q is “more possible”
than not-p. But there are cases where the technique cannot be employed: clearly
the technique is inapplicable when p, though (very accidentally) true, came to
pass by such a slight freak accident that no change in the world is slighter than the
change needed to make p false. Whether there are such p’s, and how common
they are, depends on one’s views about the similarity relation used in evaluating
counterfactuals. Moreover, even if a q satisfying the requisite comparative
possibility condition exists, remember that it must satisfy the ﬁrst three conditions in relation to S, and such a q may not be available.
In spite of these warnings, it would seem that the technique is very widely
applicable. Consider Henry again and his belief, p, that there is a genuine barn
there. Suppose Henry also notes the exact position of a pebble in the ﬁeld, q.
Intuitively, it would seem that a slight change in the position of the pebble would
have made the world much less different than a failure to erect the barn. Whether
this means that not-q is appropriately “more possible” than not-p depends upon
how close our intuitive notion of the similarity of situations is to the “similarity
relation” between worlds used in evaluating counterfactuals. It seems very likely
that some appropriate q is available.
Notice that both techniques for restoring the third condition depend on the
same phenomenon. Given p, we ﬁnd a conjunct q such that if p & q had been
false, q would have been false. Then the point is that the third condition for p & q
depends only on q, the conjunct that would have been false; p is completely
irrelevant. We can say that p is “absorbed” by q. The only difference lies in the
reason for the absorption. In the one case, exempliﬁed by the red barn, p is
absorbed because it too would have been false if q had been false. In the other
case, exempliﬁed by the actress, this need not be so. (For example, it need not be
true that had she not been a woman, she wouldn’t have gone into acting.) Rather,
p is absorbed because not-p is “less possible” than not-q. In the Lewis–Stalnaker
counterfactual logics, it can be shown that absorption is exhausted by these
two cases.
As I already mentioned, Nozick praises his third condition as “powerful and
intuitive, not so easy to satisfy” (173). But in a vast class of cases, owing to
absorption, it does not prevent these statements from being components of

Nozick on Knowledge

195

“known” conjunctions p & q. Given the artiﬁcial way the absorption phenomenon allows the ﬁrst conjunct to be ignored when we consider whether p & q
passes the test, the third condition is much less intuitive than it may look at ﬁrst
sight. Further, in the large subclass of cases exempliﬁed by the red barn (though
not in the subclass exempliﬁed by the actress), if someone goes on to deduce that
p from p & q, then on Nozick’s analysis the third condition is satisﬁed even for
p itself (even if it was not satisﬁed using the original method). Given these facts, it
is unclear to me how much the third condition really accomplishes.
Ironically, it is not as if Nozick fails to notice the possibility of absorption. On
the contrary, discussing an example with two special beliefsp and q, he writes:
S’s belief that p & q tracks the fact that p & q; if it were true he would believe it, and if it
were false he wouldn’t believe it. It may be that if the conjunction p & q were false, it is the
[second conjunct q] that would be false, and in that situation the person wouldn’t believe
q and so wouldn’t believe p & q. However, it does not follow that his belief in p tracks the
fact that p; for if p were false (which is not what would or might be the case if the
conjunction were false—q would then be the culprit) he might still believe p. We can
satisfy condition 3 for a conjunction by satisfying it for its most vulnerable conjunct, the
one that would be false if the conjunction were false; it does not follow that we satisfy
condition 3 for the other conjuncts as well. (228)58

This is a very clear statement of the absorption phenomenon. Indeed, Nozick
thinks that the absorption phenomenon is virtuous, in that it gives us an “intuitive
understanding” (227) of how one can know a conjunction without knowing one
conjunct.59 I would protest that this “explanation” merely shows why the concept
deﬁned by Nozick’s conditions is not closed under simpliﬁcation. In no way does
it give one an “intuitive understanding” of why knowledge is not closed in this
way, unless we are already ﬁrmly convinced that Nozick has given the right
analysis. Otherwise, the phenomenon might well be taken as an argument that
Nozick cannot have gotten the concept right. We have already seen the very
artiﬁcial way in which Nozick’s analysis leads to a proliferation of cases where
true beliefs get promoted to knowledge by adding a conjunct. Anyone aware
of these cases could hardly believe that Nozick’s analysis, in and of itself, gives one
an “intuitive understanding” of the failure of knowledge to be closed under
simpliﬁcation. However, even aside from these cases, many (including me), will
ﬁnd it intuitively very hard to swallow any proposal that one can know a
conjunction without knowing, or being thereby able to know, a conjunct. Even

58
I have changed the quotation slightly so that it will be consistent with our previous usage,
where p is the conjunct that is absorbed. In the original, it is q.
59
Actually, the phrase occurs in connection with his view that knowledge is not closed under
universal instantiation. It is clear from the context that Nozick thinks that the quoted paragraph
gives an analogous understanding with respect to the failure of simpliﬁcation (inference from a
conjunction to a conjunct). (Michael Levin has commented that the connection Nozick draws is
natural when UI is conceived as an inﬁnitary generalization of simpliﬁcation.)

196

Nozick on Knowledge

Dretske, who, as we (and Nozick himself) have seen, proposed a counterfactual
theory of knowledge and denied deductive closure long before Nozick, states,
“It seems to me fairly obvious that if someone knows that P and Q, . . . he thereby
knows that Q” (1970:1009).60
In the paragraph just quoted from Nozick, p was “I am not ﬂoating in a tank in
Alpha Centauri being stimulated to have my experiences,” and q was “I am in
Emerson Hall now.” The conjunction in question (put now in Nozick’s original
60
As Nozick points out (692, note 63), however, if we deny the deductive closure of knowledge,
we must also deny either closure under simpliﬁcation or closure under known logical equivalence.
For if S knows p entails q, then we can assume S knows p is logically equivalent to p & q, and hence,
assuming closure under simpliﬁcation and known logical equivalence, if S knows p, he knows p & q
(equivalence) and hence knows q (simpliﬁcation). Why, however, should one insist on closure under
known logical equivalence, especially if one has already rejected deductive closure and is therefore
forced to reject closure under simpliﬁcation? Nozick seems to give no argument.
However, two arguments, one for the intuitive concept of knowledge, and one for “gnowledge,”
as formally deﬁned by Nozick’s conditions, favor closure under known logical equivalence. For
knowledge, there is the intuitive argument that for S two statements known to be logically
equivalent, especially when the equivalence is simple, “amount to the same thing” and hence
ought to be epistemically interchangeable (see immediately below in the text; it is especially
natural for the case Nozick considers).
Another argument can be given for “gnowledge,” and really argues for closure when S truly
believes (and notices) the logical equivalence (with qualiﬁcations noted below). Suppose S truly
believes that p. Since q is logically equivalent to p, and S notices this, S truly believes that q. For the
third counterfactual condition, notice that if S had not believed p, and S does believe p logically
equivalent to q, S would not believe q either, so the third condition is preserved. Similarly for the
fourth condition.
Really, the argument concerning the counterfactual conditions has a gap, and we need a more
qualiﬁed statement. Take the third condition. If p had not been the case, then S would not have
believed that p. Since p and q are supposed to be logically equivalent, the suppositions in the
antecedent of the counterfactual are in effect the same. However, to conclude that under this
condition S would not have believed that q, so that the third condition is preserved for q, one must
assume that even if S had not believed that p, S would have retained the belief that p and q are
logically equivalent (even if p had not been the case). Normally, this would be the case; but no doubt
special counter-instances could be given. There is no corresponding problem for the fourth
condition since its antecedent is supposed to be true.
The argument also must be made more precise when one has to mention the method used,
though this does seem to lead to possible qualiﬁcations. If p had not been the case, then S would not
have believed that p by method M. But then even if p and q are correctly believed to be logically
equivalent, one must suppose that S would not have believed that q. But the method M0 would have
been subtly different (assuming that the complication in the previous paragraph had not arisen).
Namely, the method M0 would consist, say, of noting whether p by method M, and then noting the
logical equivalence of p and q. It would seem that this would be satisfactory, and similarly for the
fourth condition. Changing true belief of the logical equivalence of p and q to known logical
equivalence does not seem to alter the slight complication mentioned in the previous paragraph.
One reason that one might ignore all complicated arguments is the idea mentioned above that at
least statements that are obviously logically equivalent “amount to the same thing” and thus can be
treated the same way both in counterfactuals, and intuitive cases of belief and knowledge.
Given Dretske’s assertion, he must hold that it is closure under known logical equivalence, not
simpliﬁcation, that should be given up. I do not believe Dretske has taken a position on known
logical equivalence (at least when I wrote the original version of this paper). I have not checked
whether an argument analogous to the one I just gave for Nozick shows that Dretske’s
counterfactual theory too would ordinarily be committed to closure under known (or truly
believed) logical equivalence (with the qualiﬁcation discussed).

Nozick on Knowledge

197

order) was “I am in Emerson Hall now and not ﬂoating in a tank in Alpha
Centauri. . . .” This example has two special features that may have encouraged
Nozick to think that he had given an intuitive justiﬁcation for the absorption
phenomenon and failure under simpliﬁcation. First, the conjunction is analytically equivalent (or nearly so) to the conjunct “I am in Emerson Hall now.” We
all think, intuitively, that when Nozick is in Emerson Hall, he knows that he is,
and so we may think that knowing the conjunction amounts to knowing the
same thing.61 This will be so, especially if we believe that assertions that are
known to be (trivially) logically equivalent “amount to the same thing.” Nozick
has emphasized that, given this, failure of simpliﬁcation goes hand-in-hand with
failure of deductive closure (see my note 60 for a discussion). Second, and even
more important, in this case p, the absorbed conjunct, is the denial of a skeptical
hypothesis. Although according to Nozick we do not know that p, presumably we
are rightly in no doubt about p. This is what makes not-p a skeptical hypothesis.
This fact may make it seem less embarrassing that we know statements that entail
p, or even contain p as a conjunct. The whole contemporaneous trend against
deductive closure, well established for some time before Nozick, was based on the
idea that only if knowledge is not deductively closed can we know ordinary
beliefs that entail denials of skeptical hypotheses.
Hence I note that these special features of Nozick’s example are completely
irrelevant to the absorption phenomenon per se. As we have seen, in fact it is hard
to ﬁnd any true belief p that deﬁnitely cannot be absorbed by adding a suitable
conjunct. Given his example, Nozick seems to be aware of absorption phenomena of the second (actress) type. In such cases, the falsity of p is so much farther
from the actual world than that of q that p is absorbed in the third condition.
However, in the red barn class of cases the falsity of p need not be farther from
the real world than that of q. Even in the second class, exempliﬁed by the actress,
our examples show that the fact that not-p may be farther from the real world
than not-q has nothing to do with any indubitability of p. In fact, p may be a
statement that, intuitively, we have no business believing at all; perhaps almost all
true beliefs p can be absorbed by an appropriate conjunct q. In neither class need
the conjunction even approximately “amount to” its second conjunct; in fact,
provided that the appropriate formal properties hold, the original proposition
and the conjunct may have little intuitive or epistemic relation to each other.
61

Since—at least in theory (for all the reader may know a priori)—Emerson Hall may be on
Alpha Centauri, the conjunction, as formulated, might not be quite analytically equivalent to the
statement about Emerson Hall. But Nozick plainly intends to ignore this possibility, as we do.
A more exact discussion would reformulate the case.
Nozick’s very text shows how the locutions involved are not really analytic or a priori. For the
reader may be confused by Nozick’s wide travels. An earlier discussion (207) of the same example
uses “I am in Jerusalem” instead of “I am in Emerson Hall.” Presumably the pages were written in
different places. An ignorant reader might be tempted to conclude that Emerson Hall is in
Jerusalem.

198

Nozick on Knowledge

Nozick is simply unaware of the ubiquity of the absorption phenomenon (as he is
unaware of the fact that in the ﬁrst class of cases his criterion for preservation of
knowledge under deduction is satisﬁed if one deduces p).62
I consider these results to be major objections to Nozick’s theory, and, mutatis
mutandis, to various related theories. In some sense it seems to me that Nozick’s
counterfactual conditions are reduced to triviality if someone who is convicted
under them of failure to know can almost always defend himself by saying,
“Though I didn’t know that p, I knew that I correctly believed that p (or that p &
q, for a simple q).” (Even worse, in some cases, he will satisfy the conditions for
knowledge that p if he goes on to deduce p from the conjunction.) Given these
results, I ﬁnd it hard to see why the distinction between “knowledge” and true
belief would be of any substantial interest, or indeed why we would have the
former concept at all. Although Nozick’s theory is not quite a theory that
knowledge is true belief, in spite of appearances it comes closer to being one
than any other recent proposal of which I am aware.
To summarize the main technical results of this section: (1) If p fails to
be knowledge solely for lack of the fourth condition’s being satisﬁed, the
conjunction “p, and I believe that p (via M)” (or, equivalently, “I correctly
believe that p (via M)”) satisﬁes all four conditions. Usually the clause “and
I believe that p (via M)” can be replaced by another clause if we like, one that
gives causally sufﬁcient conditions for the belief that p to occur. (2) If p fails the
third condition (and perhaps even the fourth) but is a true belief, in a wide range
of cases “p and q, and I believe that (p & q) (via M)” (or, equivalently, “I correctly
believe (via M) that p & q”) satisﬁes all four conditions for an appropriate choice
of q. Here, too, the last clause can normally be replaced by one not mentioning
belief. (Sometimes, particularly in cases where p satisﬁes the fourth condition, the
construction can be simpliﬁed to p & q.) In particular this happens if: (2a) a
method (not the one he actually uses) satisfying the third condition is in some
sense “available” to S; or (2b) S has a true belief q satisfying the third condition
such that not-q is “more possible” than not-p. In an interesting special case of
(2b), exempliﬁed by belief in scientiﬁc laws, preﬁxing “I correctly believe (via M)
that” to p restores both of Nozick’s two counterfactual conditions when they fail
for p alone. In case (2a), deduction of p from p & q actually satisﬁes Nozick’s
conditions for preservation of knowledge under deduction.
62
In the third condition, the counterfactual hypothesis that Jones is not an actress is equivalent
to a disjunction that Jones is either not in the acting profession or not a woman. Some, especially
and notably Donald Nute in one period (e.g., Nute 1975), thought that, analogously to other
conditionals, a counterfactual with a disjunctive antecedent ought to be equivalent to the
conjunction of the separate counterfactuals with the respective disjuncts as antecedents. Perhaps
some might have heard some counterfactuals that way. This would not affect one’s intuitions if the
antecedent were expressed simply as “Jones is not an actress”—it would be substitutivity of logical
equivalents in counterfactuals that would be given up—and therefore would not really affect our
point. However, the failure of such a substitution is really rather implausible, and Nute did not
maintain his position.

Nozick on Knowledge

199

(Two marginal notes: First, the case of knowledge of necessary truths provides
an especially simple and blatant instance of the phenomena just discussed.
Second, we’re not quite through with hapless Henry. We shall pick up both
these threads below.)

5 . LOGICAL PROPERTIES OF NOZICK’S THEORY: ADDING
A DISJUNCT, WEAKENED CONCLUSIONS,
AND NOZICK’S THIRD CONDITION

5(a). Nozick’s Argument that Adding a Disjunct
Must Preserve Knowledge
Surprisingly, Nozick seems to think that adding a disjunct is very different from
simpliﬁcation, and that failure of knowledge to be closed under such inferences
would be counterintuitive (230, and 692, note 64). It is hard for me to see the
intuitive difference. At any rate, it is obvious that an argument exactly parallel to
the simpliﬁcation case (see my note 60) shows that closure of knowledge under
known logical equivalence and addition of a disjunct implies deductive closure.
For if p entails q (and we know this), then assuming p, we deduce (p or q), which
we know is logically equivalent to q, and all steps are knowledge preserving.
Moreover, how can Nozick reject closure under simpliﬁcation, given his just
cited views? Suppose we know p & q. Adding a disjunct, we (almost always)
know (p & q or p) but using closure under known logical equivalence, it follows
that we know p. Nozick’s supposition that there is a substantial intuitive
difference between closure under universal instantiation and closure under
existential generalization (230) is surprising and dubious on similar grounds.
So I wrote in the original version of the present paper, leaving the matter at
that, though soon after I gave actual counterexamples to the supposition that
Nozick’s conditions for knowledge are closed under adding a disjunct (see
below). However, Assaf Sharon and Levi Spectre sent me an unpublished
paper on the very question of adding a disjunct in Nozick’s theory that has led
me to additional thoughts. First, Sharon and Spectre pointed out that Nozick
himself is inconsistent on the point in question. As we saw in the previous
section, Nozick emphasizes that knowledge is not closed under simpliﬁcation.
His key example is “I am in Emerson Hall now and not ﬂoating in a tank in
Alpha Centauri being stimulated to have these experiences.” According to
Nozick, he knows the conjunction but not the second conjunct, which is the
denial of a skeptical hypothesis. Immediately Nozick goes on to say:
Also, it is possible for me to know p yet not know the denial of a conjunction, one
of whose conjuncts is not-p. I can know p yet not know (for I may not be tracking) not(not-p & SK) [“SK” standing for a skeptical scenario in which p is false]. I know I am in

200

Nozick on Knowledge

Emerson Hall now, yet I do not know that: it is not the case that (I am in the tank on
Alpha Centauri now and not in Emerson Hall). (228)

However, clearly the denial of a conjunction is logically equivalent to the
disjunction of the denials of the conjuncts. Given this, and Nozick’s assertion
of closure under known logical equivalence, he has plainly contradicted his
commitment to closure under adding a disjunct. Yet Nozick may well be right
that the same “intuitions” about skepticism that lead him to reject simpliﬁcation
would also justify the case in the paragraph in question.
More important, as we have already noted before, and as Sharon and Spectre
emphasize in their paper, Nozick gives conditions for when a valid deduction
preserves knowledge and argues that (almost always) adding a disjunct satisﬁes
these conditions. It is incumbent on any author who rejects the deductive closure
of knowledge to state such conditions, so Nozick should be commended for
doing so. Without them, and with a mere rejection of the deductive closure of
knowledge, anyone who proves anything from known premises could be criticized for the well-known fallacy of giving a valid argument for a conclusion!63
In Nozick’s theory a deductive argument itself can count as a method M for
arriving at knowledge. Nozick applies his analysis to consider when this method
satisﬁes his own conditions 30 and 40 .64 Here, we omit consideration of the
fourth condition. For the all-important third condition, Nozick arrives at the
following (231) when S validly infers q from a known premise p. The inference
yields knowledge that q provided that:
I: If q were false, S wouldn’t believe p (or S wouldn’t infer q from p).

The parenthetical part of the condition is a rare case and normally need not be
considered. On page 232 (see the note), Nozick mentions some other rare
exceptions.
Finally, Nozick goes on to claim that his condition will almost always be
satisﬁed for proofs by existential generalization or adding a disjunct. Unfortunately for our present discussion, Nozick spells out his argument for the claim
only for existential generalization and states merely that “similar remarks apply to
inferring a disjunction from a disjunct” ( 236).65 So we must reconstruct his
63
Moreover, this consideration seems to me to show that the cases where knowledge fails to be
closed under known logical implication ought to be rare exceptions. We have already seen that
Nozick’s theory runs into trouble on this point.
64
See his section “Proof and the Transmission of Knowledge” (230–40).
65
It might be remarked that, alternatively, Nozick could actually have deduced closure of
knowledge under adding a disjunct from the supposed proof that knowledge is closed under
existential generalization. Granting the latter principle, the following steps preserve knowledge. p,
therefore (p ∧ 0 = 0) ∨ (q ∧ 0 = 1) (known logical equivalence, which Nozick accepts), therefore (∃x)
((p ∧ x = 0) ∨ (q ∧ x = 1)) (existential generalization), therefore, p ∨ q (known logical equivalence).
However, as I remark in the main text, Nozick’s explicitly stated proof that knowledge is closed
under existential generalization makes the same fallacy in counterfactual logic as in our
reconstruction of his direct (analogous) proof for the closure of knowledge under adding a disjunct.

Nozick on Knowledge

201

argument ourselves. It appears (by analogy to his argument for existential
generalization) to be as follows: Suppose S infers (p or r) from p, where the
premise p by hypothesis satisﬁes Nozick’s third and fourth conditions. Then
taking (p or r) to be the conclusion q in the condition I above (and omitting the
rare parenthetical part), what we need is that had (p or r) not been true, S
wouldn’t have believed p. But (i) if (p or r) had not been true, p would not have
been true. But since Nozick’s third condition is by hypothesis satisﬁed for S ’s
belief that p, (ii) if p had not been true, S would not have believed that p.
Therefore, (iii) if (p or r) had not been true, S would not have believed that p,
which shows that the desired condition is satisﬁed.
The argument is fallacious. (The analogous argument stated for existential
generalization commits a similar fallacy.) It takes the counterfactual conditional
to be transitive, which is a well-known fallacy for counterfactual logic, even
though transitivity holds for the material conditional, the strict conditional, and
even the relevant conditional and entailment (if one is concerned with these).
(One might also think that the indicative conditional in ordinary language ought
to be transitive.)
David Lewis has enumerated a set of fallacies for counterfactual logic that are
valid principles for other types of conditionals.66 One is the fallacy of strengthening the antecedent. That this is a fallacy will follow immediately, given that a
counterfactual “if p were the case, q would have been the case” can be true even
though it is possible that p and not-q would have been the case (to say otherwise
would be to say that true counterfactuals are always strict [necessary] conditionals). Hence, even though “if p were the case, q would have been the case” is
true, it does not follow that “if p and not-q had been the case, q would have been
the case” is true. That transitivity is also a fallacy is an immediate consequence.
For otherwise we could argue that if p and not-q had been the case, p would have
been the case. Also (by hypothesis), if p had been the case, q would have been the
case. Hence, by transitivity, if p and not-q had been the case, q would have been
the case, which we have seen to be absurd.67
Nozick’s hypothesized argument for adding a disjunct (like his actually stated
argument for existential generalization) commits precisely the fallacy of transitivity in counterfactual logic. Just because we have “if (p or r) had not been true,
p would not have been true,” and “if p had not been true, S would not have
believed p,” it does not follow that “if (p or r) had not been true, S would not have
believed p.”
66
Lewis (1973: section 1.8 [“Counterfactual Fallacies”]). Lewis mentions some other authors
who recognize these fallacies also. See his second footnote on page 31.
67
Lewis also gives an extended discussion (in section 1.8) of why these arguments are fallacies in
terms of his own possible-worlds semantics for counterfactuals. He also gives some concrete
intuitive counterexamples to the fallacious patterns, but these discussions are not really necessary
for the main point. It is part of the very nature of a counterfactual, if it is to be distinguished from
the strict conditional, that neither strengthening of the antecedent nor transitivity should hold.

202

Nozick on Knowledge

In fact, since not-(p or r) is logically equivalent to (not-p & not-r), the fallacy
involved can simply be regarded as the one of strengthening the antecedent. Just
because we have “if p had not been true, S would not have believed p,” it does not
follow that “if neither p nor r had been true, S would not have believed p.”
It is certainly lucky that Nozick’s argument for the preservation of knowledge
by adding a disjunct is fallacious. I myself believe that for the intuitive concept of
knowledge, adding a disjunct ought to preserve knowledge. But for “gnowledge”
as deﬁned by Nozick’s conditions, the situation is otherwise. We have already
seen in the opening paragraph of this section what tangles, problems, and even
contradictions would arise for Nozick’s theory if adding a disjunct really did
preserve his conditions. Very soon, below, we will give concrete counterexamples, showing that adding a disjunct can lead Nozick’s third condition to fail,
even though it holds for an individual premise.
In addition, as far as I can see, there is a fundamental problem with Nozick’s
condition I, his formulation of how to get his condition 30 when a conclusion q is
inferred from a premise p. This condition seems to have nothing to do with
whether the premise p is known or even whether it is true. (An analogous remark
applies to Nozick’s version of condition 40 .) The method M involved, with its
tracking conditions, seems simply to be inferring a truly believed conclusion
from a believed premise. The Gettier problem made the issue of conclusions
derived from a justiﬁed but false premise famous. But Nozick’s condition I does
not even demand that the premise be justiﬁed (and allows it to be false). Nozick’s
condition I does seem to be the formulation of 30 appropriate to his theory when
the method is inferring a conclusion from a premise. But this seems to me to be a
crushing objection to the theory itself. It has nothing to do with obtaining
knowledge from known premises, or even true ones, justiﬁably believed or not.
Signiﬁcantly, prior to his formulation of condition I, Nozick seems to discuss the
situation concerning the formulation of 3 when the method M is making a
deduction, which is in effect 30 (188–89), and to conclude that, in spite of
apparent difﬁculties, the consequences are satisfactory. I am unable to see that he
shows this. (In particular, contrary to what he suggests there, his formulation
seems not to accord with Harman’s requirement that “the lemmas be true.”)

5(b). Logical Difﬁculties with the Supposed
Necessity of the Third Condition
Given that Nozick’s argument that his third condition must be preserved by
adding a disjunct is fallacious, we can still consider the third condition in and of
itself and what happens to it under such a weakening.
As I have already remarked, the third condition has a clear intuitive ﬂavor.
“Even if p had been false, you would have believed it anyway” does sound like an
objection to someone’s claim to know. So even if the preceding arguments show

Nozick on Knowledge

203

(among other things) that Nozick cannot have given sufﬁcient conditions for
knowledge, it may still seem plausible that the third condition is necessary
(although it would hardly be a useful necessary condition, since it can almost
invariably be satisﬁed by strengthening the belief ). But, in fact, this is far from
true. An argument entirely symmetrical to the one that shows how trivially we
can restore the fourth condition by conjoining “and I believe that p (via M)”
allows us, equally trivially, to falsify the third condition—only here we weaken
the statement by adding a disjunct.
To be precise, let p be anything S knows, both intuitively and in the sense of
Nozick’s four conditions (by method M). Let q be the weaker statement “either
p or I do not believe that p (via M),” or, equivalently, “I do not falsely believe that
p (via M).” Here S believes that q via the method M0 of using M to conclude that
p and then deducing (by weakening) that q. But now the third condition is no
longer satisﬁed. For if q had been false, S would have believed that p via
M (though falsely). Hence if S had applied M0 , S would have deduced that q,
violating the third condition for the belief that q.68
The argument holds equally for the case where we do not mention any method
M at all. Here q is simply “p or I do not believe p” or equivalently “I do not
believe falsely that p.” The third condition (normally) fails for q. For if q had
been false, S would have believed p, and hence (normally), would a fortiori have
believed the simple logical consequence q.
The parallel with the previous discussion of the fourth condition is obvious. It
is dual to that discussion. In the earlier case, we trivially fulﬁlled the fourth
condition by adding a conjunct about true belief. Now we force the third
condition to be false by adding a disjunct about failure to believe. And the
argument is fatal in quite a parallel way to the idea that the third condition is a
necessary condition for knowledge. That idea would entail that virtually every
time S knows that p, he does not know that he does not falsely believe (via M)
that p. So to one convinced of the necessity of the third condition, the remark
“For all you know, you may falsely believe p” is virtually invariably correct.
(Skepticism rides again?) Equivalently, he never knows the disjunction “p or I do
not believe (via M) that p,” even when he knows that p.69
The fallacy in Nozick’s argument that his third condition is preserved by
adding a disjunct should now be even more blatant. Cases where we have
“if p were the case, q would have been the case” are precisely those where we
cannot strengthen the antecedent of a counterfactual conditional with p by
conjoining it with not-q. Here supposedly we have “if p had not been the case,
68

Michael Levin has pointed out to me that a similar argument is given in Vogel (2000). At
present, I have not read Vogel myself.
69
Michael Levin has observed that this example is equivalent to the negation of the familiar
Moore’s paradoxical sentences for not-p, “not-p, but I do not believe that not-p.” So, therefore, what
I have pointed out is that the negations of Moore’s paradoxical sentences never satisfy condition 3.

Nozick on Knowledge

204

S would not have believed p (via M),” Nozick’s third condition. However, we
cannot strengthen counterfactuals with not-p in the antecedent by adding “S does
believe that p (via M)” to the antecedent. But the antecedent thus strengthened is
logically equivalent to “not (either p or S does not believe that p (via M)).” No
wonder then that the third condition fails to be preserved when the disjunct that
S does not believe that p (via M) is added.
In special cases one can replace the mechanical formula “p or I do not believe
p (via M)” by a formulation appropriate to the case involved by giving the source
of the belief and/or by spelling out the method. For example, suppose S sees a
tree and hence knows (p) that there is a tree in front of him. Now consider the
weaker disjunction (q) that either there is a tree in front of S, or S is not having a
visual impression of a tree. (Equivalently, consider the material conditional that
if S is having a visual impression of a tree, there is a tree in front of him). S
believes q because he deduces it from p, and he believes p because of his visual
impressions. If q had been false, S would have had a visual impression of a tree. If
he used the same method he actually applies, he would conclude on the basis of
his visual impression that there is a tree in front of him. It therefore follows that,
applying this method, he would deduce the disjunction q. So the third condition
fails for q.
In the preceding discussion, we weakened the statement by adding a disjunct
that is obviously false. In one case, we added the disjunct “S does not believe p,”
in another, the disjunct “S does not have a visual impression of a tree.” However,
there are variant formulations of the method of weakening a statement to destroy
the third condition, ways to add a disjunct to a statement so that the disjunction
violates the third condition, where both disjuncts are true. For example, “Either
there is a tree there or I am not hallucinating a tree,” or “Either there is a tree
there or I do not have a false visual impression of a tree.”

6 . METHOD
I now turn to Nozick’s condition that the “method be kept ﬁxed.”70 I want to
look at his basic concept, but I begin with his treatment of “multiple methods.”
Nozick says that, if two methods M1 and M2 are used, one might “outweigh” the
other. Nozick has an elaborate discussion of several cases (180–84). Rather than
go through all of these, let me discuss one case to make clear that I do not
generally share Nozick’s intuitions on two methods.
Nozick cites a case that Armstrong reports in the name of Gregory O’Hair:
A father believes his son innocent of committing a particular crime, both because of faith
in his son and (now) because he has seen presented in the courtroom a conclusive
70

See also my section 1, pp. 164–65.

Nozick on Knowledge

205

demonstration of his son’s innocence. His belief via the method of courtroom demonstration satisﬁes 1–4, let us suppose, but his faith-based belief does not. If his son were
guilty, he would still believe him innocent, on the basis of faith in his son. (180)

Nozick’s intuition, in agreement with what Armstrong (1973:208–10) at least
conjectures,71 is that the father does not know that his son is innocent. He thinks
that the belief obtained by courtroom demonstration is clearly outweighed by the
method of faith in the son. It would have prevailed if his son were guilty (and,
Nozick presumably means, even if the son’s guilt were apparently demonstrated
in court). M1, the method satisfying Nozick’s conditions, is the method of
courtroom demonstration, while M2, the method that is not, is the “method”
of faith. Then in the case stipulated, M2 outweighs M1, so that the father does
not know that his son is innocent.72
I ﬁnd Nozick’s intuition highly dubious, certainly not one that can be
presupposed, as Nozick does, without argument. If everyone else, lacking
prior faith in the son, can know that he is innocent on the basis of a conclusive
courtroom demonstration, is it really true that the father simply cannot know
it? Religious philosophers who believed on faith that God exists have sought to
transform their faith into knowledge by ﬁnding a proof, even though their faith
would override an apparent disproof. (They would think there must be a
mistake somewhere, e.g., in an argument from the problem of evil.) Does a
proper analysis of knowledge really show they were doomed to failure in
advance? Suppose one of them comes up with a valid proof. Was he really
doomed to failure even though an erstwhile skeptic can know from his proof
that God exists?
My doubts here are reinforced by the fact that once again failure of deductive
closure runs amok here, along the lines of the previous sections. Suppose the
son’s defense lawyer proves conclusively in the courtroom that someone else,
Smith, is the (sole) culprit. The father had no advance opinion as to the true
culprit; courtroom demonstration is the only method by which he arrives at this
belief. Then according to Nozick, the father does know that Smith is the sole
71
Actually, Armstrong has much less of a ﬁrm intuition than Nozick. Originally, O’Hair’s case
(without a speciﬁcation of what would have happened when M1 and M2 conﬂict) was supposed to
be a case where the father clearly does know. Armstrong hopes (see 210) that if the father fails the
extra test, he does not know, and that this result saves his analysis from the objection. Unlike
Nozick, he does not use the intuition to motivate his analysis, nor does he seem to regard its truth as
evident.
72
Nozick actually gives a technical deﬁnition of outweighing (182), which we omit, taking the
notion simply intuitively. As Nozick deﬁnes the idea, one method may outweigh another with
respect to one belief p, but the situation may reverse in principle with respect to another belief.
Nozick also stresses that the father does not satisfy the original simple condition 3, mentioning no
methods. In fairness to Nozick, he states: “Some may hold the father is made more sure in his belief
by courtroom proof; and hold that the father knows because his degree of assurance (though not his
belief) varies subjunctively with the truth” (683, note 17). This point of view differs from what
Nozick seems to think categorically in his main text.

206

Nozick on Knowledge

culprit. (Presumably he also knows that Smith is not his son.) Even if we deny the
deductive closure of knowledge, is it really credible that the father knows that
Smith is the sole culprit but not that his son is innocent—even though everyone
else knows that the son is innocent on this basis? If the father really does know
that Smith did it, what purpose can it serve to deny that he knows that his son is
innocent? The situation here is almost inevitable. The defense has almost surely
proved some more speciﬁc fact, not previously believed by the father on faith,
that cleared the son.
Similarly, a religious philosopher may have produced a valid ontological
argument, proving that it is analytic that God exists. He did not previously
hold this technical doctrine as a matter of faith. Then according to Nozick, the
religious philosopher knows that it is analytic that God exists, but does not know
that God exists! One has to be a very fanatical opponent of deductive closure to
swallow this particular case. The problem here is very general. Almost always,
when a method is “outweighed,” some stronger conclusion will have been
reached by the outweighed method alone. I doubt that Nozick’s intuition on
“outweighing” can survive this problem.
Notice one other aspect of Nozick’s account of the father. His criteria would
seem to deny the father knowledge that his son is innocent on the basis of the
courtroom demonstration even if he does not realize what his reaction would
have been had the courtroom case gone the other way. As long as his faith in his
son would have been dominant, he need not be aware of this hypothetical
situation in order for one to deny him knowledge on the basis of his seeing his
son cleared in court.
Let us reconsider Nozick’s grandmother case (179, cited in my section 1).
Surely a grandmother who clearly sees her grandson alive and well, talks to him,
and so on, knows that he is alive and well. Yet if he were sick or dead, friends
would assure her that he was alive and well, and she would believe them. Just this
case led Nozick to introduce the requirement that the method (looking at the
grandson and talking to him) be kept ﬁxed. But does this really help? Let us look
at the case in the light of Nozick’s views about Armstrong’s father case. Suppose
that even if the grandmother had seen the grandson, she would have believed
assurances from her friends that he was only pretending to be dead73 (or sick) and
was really alive and well. Then it seems that her method of looking at the
grandson, and so on, is outweighed, according to Nozick, by the method of
believing her friends.
Is this result really credible? Nozick’s intuition, and mine, was that, of course,
a grandmother who believes that her grandson is alive by looking and talking to

73
Alternatively, she would have believed assurances that she had mistaken someone else for the
grandson. The main point is that, analogously to Armstrong’s father case, she is strongly motivated
to accept assurances that her grandson is not dead (or sick).

Nozick on Knowledge

207

him does know that he is alive. But whether his requirement of keeping the
method ﬁxed really saves the situation from falling to the third condition is no
longer so clear to me.
Nozick mentions that in his cases of multiple methods (in particular the
Armstrong father case) one might instead regard the subject as using a single
complex method (684, note 20). For example, Armstrong’s father might use the
complex method: “believe about one’s son whatever the method of faith tells one,
and only if it yields no answer, believe the result of courtroom demonstration.”
Regarded this way, the father follows a single method that violates the third
condition. Regarded similarly, the grandmother following a complex method—
“give priority to favorable assurances from one’s friends about one’s grandson,
and follow the evidence of one’s own eyes and ears only if this yields no result”—
does not know even if she has seen and talked to her grandson. Once again, the
very intuition that Nozick wanted to preserve by his requirement that the
method be kept ﬁxed in fact appears to be violated.
Reconsider also Nozick’s treatment of Harman’s dictator (see my section 4
(a)). Nozick introduces this case (177) before he makes any consideration of the
requirement that the method be kept ﬁxed, illustrated by the grandmother, and
states simply that the fourth condition handles the case, even though the other
three conditions do not. Assume for the moment the Nozick–Harman intuition
that the subject does not know that the dictator has died, and waive all our
previous objections to Nozick’s treatment of the case. Surely Nozick regards this
case as involving a method also, like the grandmother case. It is not a case too
central and obvious to invoke any particular method. I assumed as much in
section 4(a).
What is the method used? If the case were analogous to Nozick’s treatment of
that of the grandmother, the method would simply be believing what one has
read in the newspaper. But then there is no violation of the fourth condition. Let
the method instead be believing what one has read in the newspaper as long as it
is not contradicted by an ofﬁcial denial. Then on Nozick’s lights, condition 40 ,
mentioning the method, might be violated, even though the subject has not
heard any ofﬁcial denial. But then, analogously, the grandmother’s method
should be believing the evidence of her own eyes and ears unless this is contradicted by assurances from friends. She has heard no such assurances, because they
are not needed. Nevertheless, the new complex method violates the third condition. So Nozick has not saved his intuition after all.
Alternatively, one might view the Harman dictator case as involving two
methods, believing the newspaper (M1) and accepting ofﬁcial announcements
(denials) (M2). M2 is supposed to outweigh M1, and this fact is supposed to
destroy the subject’s knowledge, even though M2 is not in fact used. But then the
grandmother should have two methods also. M1 is accepting the testimony of her
own senses, and M2 is believing assurances from friends. One can again suppose

208

Nozick on Knowledge

that M2 outweighs M1, even though M2 is not in fact used, because it is not
needed in this case. But M2 is a method violating Nozick’s condition 30 , so again
the grandmother’s knowledge is lost.
So Nozick’s treatments of Armstrong’s father and Harman’s dictator both
appear to be in some tension with what he wants for the grandmother. The
grandmother case is what motivated the introduction of “keeping the method
ﬁxed” in the ﬁrst place. I do not say categorically that these are insurmountable
problems. Perhaps a clariﬁcation will save the situation. However, one should
not appeal to “leeway” to get around these problems. There should be some
solution that can be stated in positive, precise language. See what immediately
follows.

7. LEEWAY
The problem of multiple methods and complex methods above brings out the
“leeway” that Nozick appeals to both in his use of counterfactuals and in his
concept of method (193). Nozick seems to think that he can use the notion of
method “loosely and intuitively” without a precise rule to choose between
alternative descriptions of the method—or even between interpretations so that
his conditions agree with intuition—provided that he does not “exploit the
leeway or wobble inconsistently, ﬁrst leaning in one direction and then in
another.” Unfortunately, he appears not to satisfy this desideratum, as our
discussion in the preceding section would seem to show. Nor is it clear to me
that his description of the method is always the “intuitive” one.
I think Nozick’s four conditions (or any other theory) ought to be
considered objectively, without prejudice as to whether they agree with our
intuitive concept of knowledge. If the conditions are vague and indeterminate,
or otherwise problematic, in some case where the question whether one knows
is itself clear, that in and of itself is enough to show that the conditions do
not deﬁne the concept of knowledge. No doubt the situation is not as bad as
when they deﬁnitely disagree with the intuitive concept, but it would still be
bad enough to show that the concepts are not the same. I agree with Nozick
that if the answer is indeterminate for some cases, his theory (if unrefuted
elsewhere) could still be a ﬁrst step, compatible with something more precise.
However, if the theory is highly confusing or problematic in some case where
our intuitive concept about knowledge is clear, this seems to me to be a
strong objection to it. Cases that I have in mind will become clear in section
12 below. Moreover, forcing the conditions so that they yield desired results
is dangerous.

Nozick on Knowledge

209

8. METHODS THAT DO NOT ALWAYS
YIELD A CLEAR RESULT
Suppose I am introduced to someone at a party attended wholly by adults. If the
situation is normal, surely I know that I have not been introduced to a four-yearold. But suppose I am not very good at estimating the exact ages of young
children; often if I were introduced to a four-year-old, I might well guess his age
as three or ﬁve. Hence Nozick’s third condition is not satisﬁed: even if I had been
introduced to a four-year-old, I might have believed that I had not been
introduced to a four-year-old.
In this use of condition 3, did I “hold the method ﬁxed”? Intuitively, I would
say that the method M that I used was “sizing up the age of the person I met on
the basis of her appearance,” and this method is held ﬁxed. But perhaps Nozick
might try to save condition 3 by arguing that the method is, rather, “sizing up
whether the person is an adult and, if the answer is afﬁrmative, deducing that she
is not four years old” (leeway). If that is the method used, then in the previous
paragraph it was not held ﬁxed. However, such a move strikes me as rather
artiﬁcial; it seems to me that the situation would not be changed if no concept of
adulthood were in my repertoire. Nor should I say that I have applied the
method of deducing that she is not four years old from the proposition that
she clearly is not four years old. In this situation, there is no independent
proposition that she clearly is not four years old from which the proposition that
she is not four years old could be deduced. The term “clearly” modiﬁes the force
or decisiveness with which the method of sizing up the person’s age yields its
result. It does not change the conclusion itself. (Note that, in this example, any
vagueness of the term “four years old” is not at issue; we may suppose that the
boundaries of the term are precisely ﬁxed. The trouble is that I may have
difﬁculty judging whether a given child ﬁts into these boundaries.)
The problem illustrated by the example seems to be this: in some cases a
method M may clearly and decisively lead S to believe that p, and do so properly.
Yet if p had not been the case and S had attempted to apply M, the application of
M would have been difﬁcult or delicate, so that S might still have judged that p.
Thus Nozick’s third condition would be violated, but intuitively we would not
deny that S knows that p, since the difﬁculties in applying M did not in fact arise.
Goldman, in a paper Nozick cites,74 already gave another example that
illustrates the problem. I look at a ﬁeld and judge correctly that there is a dog
there. Let this be the belief p in question. I can very easily distinguish the dog
I saw (a dachshund) from a wolf. On the other hand, had there been no dog in
the ﬁeld, there might well have been a wolf in its place. There are other breeds of
74

Goldman (1976:779).

210

Nozick on Knowledge

dogs that I cannot easily distinguish from wolves (Goldman mentions malamutes
and German shepherds). So, had there been a wolf there and not a dog, I might
well still have thought there was a dog there (of the other breed, say, malamutes).
So condition 3 is violated, since even had there not been a dog I might have
thought there was. Intuitively, this does not appear to affect my knowledge
claim, given that the particular dog in the ﬁeld is of a breed that I never confuse
with wolves. Note (perhaps Goldman does not stress this) that the conﬂict in this
case of Nozick’s condition 3 with intuition75 does not require that I have any
concepts of the breeds in question.
However, I wish to mention a possible way out that I did not consider in the
original formulation of this section. It is a simple modiﬁcation of the “clearly”
formulation mentioned above. Nozick might consider the judgment that there is a
dog there as deductively derived from the premise that there is a dog there that is in
no way resembling (or confusable with) a wolf. From this premise, the subject
deduces that there is a dog there. Nozick could then claim that his argument satisﬁes
his conditions for preserving knowledge by deduction. To me, there are two
difﬁculties with this. First, we have seen that Nozick’s theory of when deduction
preserves knowledge has considerable problems. But second, and waiving these
difﬁculties, it is extremely implausible to suppose that the subject goes through such
a deduction. The subject simply sees a dog and judges that there is one.
Such cases are troublesome for Nozick’s condition 30 as it stands. Rather than
try to force the description of the method used into a mold where condition 30
can be regarded as satisﬁed, I think it would probably be preferable to modify the
statement of condition 30 so as to take into account the force or decisiveness of
the way a method yields its conclusion. I will not investigate whether this can
be done satisfactorily.76

9 . KNOWLEDGE OF NECESSARY TRUTHS
Nozick emphasizes77 that his analysis offers a uniﬁed account of knowledge,
treating necessities such as mathematical and ethical truths in the same way it
75
Obviously, Goldman, writing before Nozick’s book appeared, did not direct his argument
directly against Nozick’s condition 3. But it obviously applies, and Goldman had a similar problem
in mind. Michael Levin, who called my attention to Goldman’s later review of Nozick’s book
(Goldman 1983), points out that there Goldman explicitly directs essentially the same
counterexample to Nozick’s condition 3 as formulated. Levin also seems to think that there is
some conﬂict between Goldman’s proposals for a way out of the difﬁculty in his paper and in his
review, but I will not consider this question.
76
Goldman’s analyses ought to be considered in this connection, though he himself indicates in
Goldman (1983) that it is unlikely that Nozick’s condition 3 could plausibly be maintained as it
stands.
77
See page 186, ﬁrst paragraph. This paragraph begins his section entitled “Knowledge of
Necessities.”

Nozick on Knowledge

211

treats empirical truths. Indeed, the desire for a uniﬁed account was a major
reason that Nozick replaced Goldman’s earlier causal analysis (Goldman 1967)
with a counterfactual formulation (see page 70). The point was that although
causal notions do not apply to mathematical and ethical truths, counterfactual
conditionals still make sense when applied to such truths. It is very plausible that
a uniﬁed account is indeed desirable; prima facie it would seem that “S knows
that p” expresses one and the same relation between S and p, regardless of what
proposition p is, or, for that matter, who S is.
Nozick observes that if p is a mathematical truth, his third condition has an
impossible antecedent, since it asks us to consider what would be the case if
p were false. He writes:
Perhaps a theory of subjunctives can be constructed to cover such cases—none has yet
been proposed that is remotely satisfactory—but we should try to avoid such a desperate
expedient. (186)

He immediately concludes that “condition 3 does not come into play for
necessary truths” and hence that the question whether a given belief in a necessary
truth is knowledge reduces to the fourth condition.
Here I ﬁnd Nozick’s methodology very puzzling. First, if one of the conditions
is unintelligible for mathematical truths, or at least one for which no remotely
satisfactory account has been given, where after all is the greater generality and
unity of a counterfactual account over a causal account? Even more important, if
in a given case one clause of a conjunction is obscure, doesn’t that make the entire
conjunction obscure for that case? Clearly such a situation does not allow us
simply to drop the conjunct.78 Had Nozick believed, with Lewis and Stalnaker,
that a counterfactual with an impossible antecedent is vacuously true, then
indeed the third condition would drop out as vacuously satisﬁed; but Nozick’s
quoted remarks make it clear that this is not his opinion. He might have
reformulated his theory disjunctively, with one disjunct applying to contingent
truths, containing the third condition, and one applying to necessary truths,
lacking it. But then knowledge of necessary truths is treated specially, not as the
result of a uniﬁed theory treating necessary and contingent truths in the
same way.
More important, it is hard to see how the third condition can simply be
dropped here without replacement (as we would do if we followed the Lewis–
Stalnaker condition for these counterfactuals). The third condition was meant to
78
Suppose one has a mathematical condition on real numbers deﬁned as a conjunction of several
conjuncts. There could be just one variable, or more than one. Suppose that for certain value(s) of
the variable(s), one of the conditions is ill-deﬁned; say, it has a rational expression whose
denominator comes out as zero. Then clearly the entire conjunction is ill-deﬁned for that case;
one cannot simply drop the ill-deﬁned conjunct.
If one deﬁned the condition disjunctively, dropping the ill-deﬁned conjunct when it makes no
sense, we would not have a “uniﬁed account.”

212

Nozick on Knowledge

rule out methods that conclude that p too readily—even had p been false, the
third condition objects, the method would have concluded, or might well have
concluded, that p. Don’t we need some condition to rule out such methods even
if p is necessary? The fourth condition, which, on the contrary, is meant to rule
out methods that are insufﬁciently likely to conclude that p, is hardly likely to do
the same job. (This is obvious even if we forget for the moment that we have
shown above, in the section on strengthened conclusions, that the fourth condition is toothless, a broken reed.)
Let me give an example. Suppose S, unaware of the irrationality of √2 and of
the Pythagorean theorem, assumes that all real numbers are rational. He then
deduces that C is rational, where “C ” abbreviates a deﬁnite description characterizing a particular real number either by contingent physical means or by a
mathematical deﬁnition. Even if C is in fact rational, we should not think
intuitively that S knows that it is—but why not? The fourth condition, intended
to rule out methods that are too conservative in concluding that C is rational,
seems irrelevant—the trouble is that the method draws this conclusion too
hastily. In fact, the fourth condition seems to be satisﬁed—using this method,
S would inevitably have concluded that C is rational whether it was rational or
not. Suppose “C ” abbreviates a physical deﬁnite description (e.g., the mass of
some object, or a fundamental physical constant), where the value of “C ”
depends on contingent features of the world.79 Then “C is rational” is only
contingently true. Surely, then, Nozick would ﬁnd the trouble in the third
condition—even if C had been irrational, S would have believed, using this
method, that C was rational.
If C is mathematically deﬁned, and hence “C ” abbreviates a rigid designator,
then the third condition is a counterfactual with an impossible antecedent.
Nozick tells us that the condition should be dropped, but doesn’t it need a
substitute if we are to deny that S knows that C is rational? We might try
analyzing counterfactuals with impossible antecedents after all, or we might
point out that the method is unreliable over a range of “similar” cases, or we
might try something else, but we cannot just drop the third condition without
replacement. Nozick’s explanation (188, ﬁrst two paragraphs) of why we
“needn’t worry” about the third condition when p is necessary seems to me to
be quite wrong.
Further, Nozick seems to be unaware of the ubiquity of the problem of counterfactuals with impossible antecedents in his theory. He seems to suppose that it is
conﬁned to cases of mathematical and ethical truths, as if these exhausted the
necessary truths. Since elsewhere I have argued to the contrary at length (Kripke
1980 and Chapter 1, this volume), may I be pardoned if I contest such a
supposition here? Surely I know, if I know anything, that Ronald Reagan is not
79
Some may argue that such examples are not so easy to ﬁnd. But we will suppose for the
argument that they are possible.

Nozick on Knowledge

213

the Taj Mahal and that Jimmy Carter is not Cleopatra. These statements are not
mathematical truths and may not seem to be “analytic” in any straightforward
sense. But if I consider whether I know these things, must I ask what I would have
believed if Ronald Reagan had been the Taj Mahal or if Jimmy Carter had been
Cleopatra? What would such questions mean? Elsewhere, invoking the “closest
continuer” theory of personal identity that he favors, Nozick doubts my view that
true identities are necessary (656–69). Presumably, he also doubts the necessity of
true negations of identities. I do not agree with Nozick about this, but even if he
were right about the cases he has in mind, it would be hard to dream up cases to
show that Reagan might have been the Taj Mahal or that Jimmy Carter might have
been Cleopatra. Not that the third condition is irrelevant: once again, if it is
dropped, it needs a substitute guaranteeing that the method used is not too hasty in
drawing its conclusion.
Similarly, at least according to me, such straightforwardly empirical truths as
that such-and-such a table was made from such-and-such a block of wood are
necessary. So, according to me, are various truths about natural kinds and
physical phenomena, such as that gold is the element with atomic number 79,
that heat is molecular motion, that heat is not a caloric ﬂuid, that whales are
mammals, and so on; and in this view I have been ably supported by Hilary
Putnam.80 If any of these truths is necessary, and if we know any of them, then
any time we try to verify that Nozick’s condition 3 holds, we cannot avoid
counterfactuals with impossible antecedents; there are no possible worlds, or
counterfactual situations, in which they are false. Since our knowledge of these
truths is straightforwardly empirical, it would appear that on Nozick’s view
something like the third condition is obviously needed to make sure that we
have ruled out relevant alternatives, that we have not drawn our conclusion too
hastily, and so on. (Of course, Nozick might reject some of these theses about
necessity. But in fact he does not consider the issue at all.)
Perceptive readers may have noticed some awkwardness in my phraseology in
previous discussions. Why did I speak of Henry believing that there is a genuine
barn in the ﬁeld or of the incautious experimenter as believing that he has tested a
drug physically effective against the disease? I did so to make sure that the belief
in question is contingent. Consider instead Henry’s belief that this object (in the
ﬁeld) is a genuine barn. “This object” is a rigid designator. I can imagine that a
papier-mâché barn, a different object from the one that is actually there, might
have been erected on the ﬁeld. However, it is impossible for me to imagine that
80
See Kripke (1980), Lecture III; also Chapter 1, this volume. See also Putnam (1975),
especially chapter 12 (“The Meaning of ‘Meaning’ ”). In Putnam (1983), however, he criticizes
my views on natural kind identities (“water is H2O”) as “far too strong,” though he still endorses
weaker versions. (These versions would be enough for the problems discussed here.)
Contrary to what some authors say, I did discuss the necessity of identity for natural kinds in
Kripke (1980), not just proper names. In fact, Putnam (1983) attributes the view in question to me,
and now accepts it only with considerable modiﬁcation.

214

Nozick on Knowledge

this very object, in fact a genuine barn, might have been a papier-mâché barn. If
Nozick were to apply his explicit recipe to this case, and simply drop the third
condition, then there would be no trouble about the remaining fourth condition.
Henry, although he would not know that there is a genuine barn in the ﬁeld,
would know that this object is in the ﬁeld and is a genuine barn, since being a
genuine barn is an essential property of the object. What should we think of this
failure of deductive closure? In a large number of cases, rigid designation presents
a similar problem.81
Notice that the problem of rigid designation can arise even if the belief in
question is straightforwardly contingent. Suppose Henry sees a (genuine) blue
barn in the ﬁeld. Suppose further that had the real barn not been there, a
counterfeit of any color, blue included, might well have been erected in its
place. As usual, Henry is ignorant of the presence of counterfeit barns in the
area and would have been fooled had he seen a counterfeit. Everything is in place
for us to conclude that Henry’s belief that there is a blue barn in the ﬁeld violates
Nozick’s third condition and hence is not knowledge according to Nozick’s
theory. But what of his belief that this object is a blue barn? The truth in question
is contingent: this object might have been painted green. But now consider the
third condition. If this object had not been a blue barn, that would have been
because it would have been painted some other color, not because it was a papiermâché counterfeit. (This very object could not have been a counterfeit.) But if
the object had been of a different color, Henry would not have mistakenly
believed that the object is a blue barn. So now the third condition is satisﬁed,
and there is no trouble about the fourth. So Henry, ignorant as he is that there is
a blue barn in the ﬁeld, does know that this object is in the ﬁeld and is a blue
barn!82, 83
I do not rule out a theory that allows nontrivial truth conditions for counterfactuals with impossible antecedents. We have strong inclinations to think that
nontrivial counterfactuals with antecedents denying certain “empirical” necessary
truths are possible. Even in the mathematical case, the counterfactual “if the
consistency of set theory had been proved in a ﬁnitistic subsystem of set theory,
81

Although I think that demonstratives and proper names are rigid, the problem does not
depend on any such speciﬁc devices as long as: (a) in principle, rigid designators could be introduced
into the language, and (b) objects can have essential properties that are known to be true of
them. Indeed, as the next paragraph shows, the problem can arise even if the property attributed
to the object is not essential.
82
The present paragraph anticipates what I now regard as one of the most basic objections to
Nozick’s theory, and probably to similar theories using counterfactuals. See my discussion in section
2 and note 20.
83
On page 219, Nozick shows some signs of accepting distinctions like these for some cases. See,
for example, his discussion of the distinction between whether I know that I am having a dream
according to his conditions, and whether I know that I am dreaming this. But, as in the case of the
absorption phenomenon (see section 4(b)), he does not realize the great danger this type of problem
presents for his counterfactual approach.

Nozick on Knowledge

215

Hilbert would have been vindicated” looks true in a way that the corresponding
counterfactual with “Hilbert would not have been vindicated” does not. On the
other hand, it is quite true that it is hard to give a coherent theoretical account
that yields such nontrivial truth conditions. Further, in many cases our intuitions
do seem to go very dim when a counterfactual has an impossible antecedent. Can
I really say, for condition 3, what I would have believed if Reagan had been the
Taj Mahal, if 2 3 had been 7, or (to take an ethical case), if torturing children
just for the fun of it had been a good thing? Do we have intuitions here?
Whether or not we try to revise the theory of the counterfactual to take care of
impossible antecedents, or we attempt to adopt a different replacement for the
third condition in the case of knowledge of necessary truths, the amendment
would be pointless if it left the entire theory for contingent statements unchanged. For the trick of considering “p, and I believe that p (via M)” or, “I
correctly believe that p (via M),” call it “q,” works especially smoothly in the case
of a necessary truth p. Note that even if p is necessary, the stronger statement q is
contingent; so the ordinary theory would apply. If p is truly believed (via M),
then the conjunction q obviously satisﬁes the ﬁrst two conditions. Now the
fourth condition is obviously trivialized, for reasons given above. For the third
condition, to which we now are supposed to apply the usual theory for contingent statements, note that in considering situations where the conjunction is
false, we need not worry about situations where p is false—by hypothesis, there
are no such situations. Hence, if q had been false, I must not have believed that
p (via M), and a fortiori, must not have correctly believed p, verifying the third
condition for q. Hence the theory, for contingent truths alone, leads to the
consequence that “I correctly believe that p” is known almost every time a
necessary truth p is truly believed. This is hardly satisfactory.
10 . THE FUTURE
If the sun were not to rise tomorrow, or if I were to release a book from my hands
and it were to remain aloft in midair, I would be very surprised. I would maintain
the same counterfactual retrospectively with respect to a date already past: if
yesterday strange events such as these had happened, I would have been very
surprised. The reason I would have been surprised is, of course, that under these
circumstances I would have expected the opposite.
Assuming we know that the sun will not rise tomorrow, or that we did know it
just before yesterday, these observations present a problem for Nozick’s theory.
The cases considered in the preceding paragraph go directly contrary to Nozick’s
third condition for the pieces of knowledge mentioned. For me to have known in
advance that the sun would rise on a given date, the third condition demands
that, if the sun had not risen then, I would not have expected the rising
beforehand and hence would not have been surprised when it didn’t rise. But

216

Nozick on Knowledge

it seems to me to be intuitively clear that, had the sun not risen, I would have
been very surprised.
Nozick suggests the opposite intuition, that if “the sun were not going to arise
tomorrow,” we would “have seen that coming,” because the event “would have
been presaged” in antecedent events (222).84 I think it is clear that things are not
so obvious. I doubt that most readers would demur from the conditionals in the
ﬁrst paragraph of this section. Nevertheless, it is clear what idea motivates him. In
a deterministic world, if the sun had not risen, how would that have happened?
Only by some changes in the antecedent causes. In the literature on counterfactuals, this type of consideration is sometimes called “backtracking,” and it has
indeed been suggested that some counterfactuals do invoke backtracking. Does
the third condition have at least an interpretation conforming to Nozick’s backtracking ideas, so that “leeway” could be invoked here to rescue Nozick’s third
condition? Not to my ear, if the counterfactuals involved are to be understood
“loosely and intuitively,” as Nozick says. For me, it is unambiguously true that
I would have been surprised had the sun not risen yesterday and that I would be
surprised were it not to rise tomorrow. Even if I am wrong and this is not the
only proper interpretation, surely Nozick should have taken this interpretation of
the counterfactual into account and distinguished it (using “leeway”?) from the
other one.85
Granted the backtracking interpretation, do Nozick’s conclusions follow?
I think they still do not. First, there could be quantum mechanical uncertainties,
in principle unpredictable (or perhaps classical statistical mechanical uncertainties, unpredictable from a practical point of view) that caused an explosion, say,
in the sun. Second, even in a fully deterministic world, if the sun had not risen
this morning, would we obviously have seen that coming? For example, had the
sun not risen, maybe it would have been because of some undetected problem in
the interior of the earth that ﬁnally stopped its rotation, but which we would have
been unaware of. Maybe it would have been as surprising to us as earthquakes are
today.
Maybe these things are scientiﬁcally not the case, and indeed if the sun had
ceased to rise, we could have seen that coming. But to me nothing is obvious
here, it is a matter of delicate and very speculative scientiﬁc considerations.
Intuitively, these issues have nothing to do with whether we know that the sun
will rise tomorrow.

84
Actually, Nozick phrases this as a rhetorical question, using a stylistic device that is frequent in
his book. The context shows that he plainly intends an afﬁrmative answer to be understood; he
hardly intends to suggest without elaboration that his theory collapses at this point.
85
In fairness to Nozick, in his note on page 223 he shows awareness of some of the problems
with backtracking and even notes that David Lewis’s discussion of the question does not agree with
the tenor of his own footnote. Nevertheless, Nozick appears to me to be clearly wrong about this
issue for the reasons stated in my main text.

Nozick on Knowledge

217

Really, however, I should not let this discussion of “backtracking” issues
detract from the clearly intuitive initial point in the ﬁrst paragraph of this section.
I think the reader, innocent of these discussions, would immediately agree that if
the sun had not risen this morning, she would have been very surprised.
Moreover, it is not an objection to a claim of knowledge (in advance of the
rising) that the reader would have been surprised if it had not occurred. It is
precisely because someone has adequate and rational grounds to have expected
the rising that she would have been surprised had it not occurred. Nozick’s third
condition, requiring the exact opposite for a knowledge claim, seems to get
matters reversed.
Like knowledge of necessities, knowledge of the future presents a problem for
Goldman’s old causal theory (1967)—the required causal relation would seem to
run backward. Unfortunately, Nozick’s form of the counterfactual theory appears to face similar difﬁculties. Even if the difﬁculties can be overcome, his own
very brief and sketchy discussion hardly indicates how to solve the problems or
even that his recognition of them is adequate.

11 . SKEPTICAL HYPOTHESES
In agreement with many other recent theorists, Nozick thinks the skeptic argues
successfully that we do not know that his skeptical hypotheses are false. Even
though we do know various ordinary facts incompatible with a skeptical hypothesis, since knowledge is not deductively closed we can know the ordinary facts
without knowing the skeptical hypothesis to be false.
We can discuss the intuitive and epistemological plausibility of this viewpoint
later. Here I ask whether, as Nozick thinks, his counterfactual conditions really do
yield this result. A favorite example is that none of us knows that he is not ﬂoating
in a tank on Alpha Centauri (stimulated to have just the experiences that he
actually has). The counterfactual situation described is “doxically identical for S to
the actual situation,” and “if S were in that situation, he would have exactly the
beliefs (doxa) he actually does have” (202). In particular, he would still believe that
he is not ﬂoating in a tank on Alpha Centauri, so that the third condition fails.
Actually, however, it is by no means clear that the situation described is
“doxically identical” to the actual situation. Hilary Putnam’s published work
on skepticism and reference points out an essential problem, a problem that
I discussed with John Dolan.86 A tank ﬂoater on Alpha Centauri, stimulated with
86

See Putnam (1981:1–25); also Putnam (1983). However, I do not necessarily endorse all of
Putnam’s conclusions. Surprisingly, Nozick mentions (168–69) Putnam’s argument and criticizes it
brieﬂy, but does not notice its application to his own theory. As applied to Nozick’s theory,
Putnam’s argument seems undoubtedly correct, whether or not it otherwise refutes skepticism.
Nothing in Nozick’s own discussion touches on this point.

218

Nozick on Knowledge

exactly my experiences, will have a term “Alpha Centauri” and a term “Emerson
Hall” in his vocabulary, but do these terms name the objects Alpha Centauri and
Emerson Hall? They have none of the causal or historical connections with the
star and the building that my terms do. The most typical deﬁnite descriptions the
ﬂoater associates with “Alpha Centauri” will not be true of Alpha Centauri, for
they will imply that “Alpha Centauri” names a star very distant from him. If the
ﬂoater had been on earth, really living a life corresponding to his experiences,
then “Alpha Centauri” would have referred to Alpha Centauri. But here there is
no reason to think it refers to this star rather than to another one. Hence, there is
no reason to ascribe to him a belief that he is in Emerson Hall and not ﬂoating in
a vat on Alpha Centauri. This is entirely contrary to what Nozick says.
The problem is not conﬁned to skeptical hypotheses containing proper names.
As Putnam and I have emphasized, if I had lived in a world in which I had
experiences qualitatively identical to the ones I actually have, my terms “gold”
and “water” need not have referred to gold and water. They might have referred
to substances other than gold and water, although similar to them in their surface
qualitative effects. All the more so, wouldn’t my terms “gold” and “water” have
failed to refer to gold and water if I were a brain in a vat as described? What
grounds could there be for assuming that they referred to these substances, rather
than to various other hypothetical phenomenally similar substances? Problems of
this kind arise also for terms purporting to refer to various physical phenomena.
Hence Nozick’s claim that his third condition shows that we do not know the
negations of various skeptical hypotheses is often vitiated, in particular for the
hypothesis that I am on Alpha Centauri being stimulated to think that I am in
Emerson Hall. If, following Nozick, we call the hypothesis in question SK (no
pun on my name intended!), and the belief in question not-SK, then Nozick
argues that since we do not have “if SK were the case, then I wouldn’t believe
SK,” his third condition is violated for not-SK, and therefore SK is not known.
Actually, Putnam’s argument shows that, as Nozick puts matters, I am in no
position to think or formulate the beliefs stated in SK, and therefore that the
third condition does hold, at least in some vacuous manner.
It is not trivial to formulate skeptical hypotheses so “puriﬁed” of reference that
no such problems arise. However, I have some inclination to think that this can
be done (since I share Nozick’s doubts that Putnam’s argument really gets rid of
skepticism). Perhaps there is a “narrow content” description of what the subject
believes that is free of these problems. (Perhaps a “Ramsey sentence” version also
would do.)
All we can say is that Nozick ought to have considered the problem, especially
since he was aware of Putnam’s argument, and that his picture does not seem to
be true as stated. But perhaps the objection can be overcome in a revised version.
Then there is yet another problem.

Nozick on Knowledge

219

12 . KNOWLEDGE OF THE CENTRAL AND OBVIOUS AND
THE SUPERCREDULOUS PROBLEM

12(a). Central and Obvious Statements
Earlier I discussed whether I can know that someone I have met is not a fouryear-old. Do I (Saul Kripke) know that I am no four-year-old? Prima facie, this
proposition, just as much as the example “I have two hands” that Nozick gives
explicitly (185) and for the same reasons, seems to be such a central and obvious
proposition that it could not escape my notice and yet is not believed with the aid
of any particular method or methods. For such propositions, Nozick recommends that we take his conditions in the simple form. But then condition 3
seems not to be satisﬁed. Presumably, a four-year-old might well be mistaken
about his age: maybe he thinks he is three or ﬁve, and not four. Presumably I,
too, had I been four years old, might have been liable to error and believed that
I was not four years old. At least, the viability of condition 3 here seems to
depend on the supposition that I, at least, were I fours years old, would be very
reliable about my age. (Well, little children are fond of reciting their ages. But
what about the proposition that I am not exactly four years, two months and
sixteen days old? Would I have been reliable about that if I were exactly that age?)
Here I ignore the complication that condition 3 may have an antecedent that is
impossible or close to it. Might I really have been four years old now (in 1983)?
Exactly how could that have happened?
Matters may be helped a bit if we take my belief that I am not four years old to
be derived by a method after all, say, by inference from a more basic belief that
I am an adult. The latter belief could then be a “central” one, that is, believed
owing to no particular method. I am doubtful that this is a correct model, but
even if it is, it doesn’t seem clearly to help. Condition 30 would then require me
to consider whether I would still believe via this method that I am not four years
old even if I were a four-year-old. Well, might not a four-year-old fantasize that
he is an adult and go on to deduce that he is not four years old? (Admittedly, this
would be a worse mistake than getting his exact age wrong.) I think that this is a
possibility, but it does not seem to me to give good grounds for a new form of
philosophical skepticism—that I am merely a child fantasizing that I am an
adult. Even granted the failure of the third condition, I do not see the appeal of
this particular skeptical doubt (as long as I am not worried about some more
fundamental form of skepticism).
Condition 3 is highly problematic for some of those statements that epistemologists since Descartes have regarded as expressing the ﬁrmest sort of knowledge: “I exist,” “I am conscious,” and the like. If I had not existed, how can I ask
what I would have believed? Perhaps we could save condition 3 in this case by
regarding it as vacuously satisﬁed: if I had not existed, I would not have been

220

Nozick on Knowledge

around to believe anything, including that I exist, so the third condition holds.
Although this interpretation would save the third condition in this case, I am not
sure whether it really captures the intuitive motivation of the third condition.
I am not quite sure about the case of “I am conscious”—satisfaction of the third
condition depends upon what my beliefs would be were I unconscious, a
problematic notion that Nozick discusses very little, though he does refer to
Freud (221).87 Once again, one could protest that I wouldn’t have any beliefs,
vacuously satisfying the third condition.
What about my belief that the earth has existed for many years, one of those
Nozick cites (185) as an example of a central belief ? Well, what about my belief
that it has existed for at least three years? Here, too, it is hard to understand the
third condition. Had either of these beliefs been false, surely I would not have
existed! It is (to say the least) unlikely that human beings would have evolved if
the earth had existed for only a few years. Of course, we can save the third
condition in the same somewhat artiﬁcial way we saved it for “I exist”—that is,
count it as trivially true had I not existed.
But if we count condition 3 as true when its antecedent counterfactually
implies my nonexistence or my lack of consciousness, we may not always avoid
getting in trouble elsewhere. For example, in accordance with his general attitude
about skeptical hypotheses, Nozick thinks (219) that I do not know that there are
other people with genuine minds, rather than automata; and he thinks that the
third condition fails. But, what would have been the case had all others, except
perhaps me, been automata? Is it likely that I would have remained the one
genuine human mind in the universe? It seems to me, on the contrary, that
I would not have been conscious either, so that our rule would count condition 3
as trivially satisﬁed. Perhaps this case could be saved, either by subsuming it
under condition 30 , despite the centrality of the belief, or by a heavy invocation of
leeway so as to count condition 3 as failing after all—maybe I would, or might,
have been the only human mind in the universe.88
Nozick himself does actually discuss such statements as “I am alive” and “I am
sentient,” which are close to what I was just discussing (215, note). To my
surprise, he regards them as known by a particular, though very basic, method, in
contrast to the earlier statements (on 185) that are so basic and obvious that they
are not known by any particular method. It is hard for me to see the difference
between an example such as “there are eyes,” which on page 215 (in the same
87
Freud, however, really talked of unconscious beliefs, not of beliefs that someone has when he
himself is unconscious.
88
Of course, the situation is different for the belief that it is not the case that I alone in the
universe have a mind and all others are automata. Then for the third condition, that I am the one
exception is explicitly in the antecedent of the counterfactual. (Remember the fallacy of
strengthening the antecedent.) However, is it really intuitively correct that the two beliefs (with
or without the explicit condition about me) should be distinguished as known or not known in this
way?

Nozick on Knowledge

221

note) is supposed to be known by a particular method (apparently one that seems
to require that one uses one’s eyes), and “I have two hands,” which is not
supposed to be known by any particular method (185). He also seems to think
we come to know that “looking,” or some method using our eyes, is the method
by which we come to believe that there are eyes. His basic problem, in the case of
the “eyes” example (and also “I am alive” and “I am sentient”) is that these
statements are arrived at by a method that would not exist if they were false,
creating a problem for the interpretation of condition 30 . Presumably, the
method used to arrive at “I am alive” and “I am sentient” is Cartesian introspection, or some such thing. Also, in these cases, he does not regard the statements as
so central and obvious that no particular method is used.
Although I do not really understand the reasons for this unexplained shift,
nevertheless, given what Nozick says in the later passages, we ought to consider
brieﬂy what happens to some of our examples if we think of them as beliefs
arrived at by a particular method M. Then condition 30 asks what I would have
believed had I not existed but nevertheless went ahead and applied M. Plainly
this becomes a counterfactual with a self-contradictory antecedent. In his discussion (which he also applies to other cases, such as my belief that I am not
irrational or insane), he seems to be puzzled about the examples, and states, “I
do not think this is simply incoherent, neither is it pellucidly clear” (216). In a
footnote on the same page, he suggests that maybe he should apply the same
methodology that he applied in the case of necessary truths, and drop the third
condition because it becomes unintelligible. However, such a strategy is clearly
methodologically unacceptable (see my discussion above, section 9). His puzzlement about the matter in the main text is methodologically far more appropriate.
But then there is a problem. Consider, for example, “I am thinking” or “I am
sentient.” Epistemologists from Descartes onward have regarded these as among
the most obvious and indubitable cases of knowledge, even if other things are
doubted. Perhaps it took G. E. Moore (in philosophy, anyway) to add “there are
eyes,” as he explicitly added “there are hands,” but to the common person, both
are cases of very basic knowledge. It seems to me to be a considerable objection to
Nozick’s conditions, if they make such basic cases very problematic.
In the case of “the earth has existed for many years” (another example from
Moore), if we applied condition 30 , its antecedent would stipulate that even if the
earth had existed for only a few years, I would nevertheless somehow have been
around and able to apply method M. As I said above, I am not sure that this
antecedent is really possible. Supposing, however, that this is possible, and that
I were also in a position to apply the same method M that led me to believe that
the earth has existed for many years (whatever M is supposed to be), what would
I have concluded? Under such fantastic circumstances, and where M is difﬁcult
to specify, it is hard to say; perhaps condition 30 is satisﬁed, perhaps it is not.
As I said, Nozick discusses “I am sane and rational” (216–27) as a case in
which I am not sure I am applying the method M that I think I am applying.

222

Nozick on Knowledge

Nozick concludes that perhaps on his criteria we may not know that we are sane;
the matter is difﬁcult. If we were to treat the example “I am not four years old”
similarly, we might run into similar difﬁculties—a four-year-old might think he
was applying all the methods of an adult. So quite possibly, according to
Nozick’s criteria, I do not know that I am not four years old (even if we apply
the primed conditions).
Remember what I said in section 7 about leeway. It seems to me that clear
cases of knowledge, according to our intuitive concept, should not be difﬁcult or
unclear according to Nozick’s theory. Thus the existence of such cases—clear
cases of knowledge that are difﬁcult or unclear according to his theory—is a basic
objection to the theory.
One important case from Moore goes in another direction. One of Nozick’s
basic ideas is that, although ordinary beliefs may be known, the negations of
skeptical hypotheses, even though they follow logically from these ordinary
beliefs, are not known. But what of Moore’s famous proof of an external
world? (1939). Nozick accepts Moore’s premise that I know that I have a hand
(in fact, two). These are examples of basic knowledge. He also claims that
existential generalization preserves knowledge, so that I also know that there is
a hand (in fact, more than one). So it looks as if Moore’s proof of an external
world is valid and gives us knowledge.89

12(b). The Supercredulous Problem
Let me ﬁnish with the following case, a simple and obvious objection to anyone
devoted to Nozick’s third condition. Call someone supercredulous if he believes
every proposition p. Of course, the concept of supercredulity is absurd: neither I,
nor any other human being, has ever been supercredulous. Very well then, do
I know that I am not supercredulous? This seems like the sort of central proposition that I do know, but not by any particular method.
Nevertheless, condition 3 fails. Since the belief in question is the belief that
I am not supercredulous, the third condition states that even if I had been
supercredulous, I would not have believed that I was not supercredulous. But
then, of course, since a supercredulous person believes anything, I would have
believed, along with everything else, that I was not supercredulous. So it would
seem that, according to Nozick’s theory, I do not know that I am not supercredulous, because the third condition is violated. This does not strike me as a
very plausible form of skepticism. This argument against the third condition is

89
Should one doubt that a hand is an external object? Of course, we have already seen that
Nozick’s argument that existential generalization preserves knowledge (as he deﬁnes it) is fallacious.

Nozick on Knowledge

223

simple, almost silly,90 but it shows very clearly how we cannot take Nozick’s
third condition as a “powerful and intuitive” test for whether I know.91

R E F E R EN C E S
Armstrong, D. M. (1973). Belief, Truth and Knowledge. London: Cambridge University
Press.
Bonjour, L. (1980). “Externalist Theories of Empirical Knowledge.” Midwest Studies in
Philosophy 5:53–73.
Castañeda, H. N. (1968). “On the Logic of Attributions of Self-Knowledge to Others.”
Journal of Philosophy 65: 439–56.
Dretske, F. (1970). “Epistemic Operators.” Journal of Philosophy 67:1007–23. Reprinted
in Dretske (2000).
———. (1971). “Conclusive Reasons.” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 49:1–22.
Reprinted in Dretske (2000).
———. (2000). Perception, Knowledge, and Belief: Selected Essays. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Gettier, E. (1963). “Is Justiﬁed True Belief Knowledge?” Analysis 23:121–23.
Goldman, A. (1967). “A Causal Theory of Knowing.” Journal of Philosophy 64:357–72.
———. (1976). “Discrimination and Perceptual Knowledge.” Journal of Philosophy
73:771–91. Reprinted in Pappas and Swain (1978).
———. (1979). “What is Justiﬁed Belief ?” In Pappas (1979).
———. (1983). Review of Philosophical Explanations. Philosophical Review 92:81–88.
Harper, W. (1981). “A Sketch of Some Recent Developments in the Theory of Conditionals.” In Harper, Stalnaker, and Pearce (1981).
Harper, W., R. Stalnaker, and G. Pearce, eds. (1981). Ifs. Dordrecht, Netherlands:
D. Reidel.
Kripke, S. (1971). “Identity and Necessity.” In Identity and Individuation, ed.
M. Munitz. New York: New York University Press, 135–64. Reprinted in this volume,
ch. 1.
———. (1980). Naming and Necessity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lehrer, K., and T. Paxson. (1969). “Knowledge: Undefeated Justiﬁed True Belief.”
Journal of Philosophy 66:225–37.
90

Indeed, Bertrand Russell would have rejected the argument as violating his ramiﬁed theory of
types. In the notion of supercredulous as I have deﬁned it, in the statement that someone believes
every proposition p, p must be restricted as to type. Then the statement that he is supercredulous is
also restricted as to type and is of higher type, not within the scope of the variable p in question.
Hence the argument as given will fail. Someone could be supercredulous of a given type but not
believe that he is not supercredulous (of that type).
Whatever we think of Russell’s views, do we really think that such a technicality gets to the heart
of the matter?
91
My thanks to Jonathan Adler, Jeff Buechner, Harold Teichman, and Gary Ostertag for their
helpful comments. Special thanks to Michael Levin for his very detailed comments and to Romina
Padró for her help in producing the present version and for conversations about these issues and
valuable suggestions. This paper has been completed with support from the Saul A. Kripke Center at
the City University of New York, Graduate Center.

224

Nozick on Knowledge

Lewis, D. (1973). Counterfactuals. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Luper, S. (2004). “Indiscernibility Skepticism.” In Essential Knowledge, ed. S. Luper. New
York: Pearson.
Moore, G. E. (1925). “A Defense of Common Sense.” In Contemporary British Philosophy, 2nd Series, ed. J. H. Muirhead. London: George Allen and Unwin. Reprinted in
Moore (1959).
———. (1939). “Proof of an External World.” Proceedings of the British Academy
25:273–300. Reprinted in Moore (1959).
———. (1959). Philosophical Papers. London: George Allen and Unwin.
Nozick, R. (1981). Philosophical Explanations. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Nute, D. (1975). “Counterfactuals and the Similarity of Worlds.” Journal of Philosophy
72:773-–78.
Pappas, G., ed. (1979). Justiﬁcation and Knowledge. Dordrecht, Netherlands: D. Reidel.
Pappas G., and M. Swain, eds. (1978). Essays on Knowledge and Justiﬁcation. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Putnam, H. (1975). Mind, Language and Reality: Philosophical Papers, Volume 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. (1981). Reason, Truth and History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. (1983). “Possibility and Necessity.” In Realism and Reason: Philosophical Papers,
Volume 3. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 46–68.
Shatz, D. (1981). “Reliability and Relevant Alternatives.” Philosophical Studies
39:393–408.
Sosa, E. (1969). “Propositional Knowledge.” Philosophical Studies 20:33–43.
Stalnaker, R. (1968). “A Theory of Conditionals.” In Studies in Logical Theory, ed.
N. Rescher. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. Reprinted in Causation and Conditionals, ed.
E. Sosa. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1975; and in Harper, Stalnaker, and Pearce
(1981).
Stine, G. C. (1976). “Skepticism, Relevant Alternatives and Deductive Closure.” Philosophical Studies 29:249–61.
Vogel, J. (2000). “Reliabilism Leveled.” Journal of Philosophy 97:602–23.
Wittgenstein, L. (1969). On Certainty. Ed. G. E. M. Anscombe and G. H. von Wright.
Trans. G. E. M. Anscombe and D. Paul. Oxford: Blackwell.

8
Russell’s Notion of Scope1

In analytic philosophy, contemporary Anglo-Saxon philosophy, Russell’s ‘On
Denoting’2 is surely the most famous paper written in the ﬁrst half of the
twentieth century. Quine’s ‘Two Dogmas of Empiricism’ is no doubt the most
famous paper written in the second half. (It probably has Russell’s paper beat for
the century as a whole.) I’m restricting this to analytic philosophy. The truth is
I don’t know (though maybe someone can tell me) whether famous papers—this
shows my ignorance—as opposed to books, are in fact ever written in contemporary continental philosophy. I’ve heard of this or that famous book, but of no
famous papers.3 I also don’t know when philosophical journals and philosophical
papers as such began. Previously some essays had been written that might be
called ‘papers’ today, but were chapters of books.4
Now, although ‘On Denoting’ was the most famous paper of the ﬁrst half of
the century, it seems basically to have gone unread or been ill-understood—
people may have thought that they could be content with reading secondary
accounts in the textbooks, or even in Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy.
And of course the Theory of Descriptions as such can be stated (see formula
(4) below) very simply.
1

Those familiar with some of my previous writings, especially my ﬁrst book, will recognize that
this paper is based on a transcription from tape. It was delivered at Rutgers University through the
good ofﬁces of Stephen Neale, editor of the issue of Mind where this paper originally appeared.
References to ‘the discussion’, ‘the tape’ and the like are to the delivery at Rutgers.
2
All references to this paper by page are to the reprint in Marsh (1956), pp. 41–56.
3
In the discussion, I believe someone said that there were some.
4
Since I said this, I have done some minimal research, though not enough to ﬁnd out when the
philosophical journal as such began.
As a chapter of a book, I had in mind, for example, Hume’s famous essay ‘Of Miracles’, included
(as far as I know) from the beginning in his Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, but which
could have been a separate journal article today. (It might later have been collected into a volume of
the author’s papers.) Addison and Steele, in their famous Spectator, had introduced the general
intellectual magazine or journal; but Hume did not make use of such a publication for this paper or
(as far as I know) for any philosophical paper. On the other hand, Kant’s famous paper ‘On a
Supposed Right to Lie for Altruistic Reasons’, appeared in an intellectual periodical in reply to a
paper by Benjamin Constant in a similar publication. When the specialized philosophical journal
began, I don’t know.

226

Russell’s Notion of Scope

In ‘On Denoting’, Russell deﬁnes a denoting phrase as
. . . a phrase such as any one of the following: a man, some man, any man, every man, all
men, the present King of England, the present King of France,5 the centre of mass of the
solar system at the ﬁrst instance of the twentieth century, the revolution of the earth
round the sun, the revolution of the sun round the earth. Thus a phrase is denoting solely
in virtue of its form. (Russell1905, p. 41)

(Notice that some of these denoting phrases have denoting phrases as constituents: ‘the twentieth century’ is a constituent of ‘the ﬁrst instant of the twentieth
century’, which is itself a constituent of ‘the centre of mass of the solar system at
the ﬁrst instant of the twentieth century’. This will be of some signiﬁcance later.)
Russell’s idea of a denoting phrase corresponds fairly well to the modern
linguistic idea of a determiner followed by a predicate. I think this may be
mentioned in Stephen Neale’s book, Descriptions.6 Anyway, one might ﬁnd the
implicit syntactic argument here, which is stressed in Neale’s book, that although
at ﬁrst blush a deﬁnite description might appear to be a complex term designating a single object, it is parallel in form to the other denoting phrases. If it were
natural to analyse the other ‘denoting phrases’, such as ‘every man’, ‘some man’,
‘a man’, and so on, as really quantiﬁers and quantiﬁer phrases, so would it be to
analyse corresponding phrases beginning with the word ‘the’. It is important to
realize that ‘On Denoting’ is not simply a theory of deﬁnite descriptions, though
this is its most famous and lengthily argued part, but rather of all ‘denoting
phrases’. So a syntactic parallelism is an important part of ‘On Denoting’. In his
earlier discussions in the Principles of Mathematics, Russell has a complicated and
obscure analysis of all these phrases as of the same kind, trying to give complex
things to which they refer.7
5
I myself am inclined to think that Russell should have written ‘king’ rather than ‘King’. ‘ x is
(now) king of y’ expresses a relation between people and countries, and ‘ x is king of y at t’ expresses a
relation between people, countries, and times. If England had a king, his title was ‘King of England’
or, in this particular case, really ‘King Edward VII’, or ‘King Edward VII of England’. Something of
my worry can be given by the description ‘the tallest living knight in England’. Maybe there are no
knights in the United States or France, but what would it mean for there to be some? Is this a
meaningful relation between a person and a country, or simply a title peculiar to England? The
distinction is a subtle one, and I must quote Russell accurately.
6
Neale (1990). Though Neale gives the syntactic argument that follows in Descriptions, he
appears to believe that it is not in Russell. I think it is, and ﬁnd it an important part of his
motivation. I mentioned this in a seminar Neale gave in Oslo in 1991. In later work, Neale explicitly
accepts my point: ‘As Saul Kripke has pointed out to me, Russell himself seems to be aware of this in
the ﬁrst paragraph of “On Denoting”’ (Neale 1993, p. 130, n. 17).
7
The ghost of this theory survives in the ﬁrst paragraph of ‘On Denoting’, where it is said that ‘a
man’ denotes ‘an ambiguous man’. However, in the terminology of ‘On Denoting’ a deﬁnite
description does have a denotation, namely the unique object satisfying it. Nevertheless, it is not a
complex term referring to its object. (David Kaplan, in his paper ‘What is Russell’s Theory of
Descriptions?’ (Kaplan 1972) does not properly follow Russell’s terminology here, and says that
according to Russell deﬁnite descriptions do not ‘denote’. What Kaplan really means is correct, and
has just been stated.)

Russell’s Notion of Scope

227

Now, Russell’s theory of all such phrases is the same: though they look, in
terms of their superﬁcial form, like terms, a true logical analysis (an analysis of
some sort of underlying structure) will reveal them actually to be quantiﬁed. And
in most cases the analysis is fairly simple. For example, ‘every’ is analysed as the
universal quantiﬁer, so ‘every man is such-and-such’ is analysed with a universal
quantiﬁer and a conditional:
(1) (8x)(if x is human then x is such-and-such).
(Russell’s use of the predicate ‘is human’ shows that he uses the term ‘man’ in
a sense that does not make a gender distinction.) The indeﬁnite article ‘a’
is analysed as the existential quantiﬁer—a pretty important case of Russell’s
analysis—so ‘a man did such-and-such’ is analysed with an existential quantiﬁer
and a conjunction:
(2) (∃x)( x is human and x did such-and-such).
As he puts it, ‘“C (a man)” means “It is false that ‘C(x) and x is human’ is always
false”’ (Russell 1905, p. 44). The existential quantiﬁer (∃ x) is really written
‘(8 x)’ for Russell. The resulting formulation leads to complex and stilted
English when written in ordinary prose. This may simply be because of a
preference for taking the universal quantiﬁer as primitive. However, it also
could contain an implicit reply to the ‘objection’, aren’t you presupposing
some notion of existence here, and thus some of the very philosophical problems

Notice that, contrary to what Joseph Almog claims (1986, pp. 210–42), Russell never stipulated
as part of his concept of naming that names must be semantically simple (that is, cannot have parts
whose semantics contribute to the meaning or reference of the whole). On the contrary, Russell
requires particular and complicated arguments that deﬁnite descriptions are not names. Like Frege
in his concept of Eigenamen, Russell allows names to be complex, but disagrees with Frege about
deﬁnite descriptions on philosophical grounds. For Russell, at this stage of his thought, a clause such
as ‘that England is a monarchy’ genuinely names a proposition. Later, when he abandoned
propositions in favour of facts and the multiple relation theory of (pseudo-)propositional
attitudes, he denied that such clauses were names, and, as a result, names did become
semantically simple (eventually, only ‘this’ and ‘that’ in ordinary language).
Also, contrary to what Almog supposes, in Kripke (1980), I am sympathetic to the view that
Almog attributes to Russell, although I do not make it a criterion for what a proper name is (see
below). See my discussions of ‘The United Nations’, Voltaire’s ‘Holy Roman Empire’, and Mill’s
‘Dartmouth’, which may appear to have parts that contribute to the semantics of the whole, but do
not. Perhaps the issue is really partly terminological, but in my book I actually stipulate that I simply
take the concept of a name as given as it normally is intuitively used in ordinary language without
proposing any further criterion. It is decidedly not my purpose to give a technical criterion for being
a name. (See Kripke 1980, p. 24.) A view, such as Russell’s ultimate view that ordinary names are
not ‘really’ names, is ruled out by deﬁnition, and must be restated if in some sense what it really
means is true (see Kripke 1980, p. 27, n. 4). Nor do I take rigidity to be an alternative criterion for
naming to replace Russell’s alleged opposed criterion. On the contrary, I state that deﬁnite
descriptions can be rigid too, though typically they are not. In my discussion of ‘’, as used in
mathematics, I further state my belief that it is a name whose reference is given by description, rather
than an abbreviated description, even though the term would be ‘strongly rigid’ in either case (see
p. 60).

Russell’s Notion of Scope

228

that you were trying to solve? Of course, if you write it this way, this objection is
less likely to arise. But in any case, in Principia the universal quantiﬁer, and not
the existential quantiﬁer, is taken as primitive.
Now, a deﬁnite description would be analysed as a complex binary quantiﬁer.
‘The  ł’s’, where  is a predicate, would be analysed as
(3) [the x](x, łx)
with ‘the x’ a binary quantiﬁer. However, it is also important to Russell that all
quantiﬁers that he introduces be deﬁnable in terms of the universal quantiﬁer,
truth functions, and identity. Let’s write this in a compact form, allowing
ourselves to use the existential quantiﬁer, as Russell does sometimes. His analysis
of this binary quantiﬁcation is (in effect)
(4) (∃x)((8y)(y  y = x)  łx))
which analyses everything in terms of quantiﬁcation, truth functions, and identity.
Russell also takes ‘some’ to be synonymous with ‘a’, both being existential
quantiﬁers. He has a footnote in ‘On Denoting’ in which he says, ‘Psychologically “C (a man)” has a suggestion of only one, and “C (some men)” has a
suggestion of more than one; but we may neglect these suggestions in a preliminary sketch’ (Russell 1905, p. 43). But Russell never goes beyond the preliminary
sketch (even, as far as I know, in later writings) and analyses these as the same.
Now, actually, on the ﬁrst page of ‘On Denoting’, in the passage I quoted earlier,
Russell gives ‘some man’ as his example, while in the footnote he switches to
‘some men’. One takes a singular complement, the other a plural. The singular,
certainly, does not suggest more than one. Consider, ‘Some burglar robbed us
last night’. Does that suggest that there was more than one burglar? No, any
suggestion is the opposite. Yet it is compatible with going on to say, ‘Hey, look,
I think maybe there were two burglars’, without contradicting the ﬁrst statement,
which is more or less equivalent to ‘A burglar robbed us last night’. On the other
hand, ‘Some burglars robbed us last night’ does suggest more than one, and
suggests a class—‘Some Greeks were good philosophers’ and so on—these are
plural uses of ‘some’. Russell doesn’t note this distinction, though it appears in
the paper itself. It could relate to later articles by Gareth Evans and George
Boolos, if it had been gone into.8 Now, I’m not even saying that the plural form
is necessarily false if there is only one, but the singular and plural are different.
In the traditional syllogistic, sometimes we see ‘some As are Bs’, sometimes ‘some
A is a B ’, but these are really different, and the second is probably more proper,
given what the traditional syllogistic meant.
It will be clear that when a denoting phrase is analysed as a quantiﬁer, the
quantiﬁer will have some determinate scope: it will govern a certain phrase. On
8

Evans (1977). Boolos (1984).

Russell’s Notion of Scope

229

the other hand, if it is looked at as a term and unpacked, and is embedded in
some complex construction, of which the simplest might be a negation, ‘ some
 did ł’, it will have two readings, depending upon whether the negation or the
quantiﬁer has larger scope. Now, the point is a purely logical one: it arises directly
from the theory. This is Russell’s notion of scope. It is most interesting in the case
of deﬁnite and indeﬁnite descriptions, which he emphasizes a great deal. In
intensional contexts, scope generally makes a difference to what is said, and often
to truth-value. In a truth-functional context, scope can still make a difference.
However, if the appropriate conditions are met, if there is a unique x such that
 x—I’ll use∃! x  x to abbreviate this—scope differences don’t matter. By ‘don’t
matter’, I simply mean that the different scope interpretations lead to materially
equivalent statements. The point is that for all allowable scopes (and we will give
further details later), the following conditional is true:
(5) if ∃!x x, then A  A*
where A and A* are identical but for two different occurrences of the description
with different scopes. (Actually, (5) as explained assumes that the description has
no free variables in its predicate nor embeds any other descriptions. For the
general case, see the appropriate discussion below.)
Now, I should say that these doctrines are well known today,9 but they
certainly weren’t for a long time, even though ‘On Denoting’ was supposed to
be a famous paper. Quine wrote a very well-known paper, ‘Quantiﬁers and
Propositional Attitudes’ (Quine 1956)—one of his best known, in fact—treating
many of the same subjects, even with surprising coincidences like the ambiguity
of ‘I want a sloop’. Sloops in one case and yachts in the other (see Russell’s famous
parallel example discussed below, p. 240)! ‘Sloops’ allows Quine to make the pun
9
Even more recently, are they really well known enough? Could Davidson’s ‘slingshot’
arguments—in particular the argument that if we believed in ‘facts’, there could be only one
fact—have been so inﬂuential if people had realized that for Russell the problem would be a
matter of scope, at least when statements about facts are embedded? It would have been natural for
Russell to apply his scope distinctions in Davidson’s (1980) examples of the form ‘the fact that the 
is ł caused it to be the case that the Ç is Å’. These distinctions may be recognized by Stephen Neale in
his discussion (Neale 2001, pp. 218–23), but they are not recognized by Davidson, who makes no
mention of Russell, nor of the Russellian objections to the slingshot. To me the idea that ‘facts’
could be repudiated by arguments of this form is intuitively preposterous—any theory of
descriptions, Russellian or other, should require the appropriate scope distinctions that dispel
them. (There might be alternative formulations of the slingshot that do not turn on embedding,
in which case the objection from Russell would be different.
Gödel (1944) presents a Russellian objection but says ‘ . . . I cannot help feeling that the problem
raised . . . has only been evaded by Russell’s theory of descriptions and that there is something
behind it which is not yet completely understood’ (1944, p. 130).) Russell, of course, became a
strong believer in facts (in ‘The Philosophy of Logical Atomism’). Quine’s long-time hostility to
modal logic gave rise to slingshot arguments, though ﬁnally he admitted he was wrong about
Smullyan and scope—see my remarks in the text—and conceded that Smullyan’s observations
about substitution and scope cleared modal logic of ‘any suspicion of inconsistency raised by my
slingshot argument’ (Quine 1999, p. 426).

230

Russell’s Notion of Scope

that his sentence is ambiguous between wanting a particular sloop and mere
‘relief from slooplessness’, a typical Quinean literary ﬁllip, which could not
be done with Russell’s original, parallel example of the yacht. Now the two
theories are probably different in that Quine suggests a syntactic distinction
between notional belief and relational belief, belief that p and belief of something
that it ł’s. Daniel Dennett, writing even later, in ‘Beyond Belief’,10 pejoratively
complains that people seem to think there might be two kinds of belief. Though
it does look this way in Quine’s account,11 this is not Russell’s view. In Russell
there is only one kind of belief, always belief that p. What we would call de re
belief is explained in terms of quantifying in from the outside, quantifying into a
complex proposition. If we are on the inside of all the operators, this is what
would usually be called de dicto belief. Russell has his own terms for all this, on
p. 54 of ‘On Denoting’. Where the descriptive operator governs the entire
context it has a primary occurrence. A secondary occurrence is where it is within
the context, on the inside. This strikes me as an unfortunate terminology. First,
I would have preferred a reversal of the two terms. (If we have an operator applied
to p, isn’t the reading that unpacks p following the operator the ‘primary’
notion?) Second, and more important, it makes the distinction look like a dual
distinction, and so does Quine’s parallel discussion.12 In any case, it is not a dual
distinction, because there can be a pile up of operators. Then the question where
to put the ‘the’ or the ‘a’, whether way on the outside or way on the inside, or in
between, arises, and it is very important that Russell’s theory allows for this.
Quine’s theory, too, allows for this, though he does not say so. I’ve given
examples of this elsewhere myself.13 Here’s one with an indeﬁnite description:
(6) Hoover charged that the Berrigans14 planned to kidnap a high ofﬁcial.
I actually heard this on the radio once, long ago, and I wondered what was
meant. In theory it could have been any of the following:
(6a) (∃x)(x is a high ofﬁcial and Hoover charged that the Berrigans planned to
kidnap x)
(b) Hoover charged that (∃x)(x is a high ofﬁcial and the Berrigans planned to
kidnap x)
10

Dennett (1982).
Strictly speaking Quine’s theory might take belief to be a relation between ﬁnite sequences of
length n and sentences with n free variables. De dicto (or ‘notional’ belief) might be the degenerate
case of n = 0 (i.e., where the sequence is empty and there are no free variables). See the analogous
relation between truth and satisfaction. But the impression that there are really two kinds of belief
(where n > 0 and n = 0) persists, and their uniﬁcation is an artiﬁciality. It is also directly reﬂected in
Quine’s own terminology. See Chapter 11, this volume.
12
Quine’s theory also allows for more than a dual distinction, though his discussion does
not bring this out.
13
Kripke (1977). Reprinted here as Chapter 5.
14
Here we have a plural deﬁnite description, or perhaps an unusual name for a pair of brothers.
If this gives any worries, replace the example with ‘Berrigan’.
11

Russell’s Notion of Scope

231

(c) Hoover charged that the Berrigans planned (∃x)(x is a high ofﬁcial and they
kidnap x).15
If (b) was meant, Hoover’s charge was that there was a particular high ofﬁcial the
Berrigans planned to kidnap, and is neutral as to whether Hoover himself said
who it was. If (a) is meant, Hoover identiﬁed the person. (c) allows, according to
Hoover, that the Berrigans hadn’t decided which high ofﬁcial to kidnap. I really
heard this on the radio and didn’t know what was meant. (In fact, it was Henry
Kissinger whom Hoover had in mind.)
The following also has three readings (also from my previous paper):
(7) The number of planets might have been necessarily even.
We are taking it that there are nine planets and that every even (or odd)
number is necessarily even (or odd). Now, the outer scope reading of this,
which would mean it is true of the number of planets that it might have been
necessarily even, is false because there are nine planets and it is false that the
number might even have been even (pun?), let alone necessarily even. Nor is the
inner scope reading true, because the inner scope reading would mean it is
possible that it should have been necessary that there are exactly x planets and x
is even. But that is false. That couldn’t have been necessary, because it isn’t even
true.16,17 So we reject that, but what is correct is the intermediate scope reading,
which means it is possible that there exists an x such that there is/are exactly x
planets, and necessarily x is even. The intermediate scope reading is not
mentioned by Russell. (It is not mentioned by Quine either. It took a long
time for Quine to see that you might do the same tricks he did in ‘Quantiﬁers
and Propositional Attitudes’ with necessity also, and he wrote a paper on it.
And, he said, not that he believes in necessity, that ‘I am in the position of a
Jewish chef preparing ham for a gentile clientele’ (Quine 1977, p. 270). Why it
took Quine a long time to realize this is a little obscure.) Quine’s treatment of
15
Alan Berger believes that there is yet another reading, a variant of (a): (∃x)(x is a person and
Hoover charged that x was a high ofﬁcial and the Berrigans planned to kidnap x). (Maybe, unbeknownst to Hoover, Kissinger had actually resigned.) If this is correct, we must read ‘a high ofﬁcial’
as ‘a person who is a high ofﬁcial’ and allow the deﬁnite description to be broken up so that ‘high
ofﬁcial’ still goes inside the operator. Whether this agrees with intuition, or is a reading allowable in
Russell’s theory, are issues I won’t discuss.
16
That the number of planets is nine has long been a standard philosophical example,
popularized by Quine. It is presupposed here, and its actual truth is irrelevant. While to claim
that ‘astronomers have changed their minds as to what the number of planets is’ makes sense, to
claim that ‘mathematicians have changed their minds as to what the number nine is’ seems barely
intelligible, let alone possibly true. This seems to me to be one further reason for adopting a ‘frankly
inequalitarian attitude’ towards two ways of supposedly designating the number nine. See my
discussion of Malcolm’s astronomical example in “On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge” (Chapter 2,
this volume), especially footnote 15 (p. 41). Here, I guess, we do need to pay attention to what a
committee of learned astronomers have said in correction of previous beliefs. (Footnote added in
2010.)
17
Experts in modal logic will recognize that this argument presupposes the ‘B’ axiom—what is
true could not have been necessarily false. Intuitively it certainly seems valid here.

Russell’s Notion of Scope

232

this was regarded as completely new. There is no reference to Russell in Quine’s
paper in the mid-ﬁfties. The linguists in the mid-sixties seemed to be rediscovering the same distinctions too. I do not know where I saw this, but
I remember, particularly, reading a paper by Emmon Bach calling this a ‘very
recently noticed distinction’. But these distinctions and the theory of them,
which may be different from the theories proposed by some of these later
linguists and by Quine, were all in Russell’s paper. Moreover, Quine criticized
Arthur Smullyan, who simply applied Russell’s scope distinctions to necessity,
and stated that you don’t necessarily get a paradox from universal substitutivity
of identity and statements about the number of planets. The story is well told
in a paper by Stephen Neale.18 Now, the wide scope interpretation ‘quantiﬁes
into’ a modal context. So Quine could still object on the grounds that he
regards this as ‘essentialist’. Instead, he calls Smullyan’s proposal a ‘modiﬁcation’ of Russell’s theory, which he erroneously thought allowed distinctions of
scope only in the case of failure of existence and uniqueness (and this, he says,
was indispensable for the idea that Russellian descriptions can serve as a
surrogate for a theory that takes them as genuine terms). This is not true for
intensional contexts, as is emphasized, surely, in ‘On Denoting’, though the
case of a necessity operator is not treated (Russell’s other writings showed that
he regarded such an operator as illegitimate), and also in Principia Mathematica. At the very end of *14 of Principia in *14.3, but also in the special cases
following, *14.31 et al., it is asserted that in truth-functional contexts, if the
existence and uniqueness conditions are fulﬁlled, then the scope of a single
description included in that truth-functional context does not matter:
*14.3

{8p 8q ((p  q)  f (p)  f (q))  E!( x)(x)} 
f {[( x)(x)] å( x)(x))  [( x)(x)] f (å( x)(x)}

*14.31

E!( x)(x) 
{([( x)(x)] p  å( x)(x))  (p  [( x)(x)] å( x)(x))}

Ø

Ø

Ø

Ø

Ø

Ø

Ø

Ø

Ø
Ø

This is the content of *14.31 and subsequent theorems all the way down to the
end of *14. Russell says on p. 186,
Propositions of the above type might be continued indeﬁnitely but as they are proved on a
uniform plan, it is unnecessary to go beyond the fundamental cases of p  q, p, p  q,
and p · q. (PM, p. 186)

Thus he clearly asserts that we could continue this for more complex cases.19
A whole school of writers has emerged who state that Principia does not
contain metatheorems, a school that includes Dreben, van Heijenoort and

18

Quine (1953a), Smullyan (1948). Neale (1999).
*14.3 is not an ‘ofﬁcial’ theorem of Principia, because quantiﬁcation over propositions has
not been introduced. Thus *14.31 et al. are proved independently, not deduced from *14.3.
19

Russell’s Notion of Scope

233

Goldfarb.20 The assertions following and preceding21 *14.3 are an explicit
counterexample to their claim, though there are many others, and this is not
even the most important counterexample. It is an explicit metatheorem that in a
truth-functional context the scope of a single description does not matter.
Russell may treat this as equivalent to a far more powerful metatheorem that
scopes, even with multiple descriptions, and so on, never matter in an extensional
context, if we assume an appropriate hypothesis that the existence and uniqueness conditions are fulﬁlled. Actually, as I have said, his result applies only to a
truth-functional context with just one (occurrence of a) description without free
variables and no descriptions embedded within the descriptions or quantiﬁed
into. A statement of the more general case will be discussed later. At any rate,
Quine originally said that Smullyan was modifying Russell’s theory of descriptions because according to Russell scope never matters when the existence and
uniqueness conditions are fulﬁlled, even in intensional contexts, contrary to
Smullyan’s treatment. In fact, Russell emphasizes just the opposite.
I pointed out the relevant passages of Principia to Quine. In the copy of his
book From a Logical Point of View which Quine donated to the library at Bellagio
he wrote in the margin, ‘Kripke has convinced me that Russell shared Smullyan’s
position’. And in the 1980 edition, the criticism of Smullyan is ﬁnally deleted,
and explicitly said to be deleted because it was wrong. (The story is well told by
Stephen Neale in ‘On a Milestone of Empiricism’.) But still Quine misses
something here; because there isn’t a position to be taken, there is simply an
analysis of descriptions, and it either follows that scope matters in an intensional
context, or it does not. There is nothing to postulate. Smullyan might propose a
different analysis, but if he is following Russell’s analysis, what he says either
accords with Russell’s analysis or it does not. And it does.
And eventually Quine applied his own and (at least at that time) more famous
analysis to the same thing. Now whether Russell has taken care of all of these
issues about ambiguities in, especially, the indeﬁnite article ‘a’ and the deﬁnite
article ‘the’, is a point of controversy, even in contemporary linguistic literature,
and we need not discuss this, but the amazing thing is that Russell’s discussion
was completely ignored.
20
Dreben and van Heijenoort (1986), in Feferman et al. (see pp. 44–5). Goldfarb (1979). See
also Hylton (1990). Other writers could be mentioned. I hope to write on the general topic of
metatheorems and metatheoretical ideas in Principia elsewhere.
21
The assertion following has been quoted above. For the assertion preceding, see p. 184. ‘This
proposition [that is, that scope is irrelevant when the existence and uniqueness conditions are
fulﬁlled—S.K.] cannot be proved generally [that is, for arbitrary contexts, including intensional
contexts—S.K.], but it can be proved in each particular case [that is, in every context actually used in
Principia, which supposedly are all truth-functional—S.K.]. The proposition can be proved
generally when ( x)(x) occurs in the form å( x)(x), and å( x)(x) occurs in what we may call a
‘truth-function’, i.e. a function whose truth or falsehood depends only upon the truth or falsehood
of its argument or arguments’ (Principia, 184). The last sentence expresses the content of *14.3.
The middle clause (‘but it can be proved in each particular case’) expresses the same metatheorem as
the assertion on p. 186 quoted in the text above.

Ø

Ø

Ø

234

Russell’s Notion of Scope

It must be mentioned also that, in the period when Russell’s analysis of scope
ambiguities was largely ignored, Alonzo Church did not ignore it, but actually
stated that scope ambiguities were a weakness in Russell’s approach.22
I state, hopefully, that this ignorance or misconception is no longer the case,
and that now, everyone knows about the virtues of Russell’s treatment of scope
distinctions. Ramsey called this paper a ‘paradigm of philosophy’. Paradigm of
philosophy, famous paper indeed! It appears that few read it, or took it seriously,
except for Russell and his own immediate circle. Nor did they read the relevant
sections of Principia.23
Russell has two targets (contrasting philosophers) in his paper, Frege and
Meinong. I also want to say a bit about the later famous criticisms of Strawson
(whose views resemble Frege’s in some respects, in spite of quite different
motivations.) Of Meinong I know very little, outside of what Russell reports.
According to Russell, he holds that non-existent entities, such as the king of
France (and even the king of France who is not king) have some sort of weak
existence, but all the properties attributed to them (so that, as Russell says, the
law of contradiction can be violated). Sometimes I have wondered whether
Meinong (at least the Meinong of ‘On Denoting’) was an imaginary ﬁgure
invented by Russell, who was so upset that he did not really exist that he invented
a doctrine that even beings like him have some weaker form of existence!24
Now, I might mention something which also has a parallel in ‘On Denoting’,
but is clear on p. 186 of Principia, in the discussion of ‘the King of France is not
bald’. Either interpretation, that is narrow or wide scope, might be meant by this:
it is not the case that there is a unique king of France and that whoever is king of
France is bald (narrow scope) or there is a unique king of France and he is not
bald (wide scope), in effect. But Principia says that it is more natural to take the
second, false interpretation, as the meaning of the words. And we have here the
germ of a reply to Strawson’s much later criticisms. If you are asked, ‘So, look, is
the king of France bald or isn’t he?’ you feel reluctant to answer either yes or no.
One’s reluctance could be explained by the simple remark that the second reply
naturally abbreviates, ‘No, the present king of France is not bald’. Given the
remark in Principia, that the wide scope interpretation is the more natural one,
we get an explanation of the reluctance that it is purely Russellian.25
22

Church (1950) p. 63.
Smullyan (1948), Prior (1963), Fitch (1949), and, in agreement with him, his student Ruth
Marcus (then Ruth Barcan; see Barcan 1948), were shining exceptions in their grasp of the
intensional aspects of Russellian scope distinctions. (Fitch and Marcus are not totally free of
criticism in this regard.)
24
Actually, of course, in previous writings Russell took the actual Meinong seriously and
discussed him with respect. My own ignorance remains.
25
Russell’s own late reply to Strawson, ‘Mr. Strawson on Referring’ (Russell 1957) emphasizes
that Strawson’s discussion relies on contextual matters (such as ‘present’ in ‘the present King of
France’) that are not highly relevant to the issue. On the level Strawson presents the matter, Russell
seems to me to be basically right about this point, but on a deeper analysis, Strawson’s problem can
23

Russell’s Notion of Scope

235

Actually, I consider Strawson’s ‘On Referring’ a marvellous paper, but it’s too
strong in claiming to be a refutation of Russell’s theory, that’s for sure.26
Why the somewhat impolite phrase ‘is bald’ in Russell’s example? (Strawson
decorously changes it to ‘is wise’ without even saying that he has altered Russell’s
example.) Here’s what Russell says:
If we say “the King of England is bald”, that is, it would seem, not a statement about the
complex meaning “the King of England”, but about the actual man denoted by the
meaning. (1905, p. 46)

Edward VII was king of England at that time, and bald he was, I am told. Russell
goes on:
But now consider “the King of France is bald”. By parity of form, this also ought to be
about the denotation of the phrase “the King of France”. But this phrase, though it has a
meaning provided “the King of England” has a meaning, has certainly no denotation, at
least in any obvious sense. (ibid, p. 46)

Probably this is all Russell means, the analogy. (It would be just possible that he
had in mind the sort of mischaracterization or misdescription of the speaker’s
referent made famous in Donnellan’s paper: ‘Hey, no, stupid, it’s the King of
England you’re thinking of, not the King of France’.27 But, there’s no indication
here of that.) Russell continues:
Hence one would suppose that “the King of France is bald” ought to be nonsense; but it is
not nonsense, since it is plainly false. (ibid, p. 46)

Both Frege and Strawson would rightly complain that this begs the question
against them, that the dichotomy is not correct, true-or-false or otherwise
meaningless; it might be meaningful but lacking in truth-value.28, 29 However,
still be upheld, and his distinction between sentence and statement is certainly important.
Furthermore, aside from all this, the question what to do with empty descriptions survives, but
this is not the whole of the problem. Moreover, in one passage he comes a bit too close to stressing
the syntactic ambiguities of ordinary language, perhaps giving the misleading impression that he
agrees with the view of Quine discussed below that he was not attempting to analyse ordinary
language. But then his reply to Strawson, and the entire debate, would be superﬂuous. I hope to
discuss all this elsewhere.
26
Stephen Neale reports to me that Grice once quipped that ‘On Referring’ was a wonderful
paper marred only by a discussion of Russell’s theory of descriptions!
27
Donnellan (1966).
28
Actually Strawson is ambiguous as to whether there are truth-gaps here; or no ‘statement’ has
been made (even though the sentence is meaningful), and ‘statements’ must be true-or-false, that is,
have no truth-gaps. I once asked Strawson about this question. If I understood him correctly, he
acknowledged the ambiguity but said that the second position was really the intended one. Stephen
Neale, who also asked Strawson, reports the same reply in Neale (1990).
29
Perhaps this is the place to discuss the view given the authority of W. V. Quine in his famous
Word and Object (Quine 1960, see especially p. 259): for ordinary language Strawson is right about
the truth-gaps, but for a symbolic language they are an engineer’s ‘don’t care’ cases, ﬁllable
arbitrarily for technical convenience:

236

Russell’s Notion of Scope

Strawson (who was criticizing Russell’s paper) overlooks other examples Russell
already gives that refute the view that whenever you have an empty deﬁnite
description there is no truth-value:
Or again consider such a proposition as the following: “If u is a class which has only one
member, then that one member is a member of u,” or, as we may state it, “If u is a unit
class, the u is a u”. (ibid, p. 46)

This is deﬁnitely true. We can assume the quantiﬁer u ranges over classes. Two
points are ignored by Strawson here. First, that descriptions can be quantiﬁed
into, they need not be phrases without variables like ‘the present King of France’,
but might contain variables that are bound by outside quantiﬁers. Second, that
conditionals of this type can be true even though, according to Frege and to
Strawson, some of the instances of the quantiﬁcation lack truth-value. So this
would be a refutation of both Frege and Strawson.30 It’s also, it seems to me, a
refutation of what is later stated by Hilbert and Bernays, who say that in both
ordinary language and mathematics, we require that a description containing
variables be everywhere deﬁned, when it is used.31 Hilbert and Bernays’s

(1) In ‘On Denoting’, p. 47, Russell criticizes Frege for doing exactly such artiﬁcial gap ﬁlling (of
empty denotations): ‘But this procedure, though it may not lead to actual logical error, is
plainly artiﬁcial, and does not give an exact analysis of the matter’. ‘On Denoting’ is intended to
be a contribution to the philosophy of natural language and of thought.
(2) Other ‘friends’ of Russell—including occasionally, the later Russell himself—have ‘defended’
him as merely proposing an artiﬁcial symbolic convention. But they are surely wrong about ‘On
Denoting’ and unjust to Russell’s true contribution.
(3) Taken as such a convention, it is a poor one. Why not use ‘(∃x)(Ax  Fx)’ for ‘the A Fs’, or
alternatively, ‘(8 x) (Ax  Fx)’? These are simpler, ﬁll the ‘don’t care’ cases arbitrarily, and don’t
invoke identity. When I and other logicians have given courses on formalized elementary
number theory, we have used precisely the ﬁrst convention. (Normally the appropriate
uniqueness condition is fulﬁlled.) I have even heard someone attribute a view to some
linguist that this is the correct analysis for natural language!
(4) Intuitively, Strawson and Frege are not always right about the gaps. Russell already gave true
cases (e.g. ‘my only son’, as discussed below). Further, a con-man who says, ‘My company owns
the largest of the many corn farms in Kansas’, when he owns no company and (‘South Paciﬁc’
notwithstanding—‘I feel as corny as Kansas in August’) Kansas grows wheat (and little or no
‘corn’ in the American sense) and he has no such farm, would be normally considered a liar,
uttering a falsehood. (My thanks to S. B. Coots for the information about the crops and Kansas.)
(5) Strawson eventually conceded such cases (in Strawson (1964)). In assuming as late as 1960 that
Strawson is always right about the gaps, Quine is being ‘more Catholic than the Pope’ and
ignores Russell’s own counterexamples!
30
Actually Frege wouldn’t allow this because it’s not a genuine function unless it’s everywhere
deﬁned, but intuitively Frege is wrong, and he has to provide artiﬁcial denotations for empty terms.
Now, of course, there are other theories of presupposition that are not refuted by this example.
I am well aware of various theories and have discussed the so-called projection problem myself
(Chapter 12, this volume). My point is that the theories actually propounded by Frege and Strawson
are refuted. In terms of the modern discussion of the projection problem they reﬂect the so-called
cumulative hypothesis of Langendoen and Savin (1971).
31
Hilbert and Bernays (1934).

Russell’s Notion of Scope

237

statement about ordinary language and mathematics is false in connection with
Russell’s conditional and similar cases.32
Even for the singular case, without variables in the description, Russell gives an
example of a conditional truth that contains vacuous descriptions:
The King in “The Tempest” might say, “If Ferdinand is not drowned, Ferdinand is my
only son”. Now ‘my only son’ is a denoting phrase, which, on the face of it, has a
denotation when, and only when, I have exactly one son. But the above statement
would nevertheless have remained true if Ferdinand had been in fact drowned. (1905,
p. 47)33

A better case, perhaps, would be if there were two children, Ferdinand and Sue,
and the King had said, ‘if Ferdinand is drowned, then Sue is my only remaining
child’. This is still a true statement, even if ‘my only remaining child’ might be
vacuous. It might even be the case that at least one description would have to
be vacuous. Consider the following disjunction (forget about the incomplete
descriptions here, another problem, perhaps, but they could be ﬁlled out): You
are to imagine that a last minute peace conference has taken place, and the
deadline is over, but the speaker has not heard news of the result.
(8) Either the peace treaty has been drawn up and signed or the war has broken
out.34
One of the two descriptions is vacuous, but we don’t know which, and nevertheless may assert the disjunction.
So, Russell has an interesting range of counterexamples to both Frege and
Strawson here. I do not discuss another, more complicated argument Russell uses
against Frege in ‘On Denoting’, the famous and obscure ‘Gray’s Elegy’ argument.35 But anyway, as we have just seen, there are much simpler arguments
against Frege that are in Russell’s paper.
Now in an earlier correspondence between Russell and Frege, which has been
made famous in papers by Joseph Almog and by Nathan Salmon, Frege says that
surely Mont Blanc with all its snowﬁelds is not a constituent of the proposition,
of the thought, that Mont Blanc is over 1000 metres high. And Russell replies
(roughly), ‘Yes, that’s what I think, Mont Blanc with all its snowﬁelds is a

32
Parallel instances are given later by Benson Mates (Mates 1973) in refutation of Strawson, but
Russell already mentions such a case. Mates appears not to notice this. Mates does give mathematical
examples in addition to Russell’s that are quite natural, refuting Hilbert and Bernays.
33
Mates does notice this example from ‘On Denoting’.
34
Those linguists engaged in the projection problem no doubt recognize cases like these (and
Russell’s ‘Ferdinand’ case). However, I myself recall giving the example (8) to G. H. von Wright as
early as 1962, presumably long before this literature, or at least most of it. All the more so, the same
holds for Russell and his original examples! My thanks to Stephen Neale for a correction of the
example.
35
Salmon (2005) discusses this argument.

238

Russell’s Notion of Scope

constituent of the proposition’. This correspondence is mentioned in a footnote
in ‘On Denoting’:
In the proposition “Mont Blanc is over 1000 metres high”, it is, according to him, the
meaning of “Mont Blanc”, not the actual mountain, that is the constituent of the meaning
of the proposition. (Russell 1905, p. 46)

And Russell here is surprised, I guess, and disagrees. I had the good fortune of a
trip to Switzerland recently where I saw Mont Blanc from my own hotel window
‘with all its snowﬁelds’. I looked very hard but could not see whether it itself or
only its Sinn was a constituent of the relevant proposition. But at least I knew
what they were talking about anyway. Frege seemed to think that the snowﬁelds
made Russell’s view implausible. If so, maybe global warming will eventually
help Russell.
Now let’s take Russell’s arguments for his theory otherwise.
I shall therefore state three puzzles which a theory as to denoting ought to be able to solve;
and I shall show later that my theory solves them.
(I) If a is identical with b, whatever is true of the one is true of the other. . . . Now
George IV wished to know whether Scott was the author of Waverley; and in fact Scott
was the author of Waverley. Hence we may substitute Scott for the author of “Waverley,”
and thereby prove that George IV wished to know whether Scott was Scott. Yet an
interest in the law of identity can hardly be attributed to the ﬁrst gentleman of Europe.
(1905, p. 47)

Now, ﬁrst, in this example I would replace ‘wished to know’ with ‘wished that he
should know’—not only does it involve the famous newer problem of the de se, it
is a double embedding (and involves intermediate scope problems), whereas
Russell is considering this as a single embedding. Therefore I change it to ‘George
IV wondered whether Scott was the author of Waverley ’ or ‘George IV asked
whether Scott was the author of Waverley’, which was in fact the case at the
famous banquet.36
The last sentence is a bit of an insult. Most regard the law of identity as
obvious, though a few philosophers have questioned it. George IV appears in
almost all places to have been a rather bad man, though not all bad,37 but he was
one of the most intelligent and educated kings in the history of the British
36
There is supposed to have been a famous dinner where George IV asked Scott whether he
wrote Waverley, and Scott falsely denied having written it. (Actually, George IV, then only ‘Prince
Regent’ not ‘King’, prepared a toast to ‘the author of Waverley’, implicitly asking Scott to
acknowledge authorship.) Scott wrote a series of novels anonymously. The ﬁrst one was Waverley.
A derogator of Scott wrote recently in the New York Times that all of these novels, famous in their
own days, are far from classics, and every single one of them is out of print except for Ivanhoe, which
has to be read in American high schools. (Later, after I said this in this very talk, a professional writer
told me that the novels are in print.)
37
His secret marriage and devotion to his Catholic wife, when British law then forbade marriage
between royalty and Catholics, strikes me as exemplary. He also struck an alliance with Charles Fox,
the leading British progressive of his time, though this may have been for opportunistic reasons.

Russell’s Notion of Scope

239

monarchy. He is more likely to have been interested in this than any other
English king I can think of, if I understand the relevant history correctly. So he
might well have known what is meant by the phrase, ‘law of identity’. (An
interesting ﬁgure actually. If you’ve seen the play or the ﬁlm, The Madness of King
George—the madness is that of his predecessor, George III—his character is fairly
well delineated.)
I will skip for the moment the next two puzzles, which are simpler. This one
involves an intensional context. Russell says, ‘The puzzle about George IV’s
curiosity is now seen to have a very simple solution’ (Russell 1905, p. 51).
When we say George IV wished to know whether so-and-so—and I replace
this by wondered whether so-and-so or asked whether so-and-so—or when we
say that so-and-so is surprising, so-and-so must be a proposition.
Now here’s where the distinction between primary and secondary occurrences
is ﬁrst made, and used, in the paragraph:
When we say . . . “So-and-so is surprising” or “So-and-so is true,” etc., the “so-and-so”
must be a proposition. Suppose now that “so-and-so” contains a denoting phrase. We
may either eliminate this denoting phrase from the subordinate proposition “so-and-so,”
or from the whole proposition in which ‘so-and-so’ is a mere constituent. Different
propositions result according to which we do. I have heard of a touchy owner of yacht to
whom a guest, on ﬁrst seeing it, remarked, “I thought your yacht was larger than it is”;
and the owner replied, “No, my yacht is not larger than it is”. (1905, p. 52)

I have always enjoyed this witty joke and myself use a simpler version, which
I have actually tried out in practice.
A: Hello. Oh, sorry, I thought you were someone else.
B: No, I am not someone else.

This is an ambiguity involving an indeﬁnite description. Is person A saying
‘There is an x such that x is not you and I thought you were x’? If so, the
existential quantiﬁer has outer scope. But taking it with the inner scope, what A is
saying is ‘I thought that there is an x such that: x is not you and x is you. This joke
actually works—a bit anyway.
Russell’s old example may be a good joke too. I have done some research on
yachts in order to ﬁgure it out.38 Surprisingly enough, though the size of a yacht
might be thought to be measured in cubic measure—since, after all it’s a
three dimensional object—it is in fact measured in linear measure. And it
doesn’t mean the length of the yacht or the length of the keel on the bottom
or any such thing, but is given by a complex formula using various factors
Otherwise, he was foppish, corrupt, and a schemer. And his relations with a later wife were much
less admirable.
38
From ‘Yachting’ in my edition of The Encyclopedia Britannica (1953). In 1905, the formula
for yacht size was actually different in different countries. The next year (1906), there was a new
formula adopted throughout Europe.

240

Russell’s Notion of Scope

involving the yacht, but comes out linear, so a yacht could be 30 metres or
30 yards, but that doesn’t mean its length, but its size. Russell speaks not of its
length but rather of its size: it is thirty metres in size. Russell’s analysis of these
things, I said, was ignored too much; now, perhaps, it is ignored too much the
other way: the joke is wrong. The meaning attributed to the guest by the owner
is that of:
(9) I thought that the size of your yacht was greater than the size of your yacht.
That’s impossible, and that’s what the owner is complaining about. But what the
guest actually meant was:
(10) The size that I thought your yacht was is greater than the size that your
yacht is.
That implies that there was a unique size that the guest thought the yacht was. Say,
if the yacht was 30 metres in size, he thought it was 35 metres in size. But that
plainly need not be true: who said that he previously had any exact idea of the size
of the yacht? He doesn’t have to, and he still can be surprised and say ‘I thought
your yacht was larger than it is’. The point is stronger when one realizes that yacht
size, rather than length, is in question, though the point holds for the weaker
notion.39 So Russell’s analysis in terms of his theory of descriptions, as stated, is
incorrect. I believe my own example is correct. That is an advantage.
(However, since I said the preceding paragraph, Nathan Salmon, with whom
I discussed the problem some time ago—probably a year or more—has recently
come up with a purely Russellian analysis. His initial reaction had been to use the
apparatus he set up in his book Frege’s Puzzle. Now Salmon points out that the
sentence ‘I thought that: your yacht was larger than it is’ must be analysed as
‘I thought that: the size of your yacht was greater than the size of your yacht’,
which simply does not contain the description ‘the size I thought your yacht was’,
but rather simply ‘the size of your yacht’. Give all occurrences of descriptions
inner scope and you get the yacht owner’s jocular (or ‘touchy’) reply. Give the
second occurrence of the description outer scope and the ﬁrst inner scope and
you get a plausible analysis of the guest’s remark.)
How to ﬁx up Russell’s example is a little complicated, and not clear.40 As far
as I know, no one has noted that his famous example is, in fact, wrong. There
need be no such size as the size the guest thought the yacht was.41
39
It would be very difﬁcult to establish the exact size of a yacht, or even get a close estimate, at a
glance since the formula for calculating it is complicated. The question of yacht size should not be
confused with the question of yacht length.
40
Remember I said this before Salmon talked to me about his new proposal. I was unconvinced
by his earlier proposal.
41
If one took Russell’s example as given, with ‘the size I thought your yacht was’, an obvious
proposal is to replace sizes by size intervals, a proposal I had thought of myself. It is not devoid of
problems, and to make it plausible the intervals must be vague in their boundaries. (In the

Russell’s Notion of Scope

241

Now back to the George IV example, modiﬁed in the way I have suggested so
as to disallow intermediate scope: ‘George IV asked whether the author of
Waverley was Scott’. The inner scope (or secondary) analysis will be:
(11) George IV asked whether there is an x such that x and only x wrote
Waverley, and x = Scott.
Now, intuitively one trouble with this, which has been largely overlooked in the
literature, is that it does look from Russell’s analysis as if one thing George IV
wanted to know is whether exactly one person wrote Waverley.42 Perhaps it was
written in collaboration (a possibility Russell mentions elsewhere, in connection
with another book that was written in collaboration). But probably, in fact,
George IV presupposed it was not the product of a collaboration. On the other
hand, Scott could perhaps be allowed to reply, ‘Actually it was written in
collaboration’. And though George IV would be surprised, it is not ruled out.
Nevertheless, there is a bit of a question about the orthodox Russellian analysis
here.
But now consider, worse, the large scope analysis. (In the ﬁrst part of the talk it
looked as if I came to praise Russell; perhaps now it looks as if I came to bury
him. But I think this a marvellous piece of work.) So the other analysis is:
(12) There is an x such that x and x alone wrote Waverley, and George IV asked
whether x = Scott.
Now, Russell comments, ‘This would be true, for example, if George IV had seen
Scott at a distance, and had asked “Is that Scott?”’ (Russell 1905, p. 52).
Common sense suggests this would be a reasonable interpretation. However,
we are not just dealing with common sense here, but with Russell’s theory.
Russell’s characterization is a good common sense interpretation of the large
scope analysis. However, this is an existential quantiﬁer and the variable takes a
unique value. What can that value be? Scott himself! But then the ﬁrst gentleman
of Europe is interested in an instance of the law of identity, after all! Since the
value of the propositional function here is Scott = Scott, the question would
express an interest in the law of identity. Now, in the paper, Russell introduces
his famous distinction between knowledge by acquaintance and knowledge by
description and says we often use deﬁnite descriptions to denote objects we know
only by description and are not acquainted with. In particular, we’re not
acquainted with the centre of the mass of the sun. We are also not acquainted
discussion Jason Stanley mentioned a paper on comparatives in linguistics published in 1976 that
had noticed the problem and made such a proposal, but at the time of this writing I have not
received the reference.)
42
I am indebted to Christopher Peacocke for pointing out to me that this possible problem for
Russell’s theory was in fact already discussed by Peter Geach (though the example is no longer
George IV and Waverley, it is in fact quite similar; see Geach (1967: 631). A similar problem,
involving indeﬁnite descriptions and ‘wishes that’ is attributed to Geach by Prior (1968: 105–6).

242

Russell’s Notion of Scope

with other minds, he says at the end of the paper. However, there is no suggestion
that Scott is to be identiﬁed with his mind here, nor that ‘Scott’ is anything other
than a genuine proper name. If so, to repeat, an interest in the law of identity has
been attributed to the ﬁrst gentleman of Europe! This despite the fact that his
interpretation of the large scope analysis is a very commonsensical one. (That is,
intuitively it might seem to be quite reasonable.)43
As time went on, Russell’s doctrine of acquaintance grew narrower and
narrower. By the time of his Lectures on Logical Atomism, we are not acquainted
with Scott himself, nor even with a time-slice of Scott. I would have liked to have
thought that we were acquainted only with the things in our minds, but that
never appears to have been Russell’s view. Perhaps we are acquainted only with
things in our own brain. (I don’t really get it.) When I said something about our
own mind, a Russell scholar (Gideon Makin) referred to the relevant references.
Either way, we’re not acquainted with Scott anymore, and ‘Scott’ will be a
disguised deﬁnite description and this particular problem is solved.
Some later writers have concluded from this type of example—Nathan Salmon
is the most elaborate one—that one can wonder whether a = a, but not whether a
is self-identical, and set up an apparatus allowing the distinction.44 I do not think
that this distinction is available to Russell in his apparatus, either in Principia or in
‘On Denoting’. So I don’t think that this will go for Russell,45 and the doctrine of

43

For a parallel discussion, see Soames (2003) Ch. 5. (I thank Stephen Neale for this reference.)
Soames correctly observes that Russell would be saved by his later views about acquaintance, which
allows acquaintance with very few things; certainly not Scott (and of ‘Scott’ as therefore a disguised
description). But then, as he says, Russell’s example and analysis would be destroyed. To suggest
that Russell already denied that George IV was ‘acquainted’ with Scott seems therefore, to be quite
impossible. In 1905, he even still seems to suppose, as we have seen above, that Mont Blanc is a
genuine component of a proposition, so that we must be genuinely acquainted with the mountain
(at least if we have seen it).
44
See Salmon (1986), and Salmon and Soames (1988) (see especially their introduction to the
collection and Salmon (1986a). Salmon and Soames are the principal advocates of the approach
mentioned.
45
In a personal communication Salmon assures me that at least he (I’m not so sure about
Soames) never thought that he was in agreement with Russell in this respect, even though I can attest
that intelligent readers sympathetic with Salmon’s position took him that way, and I did too.
However, Salmon makes no explicit claim either way, as far as I know, and those readers have simply
read it in. An explicit denial that he is purely Russellian here would have been highly desirable.
The Salmon–Soames apparatus depends on a distinction between ºxx (a) and (a), which
supposedly are different propositions. Then ‘a is self-identical’ is expressed by ‘ºx (x = x)(a)’,
while ‘a = a’ expresses a different proposition. One can doubt or even disbelieve the latter, but
not the former (unless one is an exceptional and bad philosopher). Russell has his own more
cumbersome notation in Principia for ºxx. Though the Salmon–Soames apparatus may seem to
give a reasonably plausible solution to the philosophical problem of ‘reﬂexivity’, it seems to me to be
plainly unavailable to Russell for the following reasons:
(a) The very term ‘propositional function’ clearly suggests that Russell did not intend any
distinction between ºxx (a) and  (a). Nor does a mathematician analogously intend any
distinction between ºx (x !)(3) and the number 6. Nor did Church, inventor of the lambda
notation, intend any such distinction.

Russell’s Notion of Scope

243

acquaintance better be narrowed as much as possible to get rid of these examples,
even though they seem like common sense.
So, two things have been ignored. First, up to a certain late point, Russell’s
important treatment of scope distinctions of descriptions in intensional contexts,
and even in extensional contexts, was unduly neglected. Second, every single
example Russell actually gives for intensional contexts is either questionable or
deﬁnitely wrong according to Russell’s own philosophy, or to the truth. The ﬁrst
has ﬁnally come through;46 the second, as far as I know, has been largely
unnoticed and unknown.47 Nevertheless, Russell is right. Scope does matter in
intensional contexts. Too bad his own examples have these problems. The
Smullyan example, involving modality, is much more straightforward than the
examples as Russell gives them, involving propositional attitudes.
About deﬁnite descriptions in extensional contexts, surely Russell’s beautiful
joke foreshadows his later comments on the tendency to construe ‘the present
King of France is not bald’ with the widest possible scope.
By the law of excluded middle, either “A is B” or “A is not B” must be true. Hence either
“the present King of France is bald” or “the present King of France is not bald” must be
true. Yet if we enumerated the things that are bald, and the things that are not bald, we
should not ﬁnd the present King of France in either list. Hegelians, who love a synthesis,
will conclude that he wears a wig. (Russell 1905, p. 48)

The late Gareth Evans once mentioned to me in conversation that Russell’s
theory predicts more ambiguities than actually occur, and this remark was meant
to be an objection to Russell. Now, ﬁrst, it can be some credit to Russell’s theory
that it predicts the existence of scope ambiguities that actually do occur, and
predicts them from the very nature of the theory, not as some sort of ad hoc
(b) Russell obviously intends to use the existence of scope distinctions in intensional and even
extensional contexts as an important argument that deﬁnite descriptions are not genuine names
or terms, but rather require his quantiﬁcational analysis. But given Salmon’s ideas about the
lambda notation this argument is lost. For example one could distinguish between ºx George IV
believes x (the author of Waverley) and George IV believes (the author of Waverley). This
solution resembles Quine’s, and I believe something close to it (using the lambda notation) is
made explicitly by Robert Stalnaker and Richmond Thomason (1968).
Moreover, I myself am disinclined to accept Salmon’s idea for the following reasons:
(a0 ) Consideration (a) above strikes me as correct in terms of the truth, not just for Russell.
(b0 ) If Salmon is right, there are distinct propositions (a), ºxx(a), ºyºx x(y)(a), and so on ad
inﬁnitum, all closely related but distinct. If n-place relations are involved, the situation comes
to involve complicated inﬁnite trees. Is all this really plausible?
(c0 ) Someone might argue against the necessity of identity by claiming that only the self-identity of
x is necessary, while the identity of x and x is contingent. Similarly, he or she might ‘refute’
Salmon’s own argument against vague identity by a parallel argument. Surely Salmon should be
wary of this. I am.
46

But see note 9 on Davidson above.
With the shining exception of Scott Soames’s discussion of the large scope reading of Russell’s
George IV-Walter Scott example, as mentioned above.
47

244

Russell’s Notion of Scope

solution to a problem. But second, I think, however, that any defender of Russell
must concede that in ordinary language the predicted scope ambiguities don’t all
occur and are subject to some restrictive conditions. There are various restrictions, expressions such as ‘a certain’ that often call for a wider scope, and perhaps
‘scope islands’. Already in Principia Russell mentions that in ‘the King of France
is not bald’, the wide scope interpretation is to be preferred. Moreover, Russell
himself, as we have seen, regards ‘If Ferdinand has not drowned, then Ferdinand
is my only son’ uttered by King Alonso in The Tempest, as true even if Ferdinand
has drowned, and there is no son. He does not say that the statement is ambiguous, and on a wide scope interpretation is false if Ferdinand drowned. Perhaps
Russell is inconsistent. If we wish to be charitable, we must commit him to the
view that not all scopes are allowed in English.
Now Delia Graff Fara48—and maybe this is even in an earlier paper by George
Wilson49—observes that we cannot construe ‘Aristotle was not a philosopher’ as
having a true interpretation, namely:
(13) There exists an x such that x is a philosopher and x 6¼ Aristotle.
(13) is true, but no one would take ‘Aristotle was not a philosopher’ in this way.
The corresponding case for deﬁnite descriptions is more delicate, but Graff Fara
and Wilson are surely right in the indeﬁnite description case. Graff Fara uses this
example as part of an argument, which surely has independent intuitive appeal,
as mentioned already by Strawson and Geach,50 that sometimes when you use
the word ‘the’ in the predicate after ‘is’ we are predicating something of the object
rather than identifying it, that this is an ‘is’ of predication rather than of identity.
In ‘Gödel was the greatest logician of the twentieth century’, we seem to be
predicating something of Gödel rather than identifying him with the greatest
logician of the twentieth century.51 Russell says, in Introduction to Mathematical
Philosophy, that in ‘Socrates is a man’ the ‘is’ used is the ‘is’ of identity:
(14) There is an x such that x is human and Socrates = x.
48
Graff Fara (2001). Graff Fara gives a long list of references concerned with her main issue,
predicative vs. objectual interpretations of deﬁnite descriptions, including Wilson’s paper
mentioned next, but as we shall see, seems ignorant of the earliest and most basic one.
49
Wilson (1978).
50
See Graff Fara (2001) for the references.
51
Probably the example is better if it is false, with the qualiﬁcation below. (I think the statement
about Gödel is true.) But (with all due respect to him), ‘Quine is the greatest logician of the
twentieth century’ is a false statement about Quine (I don’t think he would have disputed my
assertion), but does not erroneously equate Quine with Gödel. (Graff Fara already mentions the
importance of false examples.)
The example could be improved further if the somewhat artiﬁcial tenseless ‘is’ beloved of
philosophers were replaced by the more common tensed use of ‘was’, ‘Gödel was the greatest
logician of the twentieth century’. The ‘was’ certainly does not suggest that maybe Gödel became
someone else later. Nor does ‘Bill Clinton was the president of the US, but he is no longer’. (Grice
and Myro, who believed that such changes of identity are possible—I don’t—are not supported by
such examples.)

Russell’s Notion of Scope

245

On the other hand, in ‘Socrates is human’, the ‘is’ simply predicates ‘human’ of
Socrates. Richard Montague, apparently in ignorance of Russell (at least, he
doesn’t cite him, as far as I can remember), tries to treat ‘Socrates is human’ as
simply an abbreviated form of ‘Socrates is a man’, and accepts Russell’s interpretation of the latter, thus eliminating the ‘is’ of predication altogether.52 (Russell,
in contrast, regards it as scandalous that ‘is’ is used ambiguously between predication and identity.) But intuitively one might feel the exact opposite, namely, that
it’s ‘is a man’ which is the predicate, that the ‘is’ here is the ‘is’ of predication. The
negative instance mentioned by Graff Fara (maybe something similar is already in
Wilson) could support this: ‘Socrates is not a man’ does not have a true interpretation either, whereas if all scopes were allowed it certainly would. Of course, this
can be gotten rid of by making a restriction on what scopes are allowed rather than
by abandoning the interpretation using the identity sign.
Really the basic argument for the predicative nature of ‘the’ in predicative
form is already in a very old example by Leonard Linsky.53 If someone says ‘De
Gaulle is not the King of France’ that would be a natural expression by an
opponent of de Gaulle who thinks he’s getting too big for his britches, and too
dictatorial. (Linsky himself imagines a parent instructing a child.) It would not
appear to presuppose the existence of any king of France, let alone to assert it,
and the wide scope interpretation is implausible. The statement seems to deny
the predication of something to de Gaulle. However, ‘The King of France is not
de Gaulle’ sounds a little weird, and seems more likely to have been asserted by a
monarchist, who regards de Gaulle as a pretender occupying the throne, which
should be occupied by a true Bourbon (or, more simply, someone who erroneously thinks that France is still a monarchy). Linsky’s example, much earlier than
Graff Fara (and even Wilson’s) has the germ of all the arguments given by Graff
Fara. The ﬁrst form, with ‘de Gaulle’ as subject is, Linsky argues, predicative, and
not the ‘is’ of identity. After all, Linsky points out, a 6¼ b should be equivalent to
b 6¼ a! (As President Clinton once said, it all depends on what ‘is’ is!) Yet Graff
Fara, careful to list all her predecessors, seems unaware of the Linsky paper.
Really, the Linsky paper foreshadows the later arguments. Take Fara’s central
case with indeﬁnites — that ‘Aristotle was not a philosopher’ has no true reading.
But now put ‘a philosopher’ in a subject position. (I invent an expanded dialogue
to make this more plausible.) ‘A [or: some] philosopher was not Aristotle himself,
but held that he faithfully followed all his positions’. ‘Who is it you have in
mind?’ ‘Averroes’. Then, with the indeﬁnite article in subject position, the wide
scope is the preferred interpretation, just as Linsky would have predicted.54
52

53
Thomason (1974).
Linsky (1960).
But I must admit ‘the greatest living logician is Ernest Nagel’, which I once heard seriously
afﬁrmed at a sister institution of Nagel’s own Columbia, strikes me as a false assertion about Nagel,
not about Gödel (who I think was alive). The same point is true of other assertions, the  is ł in x’,
which are ‘about’ x, so I suppose subject vs. predicate position is not the whole of the story.
54

246

Russell’s Notion of Scope

However, there is trouble here. ‘Yvonne de Gaulle did not marry the King of
France’, ‘Dora Black never married a philosopher’, and the like appear not to
have wide scope readings either, but ‘the King of France’, ‘a philosopher’ and so
on, do appear to be substantive objects of their verbs. (And Linsky’s argument
about a 6¼ b and b 6¼ a applies to ‘married’ also, since ‘married’ is a symmetric
relation.) Maybe the reason someone might make the statement about Yvonne is
sarcastically to deny that de Gaulle is king of France, but the statement appears to
be an assertion about the relation between two objects.55 (Graff Fara proposes a
theory that deﬁnite descriptions are really always predicative, but at this time
I have not studied her paper enough to comment, nor have I studied Wilson’s;
but I am relying on naive intuition, which is just as compelling here as in the
apparent predicative uses with the copula.)
Many times scope in a complicated case can be indicated by the form of the
words, and is unlikely to be interpreted otherwise:
(15) I mistakenly took it to be the case that the President of Harvard was a
teaching fellow
might be most naturally interpreted with inner scopes and as attributing a
dual role to the President of Harvard. Graff Fara predicative interpretation, at
least of the indeﬁnite, may also seem to be natural. Well, maybe. In fact, in
Princeton, the President at least at one time did teach sections of a course, but
that’s not the most likely interpretation of the displayed formula about Harvard.
More likely, someone ran into the President and he was so youthful looking that
he was mistaken to be a teaching fellow, not the President. Now, if you say, ‘I
mistook the President of Harvard for a teaching fellow’ then it is probably
interpreted as ‘The President is such that I mistook him for a teaching fellow’,
wide scope for ‘the President’, narrow for ‘a teaching fellow’. If you say, in spite
of the symmetry of the relationship involved, ‘I mistook a teaching fellow for the
President of Harvard’, it is likely that ‘a teaching fellow’ has the wider scope and
‘the President of Harvard’ the inner scope (that is, some teaching fellow one
encountered was so old and distinguished looking that I thought he was President of Harvard).56 Here language may contain its own scope indicators.
55
It should also be noted in this connection that Russell states his analysis in a way that brings
out the predication in ‘On Denoting’ (p. 55) when he says that ‘Scott is the author of Waverley’ can
be paraphrased as what amounts to ‘Scott and only Scott authored Waverley,’ though the
predication itself still involves identity. (As Stephen Neale has reminded me, Russell does this
again in ‘Knowledge by Acquaintance and Knowledge by Description’, p. 217.) The sentences
‘Scott and the author of Waverley are one’ and ‘Scott and the author of Waverley are one and the
same man’ both appear to be statements about the identity of objects and are highly relevant in the
historical situation, since many books were published under the by-line ‘by the author of Waverley’.
56
Yet another question, relevant to the predicative versus the object uses of deﬁnite and
indeﬁnite articles is the issue of whether I have actually confused two people with each other, the
teaching fellow in question, if that’s whom I encountered, or the president. See my remarks on this
in Kripke (1977), and also Ludlow and Neale (1991).

Russell’s Notion of Scope

247

As I already said, in Principia Russell proves a metatheorem to the effect that a
single description (or, strictly speaking, a single occurrence of a description) can
be moved in or out if the existence and uniqueness conditions are fulﬁlled. He
may think he has settled the scope question for extensional formal languages, but
it is hardly so. First, there may be more than one description, or even more than
one occurrence of the same description. Second, as he, himself, mentions in ‘On
Denoting’—see the ﬁrst paragraph, quoted above—a description can occur
within a description, which gives more possibilities for scope ambiguities but is
not treated. Third, a description can be quantiﬁed into, as when it stands for a
function, as he himself emphasizes in Principia. Now, one needs a ﬁxed set of
rules for what is allowed in all these cases, and it’s not that the treatment will be
essentially different, but that Russell himself omits these cases. (In fact, *14.242
and its two subservient theorems underlies the special case.) A description
operator may bind a description within its scope and so may an ordinary quantiﬁer. A general theorem will assert that under general conditions, a description can
indifferently be moved to any appropriate scope and you get something equivalent.
However, if it is bound by a quantiﬁer or another description, it cannot be moved
outside of what binds it. Also, suppose a description occurs within another
description, but is not bound by the variable in the ﬁrst description, then you
can move in either of the following orders. Move the inner description out ﬁrst; or
move the whole thing. But the orders of moving around and so on have a rather
complicated structure only very partially treated by Principia, though the authors
certainly have the basic idea.
The various ways of moving a description around can be represented in the
form of a tree. In underlying structure, all the descriptions are quantiﬁers already
and there is no moving around. If you look at it from the bottom up, that is,
consider the ‘true logical form’ ﬁrst and then use descriptions as abbreviations,
everything has been decided at the bottom. The problem arises when the
descriptions appear to be terms, and there are no scope operators. A general
metatheorem will have the form of a tree of disambiguations depending on how
we give a scope to this or that description. When we do want disambiguation, the
result may still be ambiguous, and we disambiguate it further until we get,
hopefully, to the end. Now we need sufﬁcient conditions for a ‘scope indifference’ theorem, asserting that it follows from certain hypotheses, that once we get
to the ultimate logical forms postulated by Russell’s theory, the resulting forms
are materially equivalent, regardless of the choices of scope. This theorem will
hold for extensional ﬁrst-order logic. Formula (5) is a special case, with a weak
hypothesis that does not work in general. The Hilbert–Bernays conditions
mentioned above, though not correct for English or mathematics (see above),
are nevertheless sufﬁcient for a scope indifference theorem. The exact formulation
of such a theorem need not be given here, but is illustrated by the cases discussed
above. Descriptions may be moved around freely, and need not be given explicit
scope indicators. But of course, as is clear, descriptions containing a variable

248

Russell’s Notion of Scope

bound by a description operator of a quantiﬁer must remain inside the operator
or quantiﬁer. The problem of ﬁnding weaker sufﬁcient conditions than those of
Hilbert–Bernays has been given little real attention in the standard literature—
perhaps the literature on free logic pays some such attention, but I am ignorant.
(And ‘little real attention’ is itself a ‘scholarly hedge’!)
Whereas in the ﬁrst edition of Principia Russell takes negation and alternation
as primitive, in the second edition, he proposes to replace them by the Sheffer
stroke, or alternatively, it could be the dual notion (‘joint denial’). The Sheffer
stroke p|q means ‘not-p or not-q’. (The Sheffer stroke was, in fact, already known
to Peirce, but forgotten. And presumably Peirce knew the dual notion, which is
used by Quine in his Mathematical Logic.57 Russell thinks that this is the most
‘deﬁnite improvement’ of Principia if it were to be rewritten—that is, one that
uncontroversially should be made (see exact quotation below).
If we’re granted that every truth function can be deﬁned in term of negation
and alternation, then these terms can be deﬁned in terms of the stroke, as on page
xvi of the introduction to the second edition:
 p ¼ df pjp
p  q ¼ df  pj  q
Now, here is the problem. Eliminating descriptions means taking them as terms
and then translating them into quantiﬁers, but regardless of scope, under the
hypothesis for a ‘scope indifference theorem’, and subject to the restrictions that
I have mentioned. So, what is Russell’s deﬁnition of
ł( x)(x)?
Ø

We wrote it before as:
ðƎxÞðð8yÞðy ¼ x  FyÞ  cxÞÞ
Now, assuming for the moment that the material biconditional and conjunction
are both primitive, and granting the ‘scope indifference theorem’ sketched above,
it should be clear that an iteration of the procedure will terminate. But rarely is
the biconditional taken as primitive, it is usually deﬁned. Suppose the Sheffer
stroke is taken as primitive. Then negation is:
 A ¼ df AjA
A  B ¼ df  Aj  B ¼ df ðAjAÞjðBjBÞ
A  B ¼ df  ðAjBÞ ¼ df ðAjBÞjðAjBÞ
A  B ¼ df ðA  BÞ  ð  A   BÞ;
where I leave the last expansion into primitive notation to the reader. Alternatively, try deﬁning the material biconditional as ( A  B)  ( B  A).
57

Quine (1940).

Russell’s Notion of Scope

249

At any rate, what looks like only one occurrence of  and ł in the conventional
Russellian analysis of ł ( x (x)) is obviously becoming many, many occurrences
of  and ł in the analysis. Now, suppose either  or ł itself, or worse, both,
contain a description, or one or both contain many (occurrences of) descriptions.
With an unfavourable choice of scopes there will be more (occurrences of)
descriptions in the analysis than there were originally in the analysand! The
dangers involved in this situation I call the dangers of a hydra; that is where you
are trying to unpack things you always have more occurrences of descriptions
than you had before. That’s what I call the ‘hydra problem’.58
Now, Russell says in the introduction to the second edition of Principia:
Ø

The most deﬁnite improvement resulting from work in mathematical logic during the
past fourteen years is the substitution, in Part I, Section A, of the one indeﬁnable ‘p and q
are incompatible’, (or, alternatively, ‘p and q are both false’) for the two indeﬁnables ‘notp’ and ‘p or q’. This is due to Dr. H. M. Sheffer. (Whitehead and Russell 1927, p. xiii)

Now, Russell does not say, contrary to what is attributed to him by Warren
Goldfarb,59 that this is the most important work done in mathematical logic
since the ﬁrst edition of Principia. The ‘most deﬁnite improvement’: Russell is
talking about the ways the book should be rewritten if he had the time, and, in
fact that’s all he means. ‘The most deﬁnite improvement’ means the improvement least open to controversy or doubt. It shows that propositional logic needs
only a single primitive, and moreover Nicod has shown that you can get by with
only one axiom for propositional logic that way. In deference to Goldfarb,
I should add, though he has lost the battle perhaps he could have won the war.60
58
Nathan Salmon once emailed me. He couldn’t see the problem, because he had learned logic
from the textbook by Kalish and Montague (1964) which takes all the connectives, including the
material biconditional, as primitive. This is unusual. Later, Salmon wrote he doubted they were
trying to avoid hydras.
59
Warren Goldfarb, in the paper cited in note 20 above.
60
Nicod (1917). Though Goldfarb has lost this battle, in a way his basic point is right. Russell
probably did not properly follow later work on logic. Russell may or may not have known of such
developments as the work of Löwenheim or Skolem, but, in any event, he would have regarded
them as irrelevant to the Principia project. However, he is very concerned with the problem of
developing mathematics purely predicatively, dropping the axiom of reducibility and adding axioms
of extensionality. He believes, what is now known to be in error, that he has managed to prove
mathematical induction without postulating it. However, in the introduction to the second edition,
he still sees a problem in the Dedekind ordering of the continuum, and hence presumably in the
developments of real analysis. But one of the books he cites at the end of his paper as a further
development of mathematical logic—this bibliography of further developments also gives the lie to
Goldfarb’s assertion that he thought the Sheffer stroke the most signiﬁcant later development in
mathematical logic—is Hermann Weyl’s Das Kontinuum. This book, which postulates
mathematical induction and deals precisely with the problem about developing analysis
predicatively, assuming induction, and hence with the problem he is concerned with about the
continuum, is a work he probably, despite his excellent German, has not read. The proper
conclusion is that although he is aware (probably contrary to the impression Goldfarb has) that
signiﬁcant other developments in logic have taken place, he probably has not kept up with them,
even when they are highly relevant to his project in Principia.

Russell’s Notion of Scope

250

Now to state a theorem: In the second edition Russell favours taking the
Sheffer stroke as the sole primitive of propositional logic. One theorem that
I recall I proved is that with a bad choice of scopes, using a Sheffer stroke or its
dual will allow for a hydra. Some paths of the tree will go on inﬁnitely and never
come to an end. It is intuitively obvious, although syntactically much more
difﬁcult to prove, that all terminating paths are equivalent. But non-terminating
paths are equivalent to nothing in particular because they don’t lead to any
analysis. The general thing to do to try to get a path not to terminate is to choose
the scopes so they have as many occurrences of descriptions embedded in them as
possible. That will improve the chances for an increase in the number of
occurrences of descriptions. The opposite strategy, making the scopes as narrow
as possible, is what would lead to a termination. Now, even for alternation and
negation as primitive, or dually for conjunction and negation, the problem still
exists. Temporarily, if everything is in primitive notation, an elimination of
descriptions may lead to an analysis with more occurrences of descriptions than
there were before. In these cases, however, I recall proving—though it really takes
proving!—that there are no real hydras. Every path eventually terminates, and all
are equivalent.
Hilbert and Bernays give an analysis in their book, not with the Sheffer stroke
as primitive, that a certain particular procedure terminates and eliminates descriptions. Other treatments of the problem are given by Joseph Shoenﬁeld61 and
Edward Nelson.62 A model-theoretic treatment of the problem, which is much
easier, has been given by Elliot Mendelson.63 All these treatments show that
speciﬁc procedures can be given to eliminate descriptions.
As Quine wrote in his original criticism of Smullyan, for a formal language
(without intensional contexts and not in natural language—in other words, we
eliminate Quine’s original errors), under reasonable hypotheses (actually, Quine
ignores the case of descriptions with variables, where the Hilbert–Bernays hypotheses we have been using are rather strong), if descriptions are thought of as
terms it is unnatural to have scope distinctions in the language. So a ‘scope
indifference theorem’ is important to Russell’s theory as a surrogate for one in
which deﬁnite descriptions are deﬁnite terms. Such a theorem does exist in the
case of all terminating paths, and this is not brought out in the speciﬁc elimination procedures cited in the preceding paragraph. However, as I have said, in the
case of the Sheffer stroke and its dual, not all paths terminate, while with
disjunction and negation (or its dual, conjunction and negation), all paths do
terminate, but the result is not trivial.
In sum, it is hardly so incontestable as Russell thought, that the Sheffer stroke
should be taken as primitive. If we want scope to make no difference at all in the
case of non-empty descriptions and totally deﬁned functions, perhaps we want all
61

Shoenﬁeld (1967).

62

Nelson (1986).

63

Mendelson.

Russell’s Notion of Scope

251

paths to terminate and be equivalent—which does not happen (no hydras). If 
and  are primitive, as in the ﬁrst edition, the desiderata are achieved, but the
proof is nontrivial. As far as I can see, only a choice of connectives with
redundancies (not all independent) can avoid hydras trivially.
Guess what? I guess I’m through!64, 65
R E F E R EN C E S
Almog, J. (1986). “Naming without Necessity.” Journal of Philosophy 83: 210–42.
Barcan, R. (1948). Review of Smullyan, “Modality and Description.” Journal of Symbolic
Logic 13: 149–50.
Boolos, G. (1984). “To be is to be the Value of a Variable (or to be Some Value of Some
Variables).” Journal of Philosophy 81: 430–49.
Caton, C. (ed.) (1963). Philosophy and Ordinary Language. Urbana: University of Illinois
Press.
Church, A. (1950). Review of Fitch “The Problem of the Morning Star and the Evening
Star.” Journal of Symbolic Logic 15: 63.
Davidson, D. (1980). Essays on Actions and Events. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Dennett, D. (1982). “Beyond Belief.” In Woodﬁeld (1982), pp. 1–96.
Donnellan, K. (1966). “Reference and Deﬁnite Descriptions.” Philosophical Review 75:
281–304.
Dreben, B., and J. van Heijenoort. (1986). “Introductory Note to 1929, 1930, and
1930a.” In Feferman et al. (1986), pp. 44–59.
Evans, G. (1977). “Pronouns, Quantiﬁers and Relative Clauses (I).” Canadian Journal of
Philosophy 7: 467–536.
Fara, D. Graff (2001). “Descriptions as Predicates.” Philosophical Studies 102: 1–42.
Feferman, S. et al. (1986). Kurt Gödel: Collected Works, Vol. I. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Fitch, F. (1949). “The Problem of the Morning Star and the Evening Star.” Philosophy of
Science 16: 137–41.
Frege, G. (1892). “Uber Sinn und Bedeutung.” Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik 100: 25–50.
French, P. A., T. E. Uehling, Jr., and H. K. Wettstein. (1989). Contemporary Perspectives
in the Philosophy of Language. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Geach, P. (1967). “Intentional Identity.” Journal of Philosophy 74: 626–32.
Gödel, K. (1944). “Russell’s Mathematical Logic.” In Schilpp (1944), pp. 125–53.
Goldfarb, W. (1979). “Logic in the Twenties: The Nature of the Quantiﬁer.” Journal of
Symbolic Logic 44: 351–68.
64
My thanks to the transcriber, whose identity I don’t know. Special thanks go to Stephen Neale
and Romina Padró for their invaluable help in the editing of this paper. Since they took such an
active part in the editing, clearly any philosophical or technical errors that remain are due to them!
65
A technical investigation of the hydra problem raised in this paper has been made by Visser,
Gramayer, Leo and Oostrom (2009). I haven’t studied their paper in detail, except to note its basic
claims, but my respect for the authors is such that I assume that their results are correct.

252

Russell’s Notion of Scope

Hilbert, D. and Bernays, P. (1934). Grundlagen der Mathematik, Vol. I. Berlin: Springer.
2nd ed., 1968.
Hylton, P. (1990). Russell, Idealism and the Emergence of Analytic Philosophy. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Irvine, A. D. and G. A. Wedeking (eds.) (1993). Russell and Analytic Philosophy. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press.
Kalish, D. and R. Montague. (1964). Logic: Techniques of Formal Reasoning. New York:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Kaplan, D. (1972). “What is Russell’s Theory of Descriptions?” In Pears (1972),
pp. 227–44.
Kripke, S. (1977). “Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference.” In French, Uehling
and Wettstein (1977), pp. 6–27. Reprinted in this volume as Chapter 5.
——— (1980). Naming and Necessity. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
——— (2009). “Presupposition and Anaphora.” Linguistic Inquiry 40: 367–86. Reprinted
in this volume as Chapter 12.
Linsky, L. (1960). “Reference and Referents.” In Caton (1963), pp. 74–89.
Ludlow, P. and Neale, S. (1991). “Indeﬁnite Descriptions: In Defense of Russell.”
Linguistics and Philosophy 14: 171–202.
Mates, B. (1973). “Reference and Description.” Foundations of Language 10: 409–18.
Mendelson, E. (1960). “A Semantic Proof of the Eliminability of Descriptions.” Mathematical Logic Quarterly 6: 199–200.
Neale, S. (1990). Descriptions. Cambridge: MIT Press.
——— (1993). “Grammatical Form, Logical Form, and Incomplete Symbols.” In Irvine
and Wedeking (1993), pp. 97–139. Reprinted in Ostertag (1998), pp. 79–121.
——— (1999). “On a Milestone of Empiricism.” In Orenstein and Kotatko (1999),
pp. 237–346.
——— (2001). Facing Facts. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nelson, E. (1986). Predicative Arithmetic. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Nicod, J. G. (1917). “A Reduction in the Number of Primitive Propositions of Logic.”
Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 19: 32–41.
Orenstein, A. and P. Kotatko (eds.) (1999). Knowledge, Language and Logic. Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
Ostertag, G. (ed.) (1998). Deﬁnite Descriptions: A Reader. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Pears, D. F. (ed.) (1972). Bertrand Russell: A Collection of Critical Essays. Garden City,
New York: Doubleday Anchor.
Prior, A. N. (1963). “Is the Concept of Referential Opacity Really Necessary?” Acta
Philosophica Fennica 16: 189–200.
——— (1968). “Intentionality and Intensionality.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,
Supplementary Volume 42: 91–106.
Quine, W. V. O. (1940). Mathematical Logic. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
——— (1953). From a Logical Point of View. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Reprinted 1961, 1980.
——— (1953a). “Reference and Modality.” In Quine (1953), pp. 139–59 (revised in
1961 and 1980 editions).
——— (1956). “Quantiﬁers and Propositional Attitudes.” Journal of Philosophy 53:
177–87. Reprinted in Quine (1966), pp. 183–94.

Russell’s Notion of Scope

253

——— (1960). Word and Object. Cambridge: MIT Press.
——— (1966). The Ways of Paradox and Other Essays. New York: Random House.
——— (1977). “Intensions Revisited.” In Quine (1981), pp. 113–23.
——— (1981). Theories and Things. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
——— (1999). “Reply to Neale.” In Orenstein and Kotatko (1999), pp. 426–27.
Rosser, B. (1939). “On the Consistency of Quine’s New Foundations for Mathematical
Logic.” Journal of Symbolic Logic 4: 15–24.
Russell, B. (1905). “On Denoting.” Mind 14: 479–93. Reprinted in Ostertag (1998)
pp. 35–49.
——— (1957). “Mr Strawson on Referring.” Mind 66: 385–9.
——— (1918, 1919). “The Philosophy of Logical Atomism.” The Monist 28: 495–527;
29: 32–63, 190–222, 345–380. Reprinted in Russell (1988), pp. 155–244.
——— (1988). The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell, Vol. 10, The Philosophy of
Logical Atomism And Other Essays, 1914–19, John Slater (ed.). London: Routledge.
Salmon, N. (1986). Frege’s Puzzle. Cambridge: MIT Press.
——— (1986a). “Reﬂexivity.” Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 27, pp. 401–29.
Reprinted in Salmon and Soames (1988), pp. 24–74.
——— (2005). “On Designating.” Mind 114: 1069–133.
Salmon, N. and S. Soames (eds.)(1988). Propositions and Attitudes. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Schilpp, P. A. (ed.) (1944). The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell. Evanston, Illinois:
Northwestern University Press.
Shoenﬁeld, J. (1967). Mathematical Logic. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
Smullyan, A. (1948). “Modality and Description.” Journal of Symbolic Logic 13: 31–7.
Soames, S. (2003). Philosophical Analysis in the Twentieth Century, Volume 1: The Dawn
of Analysis. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Stalnaker, R. and R. Thomason. (1968). “Modality and Reference.” Noûs 2: 359–72.
Strawson, P. (1964). “Identifying Reference and Truth-Values.” Theoria 30: 96–118.
——— (1950). “On Referring.” Mind 59: 320–44.
Thomason, R. (ed.) (1947). Formal Philosophy: Selected Papers of Richard Montague. New
Haven: Yale University Press.
Visser, A., C. Grabmayer, J. Leo, and V. van Oostrom (2009). “On the Termination
of Russell’s Description Elimination Algorithm.” Utrecht, The Netherlands:
Logic Group Preprint Series.: http://www.phil.uu.nl/preprints/lgps/list.html (accessed, October 2010).
Weyl, H. (1918). Das Kontinuum. Leipzig: Veit.
Whitehead, A. N., and B. Russell. (1910, 1912, 1913). Principia Mathematica, 3 Vols,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. Second edition, 1925 (Vol. 1), 1927
(Vols. 2, 3).
Wilson, G. (1978). “On Deﬁnite and Indeﬁnite Descriptions.” Philosophical Review 87:
48–76.
Woodﬁeld, A. (ed.) (1982). Thought and Object: Essays on Intentionality. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.

9
Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference:
Some Exegetical Notes1

In translating Frege’s terms “Sinn” and “Bedeutung”, I follow Max Black’s
translation as “sense” and “reference”, or “referent”. For a long time this was
standard, although other translations have been proposed, and later some have
thought that standard German usage should be followed in the translation of
“Bedeutung”. However unusual Frege’s usage may be, there should not be any
doubt that for Frege “Bedeutung” is what a term stands for.2
1
The present chapter is based on a transcript of a lecture given in Stockholm, Sweden, on 24
October 2001, on the occasion of the award of the Schock Prize in Logic and Philosophy. There are
occasional references to works postdating the original lecture, obviously added to the present
version. There has been considerable rewriting and editing of the transcript, but the essence of
the lecture remains unchanged, except in a few places that are explicitly noted.
2
In standard German “Bedeutung” should be translated as “meaning” and recent translators have
advocated that this be done. See Beaney (1997, pp. 36–46), for some of the controversy over this
issue; he himself leaves “Bedeutung” untranslated.
The argument for translating “Bedeutung” as “meaning” is a principle of “exegetical neutrality"; that
one should not deviate from standard German for exegetical reasons. However, I assume that there
would be no such issue had Frege used “das Bezeichnete” and “bezeichnen”, and he does explain that by
“bedeuten” he means “bezeichnen”, and uses “das Bezeichnete” for the designatum (see Künne, 2010,
footnote 15, who corrects my original statement). Already in “Über Sinn und Bedeutung” Frege says:
“Ein Eigenname . . . drückt aus seinen Sinn, bedeutet oder bezeichnet seine Bedeutung. Wir drücken
mit einem Zeichen dessen Sinn aus und bezeichnen mit ihm dessen Bedeutung” (Frege, 1892, p. 31 in
the original; p. 156 in Beaney, 1997). Beaney’s edition translates “bedeutet” as “stands for” and
“bezeichnet” as “designates”. Whatever ambiguity there might be in the ﬁrst verb, I assume that there is
no such ambiguity in the second one. (My thanks to Dagﬁnn Fllesdal for this reference.) I have seen
other passages where “bedeuten” and “bezeichnen” are used interchangeably.
I should mention that Church (1995, p. 69) objects to the use of “reference” as violating proper
English usage. (His point appears to be that it is speakers who refer to things, and that they can do so
without using any term designating the object.) Maybe so, but since Black introduced “reference”, it
has become too standard to give up. Perhaps “referent” is somewhat better. Church himself favors
Russell’s “denotation”, which is also used by Montgomery Furth and David Kaplan, and no doubt
others. (However, Russell himself also uses “denoting” in another way of his own.) One might have
favored “designation”; Feigl’s “nominatum”, which Feigl followed, clearly failed to gain wide
currency because it was too awkward.
Subsequently all references to “Über Sinn und Bedeutung” come from Beaney (1997) with
pagination accordingly, unless otherwise speciﬁed. Beaney himself gives the original pagination.

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

255

Frege introduced the notion of sense to explain how there can be non-trivial
but true identity statements. In such a case, there are two terms with the same
reference but different senses. For example, the phrase “the president of the US
when I am giving this lecture” designates the same thing as “the president of the
US in 2001”,3 which also has the same Bedeutung as the proper name “George
W. Bush”. So there can be many different senses with one referent. This leads to
Russell’s famous slogan: “There is no backward road from denotations to meanings”,4 or as we would put it, from referents to senses. There could be many
senses determining the same reference.
The phrase “there is no backward road”, however, should not mislead: one does
not, when using an expression or introducing an expression, have to specify two
things, its reference and its sense. Once one speciﬁes the reference one has speciﬁed
the sense. How can that be? It is because the sense is the way the reference or
Bedeutung is speciﬁed. So, for example, in Grundgesetze (Frege, 1893, sections 31
and 32, pp. 87–90), Frege gives5 the truth-conditions for all the sentences of his
language. Then he concludes that every sentence of his language expresses a
thought, namely that these given truth-conditions hold. In that way there is a
backward road in every particular case of an explanation of a given phrase.6
So far, perhaps, so easy. Complications come in with Frege’s doctrine of
so-called “indirect” or ungerade reference. If someone says (this is Frege’s own
example; Frege, 1892, p. 160):

Although I have used “reference” and “referent” in this chapter, when quotations from Frege derive
from Beaney’s edition they perforce follow his practice of leaving “Bedeutung” untranslated.
3
Or most of 2001 anyway. He took ofﬁce on 20 January. In an article like this we need not
discuss whether he was “really” elected.
4
Russell writes:
And C must not be a constituent of this complex (as it is of “the meaning of C"); for if C occurs in
the complex, it will be its denotation, not its meaning, that will occur, and there is no backward road
from denotations to meanings, because every object can be denoted by an inﬁnite number of
different denoting phrases. (1905, p. 487)
5
It does not matter for present purposes that Frege’s attempt to do this is fallaciously circular,
and therefore fails.
6
Dummett says:
. . . when Frege is purporting to give the sense of a word or symbol, what he actually states is what the
reference is . . . in saying what the referent is, we have to choose a particular way of saying this, a
particular means of determining something as the referent. . . . we say what the referent of a word is,
and thereby show what its sense is. (This is the correct answer to Russell’s objection . . . that there is
“no backward road” from reference to sense.) (1973, p. 227; original emphasis)
There are qualiﬁcations and other remarks in Dummett’s text that I do not necessarily endorse.
Dummett seems to imply that the point he is making can be found in many places in Frege, but the
main case I am aware of is the one cited above from the Grundgesetze (1893). Many who write on
Frege give insufﬁcient recognition to this point, perhaps to an extent even Dummett himself. That
there is a “backward road” in the sense in question already states the main moral of the present paper
in advance.

256

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

Copernicus believed that the planetary orbits are circles this is an example of indirect
discourse. Frege’s doctrine was that in a case like this, the referent of “the planetary orbits”
is not the orbits themselves, but the Sinn or meaning7 of the phrase “the planetary orbits”.
Some commentary on Frege would be needed as to why he says this, but the arguments
will be familiar to the present readership.

Frege believed that the referent of a sentence is its truth-value, the True or the
False. The Gedanke or thought expressed is its Sinn. The referent of “that the
planetary orbits are circles” is the Gedanke; that is what is believed. But since the
Gedanke is the Sinn of the sentence, its components are themselves Sinne, and
hence must be the references of the component parts of the sentence following
the “that” clause.8
So there is a reference shift in indirect contexts. Since the reference must be
determined in some way, there has to be therefore not only an indirect reference
but also apparently an indirect sense. As far as I know Frege does not ever
explicitly consider iterations of “that” clauses, such as, for example, “We should
remember that Copernicus believed that the planetary orbits are circles”, and so
on for arbitrary iterations.9 If we do consider such iterations, the familiar
consequence is that Frege is committed to a hierarchy of doubly oblique indirect
referents and senses, triply oblique, and so on.
Another way of generating a hierarchy ought to be mentioned also. If an
expression has a Sinn, presumably another expression could designate that Sinn.
But then the second expression presumably has a Sinn also, which can be
designated by yet another expression, and so on. Given Frege’s doctrine that
an expression in indirect contexts designates its Sinn, the two ways of generating
a hierarchy are of course related.
There are papers on the hierarchical question by Terry Parsons (1981) and
Tyler Burge (1979b).10 There is a famous objection to Frege, made by Donald
Davidson (1965) in a well-known paper that precedes the papers by Parsons and
Burge. Davidson argues that if there were such an inﬁnite hierarchy, then, say, for
a Swede to learn English as a foreign language, the Swede would have to learn

7

Later Tyler Burge’s claim (in 1979b) that Sinn and meaning have been wrongly equated will
be discussed (and his argument rejected). The issue is probably not crucial at this point, but may
affect some of my own argument below.
8
The general compositional principles involved will be stated below.
9
Künne (2010) and Burge (in personal communication) have pointed out that a particular double
iteration is considered in the letter to Russell dated 28-12-1902 (Frege, 1980) that I myself cite below.
10
I agree with Burge (see especially his postscript in Burge, 2004) that the hierarchy is an actual
consequence of Frege’s theory. (Qualiﬁcations of this will emerge from the present chapter.)
Various writers have tried to avoid this consequence. Carnap (1947) abolishes it by ﬁat, replacing
Frege’s “method of the name relation” by his “method of extension and intension”. Dummett
(1973, pp. 267–268) proposes to emend Frege’s theory to avoid this consequence. Without going
into the matter, I do not ﬁnd his proposal to be successful, but nevertheless I have found his
discussion helpful and inﬂuential for my own interpretation.

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

257

inﬁnitely many things. That is, not just the sense—if that is the meaning of the
English phrase—but also its indirect sense, its doubly indirect sense, and so on.
He similarly objects to Church’s (1951) well-known formalization of Frege’s
theory in “A Formulation of the Logic of Sense and Denotation”, where the
inﬁnity of primitives is very clear.11
How could that be? How could we learn such a language, either a natural
language under the Fregean hierarchical view, or the corresponding formal
language given by Church? It cannot be that we have to learn inﬁnitely many
independent things. I actually think this objection is valid, but I also think it is
not so much needed as people seem to believe. A simpler version, indeed inspired
by Davidson’s remarks, can take its place.
Let us forget about any iterations either of operators such as “believes that”, or
of referring to a sense. Let us just consider the original simple case:
Copernicus believes that the planetary orbits are circles.

There are two problems here. Ordinarily, we should think that to teach
English to a foreigner one simply teaches some grammar, the vocabulary, and
what all the words mean, and then we are through. But not according to this: she
will not understand this sentence because she has not learned the indirect senses
of these words, if these are independent entities from the ordinary senses.
To know what the sense of a sentence is is to understand it, to know what
thought it expresses. Normally, we would think that that is enough, that the
foreigner has learned English. But apparently this is not so according to Frege’s
theory of indirect senses. According to this theory, it appears that the foreigner
cannot understand belief and other indirect discourse sentences, such as the one
about Copernicus. The foreigner should say to the teacher: “Unfortunately you
have not taught me how to understand these ‘belief-sentences’, or ‘said thatsentences’, or other indirect discourse sentences. For these I need not only to
know the senses of the English words, as I have just been taught, but also their
indirect senses.” And the teacher might then reply “Oh yes! Next year we will get
out Volume II, the dictionary of indirect senses. Then you will learn indirect
English, and will be able to understand these belief sentences. But I cannot go so
fast as to teach this in the ﬁrst year.” Clearly the teacher’s speech is absurd, as is
the student’s puzzlement, and no inﬁnite hierarchy is needed to see this.12
11

This paper, and the issue of its ﬁdelity to Frege’s intent, will be discussed in a little more detail
below.
12
See Davidson (1968, p. 214). He remarks that in our “semantic innocence”, we never would
have imagined that expressions mean something different in indirect discourse from what they mean
in ordinary contexts. This in effect expresses the objection to Frege’s theory that I have just given in a
stronger and simpler way. See Kaplan (1968), who emphasizes that Frege’s theory is an ambiguity
theory. It should be noted that Russell’s theory of descriptions is semantically innocent in Davidson’s
sense, and that he could have claimed this as an advantage of his view. I am not sure that I can really get
Frege out of the “innocence objection”, but I will try to come close. See footnote 46 below.

258

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

English, if the issue stopped there, might be a learnable language in Davidson’s
sense, but it takes an implausible amount of work to learn it.
A related objection which has been raised against Frege is: what are these
indirect senses? He does not give us any idea what they are.13 Given Russell’s
slogan, “there is no backward road from denotations to meanings”,14 assuming it
applies at every level, there could be words with the same senses but different
indirect senses. And expressions could actually be synonymous, in the sense of
having the same Sinn, but nevertheless have different ungerade Sinne (indirect
senses). Then we have a very strange situation for language learning.
Frege does say the following:
In order to speak of the sense of an expression “A” one may simply use the phrase “the
sense of the expression ‘A ’ ”. (Frege, 1892, p. 154)

That certainly has the same reference—namely, the ordinary sense—as the
indirect sense, whatever entity this may be. Could this be what Frege thinks is
the indirect sense? The suggestion that this is what an indirect sense is, is rejected
by Dummett as implausible in Frege: Philosophy of Language (1973,
pp. 267–268); but then in his later book, The Interpretation of Frege’s Philosophy
(1981, pp. 89ff.),15 he says that he does not know why he regarded this suggestion
(which he attributes to Heidelberger) as so obviously implausible and gives a
more elaborate discussion.
Whatever an indirect sense is, it is not plausible to me that it is this. To
understand any English sentence, it is (necessary and) sufﬁcient to understand
the senses of all its components. In particular, to understand an indirect discourse
context, it is sufﬁcient to understand the indirect senses of its components. Now
someone who knows virtually no English can perfectly well understand the
phrase “the sense of ‘the planetary orbits are circular’” if all he knows are the
English words “the sense of ”, but has no idea what “the planetary orbits are
circular” means. Then, if the analysis in question were true, he will understand
13

I have in mind Carnap (1947). He writes:
And since he [Frege] assumes that nominatum and sense must always be different, he had thus to
introduce a third entity as the oblique sense. Incidentally, it seems that Frege nowhere explains in
more customary terms what this third entity is. (Carnap, 1947, p. 129)
Since Carnap actually studied with Frege (and the direction of his entire career was changed by the
experience), it is too bad that he apparently found Frege to be an intimidating teacher. He might
simply have asked him.
14
There are those who believe that here Russell has anticipated Davidson’s learnability
argument, or perhaps has the germ of a beginning of his argument. See Salmon (2005) (who sees
an anticipation both of Davidson’s learnability argument and Carnap’s question) and earlier writers,
some of whom he cites. Dummett (1973, pp. 267–268) thinks that Russell has anticipated Carnap’s
question in the following form: since there is no “backward road”, which of the inﬁnitely many
candidates for an indirect sense is the right one?
15
I have not checked Heidelberger’s original, which, as Dummett remarks, would obviously be
inconsistent since he accepts Church’s translation argument.

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

259

“Copernicus believed that the planetary orbits are circular” as long as he understands “Copernicus believed that” and the phrase “the sense of ‘the planetary
orbits are circular’ ” without having any idea what “the planetary orbits are
circular” means. But this consequence is plainly absurd.16,17
This suggestion about indirect senses would make them a metalinguistic
notion. On the other hand, Casimir Lewy in his “Critical Notice” (1949)—
actually, very critical notice—of Carnap’s book denies that Frege gives no
explanation in “more customary terms” of what an indirect sense might be. He
points out that Frege says explicitly that the sense of a sentence in an indirect
context is the sense of the words “the thought that . . . ”, where the dots are
supposed to be ﬁlled in with the sentence in question (see Frege, 1892, p. 160).
Well, of course this is Frege’s view; but it says nothing as to what the indirect senses
of the signiﬁcant parts of the sentence are, nor how they combine to give the sense
of the whole. Lewy’s remarks do avoid the unfortunate ascent to a metalinguistic
notion in indirect contexts, as in the theory discussed in the previous paragraph;
but they really leave the matter as mysterious as Carnap says it is.
The discussion of the metalinguistic interpretation of indirect senses suggests a
further requirement on indirect senses. An indirect sense must be revelatory. First
let me say what I mean by a sense being revelatory: a sense is revelatory of its
referent if one can ﬁgure out from the sense alone what the referent is. For
example, one can understand the description “the prime minister of England on
1 January 1970” perfectly well without knowing the relevant historical fact: not
knowing who was the prime minister of England at that time, one fails to know
the referent even though one knows the sense.18 Similarly, for the famous
16
Fussy details: on this account one really needs simply the concept (Fregean Sinn) expressed by
the English phrase “the sense of ‘the planetary orbits are circular’” (including, therefore, quotation),
and that this is what “the planetary orbits are circular” means in English indirect discourse. One
need not have learned this by learning even the English phrase “the sense of”. What one does need to
know about English is how to recognize indirect quotation contexts (“that clauses”) and that in
them words have indirect senses.
Another delicate point: should one really have written “the sense in English of ‘the planetary orbits
are circular’”, as most writers on the subject probably assume? Or should one understand quote
conventions in such a way that the expression referred to carries its language with it, even if a
phonetically identical expression might appear in another language? See Geach (1957, pp. 86–87)
(on “ja”), and pp. 97–98 (“jam dies”). Kaplan (1990), in his rejection of the conventional type/
token analysis of expressions (the “orthographic conception”), might well agree with Geach.
17
In his second discussion of the matter, Dummett says that he hopes he was not misled by the
Church translation argument (or something similar), which he rejects. (See Dummett, 1981,
pp. 89ff.) I myself am a believer in the argument, but I also think, as Church does (see Church,
1950, p. 98 (the objection to (6) and the translation argument following), and 1956, p. 62, footnote
136), that the translation argument only brings out the arbitrariness of the connection of a given
phonetic or written sequence and what it stands for or means. Normally this can be brought out in
another way.
18
In other contexts (not this one), I have heard some people object to an example on the grounds
that “it depends on the analytic–synthetic distinction” (really the a priori–a posteriori distinction),
which Quine supposedly refuted. If someone really worries about this, replace it with the notion of
what could have been known to someone, say in the year 1000, even in principle. The date could

260

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

Quinean example of “the number of planets”.19 In each case, one can understand
the sense without knowing the referent. Further information is required for the
latter. So the senses of these phrases are not revelatory. On the other hand, both
“nine” and perhaps even “the square of three” do have revelatory senses. Given
that one can understand them, one can tell what the referent is. The same holds
for “George W. Bush” and almost for “the father of George W. Bush’s
(biological) children” (though in the latter case, strictly speaking, one has to
know that George W. Bush is male and has children).
Now, these “knowing what” phrases or “knowing who” phrases have had a
curious history in recent philosophy. Some have declared them to be entirely
unscientiﬁc and context-dependent or even interest-relative.20 And under the
inﬂuence of Quine and others this view has been widespread.21 Sometimes the
extreme position is taken that any deﬁnite description determining the object tells
us what it is given some appropriate interest, but I do not see that the examples of
interest-relativity that have been given would support such an extreme position.22
Quine’s longstanding remarks against “frankly inequalitarian” attitudes towards
different ways of designating the same object have been a big inﬂuence here.23

vary with the example, and other things could vary. Anyone who says that Quine or anyone else
showed that such distinctions make no sense is simply incredible.
Of course Quinean objections to the analytic–synthetic distinction and to the notion of meaning
are out of place in a discussion of Fregean Sinne anyway. Surely these objections would go against
Frege’s entire apparatus, except on a very unusual interpretation of Frege that I can only speculate
about.
19
That the number of planets is nine has long been a standard philosophical example, popularized
by Quine. It is presupposed here, and its actual truth is irrelevant. While to claim that ‘astronomers
have changed their minds as to what the number of planets is’ makes sense, to claim that
‘mathematicians have changed their mind as to what the number nine is’ seems barely intelligible,
let alone possibley true. This seems to me to be one further reason for adopting a “frankly inequalitarian
attitude” towards two ways of supposedly designating the number nine. See my discussion of
Malcolm’s astronomical example in “On Two Paradoxes of Knowledge” (Chapter 2, this volume),
especially footnote 15 (p. 41). Here, I guess, we do need to pay attention to what a committee of
learned astronomers have said in correction of previous beliefs. (Footnote added in 2010.)
20
In my own opinion the latter two notions should carefully be distinguished, but I will not go
into the matter here.
21
See Quine (1979, p. 273); see also Sosa (1970) (which strictly speaking is about de re
propositional attitudes, not “knowing who”, and as far as I know remains the classic exposition of
its point of view), and Boër and Lycan (1986) (with which I am only partly familiar). In his book
Knowledge and Belief (1962), Hintikka emphasizes “knowing who” as the condition for a transition
from de dicto to de re knowledge. Not every author accepts the connection, but some do. Many
regard “knowing who” and related notions as hopelessly interest-relative, even taking the extreme
view mentioned in my text. I regard the interest-relativity of these notions as exaggerated, though
not entirely nonexistent.
22
Most or many of these examples simply do not work, to repeat my opinion, though perhaps
there are special cases where they do. One thing that helps create an exaggerated impression of
context or interest relativity is an overemphasis on the case of persons. Also, even in the case of
people, philosophers pay insufﬁcient attention to the variety of “knowing wh-” notions available in
ordinary language.
23
See his famous example of “the number of planets” and “nine”, alluded to before.

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

261

I have a lot more to say about this issue and I have done so in lectures on the
natural numbers (Kripke, unpublished).24 It is not true, as I have heard some say,
that whatever may be the case for ordinary language and day-to-day thought, no
serious science is based on such notions. I assume that recursion theory or
computability theory is a serious science. A computable function is a function f
such that for each given n, if you put in a particular number, the value f (n) can be
computed. And what does that mean? That given the deﬁnition of the function
and an argument n, you can know, by computation, what the value f (n) is. This
would hardly make sense if all ways, even all mathematical ways, of designating a
number, were on a par. For then every function25 would be computable, since
the value of f for a given n could simply be “computed” as f (n)! To say otherwise
would be to adopt an “inequalitarian” attitude towards different ways of designating a number, supposedly a sin. Similarly, complexity theory is another such
inequalitarian science.26
In the light of this discussion, one might say that a sense is immediately
revelatory if no calculation is required to ﬁgure out its referent. If f is a noncomputable mathematical function, then the sense of “f (n)” might be revelatory
in the weak sense that no empirical information is required to ﬁnd the referent,
though perhaps a mathematical argument is required to do so. More important,
even a computable function may not yield an immediately revelatory sense. For
example, even “the square of three” does not have an immediately revelatory
sense, since a computation, in this case a very easy one, is required to obtain its
value. In the general case, the computation could be much more difﬁcult.
“Nine”, however, is immediately revelatory.27 We can now strengthen the
requirement on indirect senses to say that they must be immediately revelatory:
anyone who understands an indirect sense must immediately know its referent
(the direct sense).
Frege thought that the Bedeutung of a sentence is its truth-value, T or F. One
might understand the sense of a sentence but not know what its truth-value is.
Will George W. Bush run in 2004 and win? Or, who will be the president at the
end of the century (or whatever)? We do not know.28 Now, suppose you take
the sentence “George W. Bush will run and be elected in 2004”. We do not know
the outcome of the 2004 election, and so we do not know the truth-value
24
The argument given here is excerpted from these lectures, which go into the matter in greater
detail. Other versions of the material have been given as lectures elsewhere, sometimes with the last
part of the title changed (“The identiﬁcation of numbers”, or something like that).
25
Or if one restricts the view to mathematically deﬁned functions, every mathematically deﬁned
function. (Though one should watch out about such a restriction, in view of the Richard paradox.)
26
Strictly speaking, the formal theorems of these theories would still exist, even given
the “equalitarian” view, but their motivation (as, say, in Turing’s analysis) would not.
27
In the case of the natural numbers, there are subtleties involved that are discussed in my
aforementioned lectures on the natural numbers, where numerical terms with immediately
revelatory senses are called “buck stoppers”.
28
Remember, for some of the examples, that these lectures were given in 2001.

262

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

(Bedeutung) of the sentence, though we understand it and therefore grasp its
Sinn. But if all ways of designating an object were equally good, we would know
the truth-value of the sentence about George W. Bush, namely the truth-value
that Bush will run and be elected in 2004. Similarly for any other sentence. But
in fact, only an omniscient being could know the Fregean referent of every
sentence. This could be true of God but of no one else. To favor equalitarianism
of ways of designating truth-values is to obliterate this important distinction
between God and His creatures.29
Let me turn to another aspect of Frege’s theory. In his well-known paper
“Quantifying In”, David Kaplan says that one should not let the complications of
Frege’s theory obscure the basic idea. According to Kaplan, Frege’s theories of
indirect and direct quotation are simply instances of the familiar fact that some
words have a usual denotation (reference), but in some secondary contexts have
a less usual one. He gives the following example: “F.D.R.” is the name of a
president of the United States (and that is its usual reference). Apparently it
was also the name of some television show, an unusual reference (the truth is
I have never heard of this show, and there is some joke here, but I am not sure
exactly what it is) (Kaplan, 1968, p. 183).30 And of course though “London”
primarily refers to a great city in England, it is also the name of a city in Ontario
(Canada), and for all I know of other cities. No doubt many other examples
could be given.
According to Kaplan, Frege’s theory of direct and indirect quotation (and, he
suggests, of other contexts that are unspeciﬁed) is that the ambiguity in these
contexts is similar. In direct and indirect quotation contexts phrases do not have
their usual denotation. So far so good, and no doubt this is Frege’s theory.31
However, Frege surely believed that a formal logical language should avoid
ambiguities, even if they exist in natural language. Frege actually conﬁrms this in
a letter to Russell, where he says:

29
I owe this point to Nathan Salmon, who has in print otherwise advocated the interest-relative
view of “knowing which”, but he gave me this example.
30
Kaplan’s example of a confusing sentence is:
Although F.D.R. ran for ofﬁce many times, F.D.R. ran on television only once.
His example actually (without explicit acknowledgment) trades not only on the ambiguity (really
homonymy) of “F.D.R.”, but also of “ran”. (Prominent philosophers have denied that the “F.D.R.”
case is any sort of homonymy, because names are not in the language. I will not go into the issue
here; but “F.D.R.”, especially the second usage, is surely grist for their mill. I myself disagree with
these philosophers, and I have been criticized by them; but no one will dispute the “ran” case.) See
footnote 79, below.
31
But it is signiﬁcant that these are not ordinary ambiguities or unusual references, unlike the
F.D.R. case Kaplan cites, or the “London” example. For in Frege’s theory of indirect quotation and
the like, the unusual references are determined entirely by the context. In the other examples the
unusual reference can often be guessed from the context, but it is not determined by any semantic
rule. Kaplan’s discussion does not make this distinction clear.

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

263

To avoid ambiguity, we ought really to have special signs in indirect speech, though their
connection with the corresponding signs in direct speech should be easy to recognize.
(Frege, 1980, p. 153)32

But there is something a bit evasive about the assertion that the connection should
be “easy to recognize”. Are they independent symbolic expressions or are they not?
It is signiﬁcant that Frege says that, because in Church’s famous paper,
“A Formulation of the Logic of Sense and Denotation” (1951), he does in fact
use distinct symbols for each expression and its counterpart in indirect speech.
Since indirect contexts can be iterated, there is an inﬁnity of separate and
independent symbols, giving rise to Davidson’s unlearnability objection. Dummett criticizes Church for doing so, and states that he has abandoned Frege’s
doctrine of indirect references and senses, that is, the contextually determined
ambiguity doctrine. (“Most striking, perhaps, is the fact that the doctrine of
indirect reference is abandoned”.)33 In fact, in this respect it is Church, and not
Dummett, who is faithful to Frege’s explicit ipse dixit. Not only that, but Frege’s
declaration, as we have seen, is an obvious consequence of his general attitude
that a proper formal language should avoid such ambiguities.34
In spite of my criticism of Dummett on the question of ﬁdelity to Frege,
Dummett’s approach (taking the contextual ambiguities to be an essential part of
the theory) seems to me to be highly suggestive and to have a good deal to
recommend it, but that is for later in this discussion.35
32
My thanks to Eva Picardi for helping me to relocate the passage in the correspondence with
Russell.
Perhaps Frege’s remark in “Über Sinn und Bedeutung” itself could also be cited in this
connection: “To every expression belonging to a complete totality of signs, there should certainly
correspond a deﬁnite sense; but natural languages often do not satisfy this condition, and one must
be content if the same word has the same sense in the same context” (Frege, 1892, p. 153). As
I remarked in the previous footnote, the ambiguity created by indirect discourse is completely
determined by context. But Frege seems clearly to be saying that such an ambiguity is a defect of
natural language, and therefore that it should be avoided in a scientiﬁc Begriffsschrift.
33
See Dummett (1973, pp. 292-293, top). The quoted sentence is on p. 292. In contrast,
Kaplan recognizes that Church’s system is the natural result of an attempt to avoid ambiguities. See
Kaplan (1968, p. 184). Kaplan does not quote Frege’s explicit assertion (which may not have been
available to him at the time).
34
Dummett makes several doubtful criticisms of Church’s paper, but he is strangely unaware of
the main problem with it, viz. that all three systems proposed collapse for purely formal reasons,
even formal inconsistency in at least one case.
Church later published revised versions of his original formal systems, which in general lead to
even more complicated hierarchies. At least one of his revisions was inconsistent, and yet another
version was proposed by C. Anthony Anderson. We do not need to go into these complications
here, and we will stick to the original formulation.
35
When Dummett says that the doctrine of indirect reference has been abandoned, he is
motivated by the fact that a person who began with Church’s system alone would no longer
think of indirect or “oblique” contexts as special problematic cases of “intensional” contexts,
generating a special problem for substitutivity that Frege needs to solve. Such a person would
think of belief contexts, etc., as just as obviously extensional as any others. For Dummett, the double
(and iterated) uses of terms in indirect contexts are an essential part of the theory. As we have seen,

264

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

Now Church has a category o0 of truth-values T and F, which are the referents
of the sentences. Then there is a category o1 of senses of sentences, that is,
Fregean thoughts, Gedanken. And then there is a category o2 of what Church
calls “propositional concepts”, that is, senses of “that clauses” or of names of
Fregean thoughts, and so on. Each category consists of senses determining
elements of the previous category as referents. There is a similar sequence starting
out with the individuals (or objects). One way Church does deviate from Frege is
that the truth-values are not assumed to be among the individuals, but are
assigned a separate logical type of their own.36
Then various particular notions also come in a hierarchy. For example, and
here I simplify Church’s own notation, consider the (material) conditional. 0 is
the function on the truth-values {T, F}, given by the familiar truth-table. 1 is
supposed to be a sense determining 0 as a referent, and so on. However, not
only does this automatically lead to Davidson’s unlearnability objection, there is
something else. 1 is supposed to be a sense determining 0 as a referent, but
which one? Plainly many such senses determine the same referent (“no backward
road”). Church gives no explanation whatsoever. Thus, it is not merely a
problem of an inﬁnite sequence: as early as the second level we are not told
what a symbol is supposed to mean.
If Church had a doctrine of “privileged” senses, then perhaps the system might
be intelligible. But this was not Church’s view. In very late writings his attitudes
are close to Quine’s on this point. In fact, on this type of issue he comes in this
very paper to the extreme conclusion that the problem of different ways of
designating the same thing makes a problem even for modal propositional
logic, a conclusion that Quine never drew.37
Church’s paper is faithful to Frege in this disputed respect. However, Dummett’s contrary point of
view is close in spirit to my ﬁnal conclusions.
As I have mentioned (footnote 10 above), Dummett himself proposes a modiﬁcation of Frege’s
notion of sense (and of indirect sense), giving rise to a two-level theory similar to that of Carnap, but
with another justiﬁcation. I myself am not inclined to accept Dummett’s modiﬁcation. The present
article will show why I think such a modiﬁcation unnecessary. Without going into details, I also
think that Dummett’s modiﬁed deﬁnition of ‘sense’ probably suffers from a problem of circular
deﬁnition.
36
Dummett (1973, pp. 182–184) favors just such a revision of Frege, but in his very critical
discussion of Church’s system, he fails to note that Church makes exactly the same revision. Nor
does he note in the pages just cited that he is echoing Church (no doubt with more philosophical
discussion of the desirability of the revision, which Church makes without argument and without
even noting that it is a revision).
37
Discussing the characteristic axiom of S4–that necessity implies double necessity–Church says:
According to the present theory, the answer to this question depends on what concept of the
proposition is employed. For example, that it is necessary that everything has some property or other is
no doubt itself necessary; but that the proposition mentioned on lines 27–28 of page 272 of Lewis and
Langford’s Symbolic Logic is necessary is true but not necessary. (Church, 1951, footnote 23; original
emphasis)
Some of the rest of us would take the ﬁrst way of determining the proposition in question to be
privileged over the second. In my own terminology above, the ﬁrst way of determining the

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

265

Leaving Church, we return to Kaplan. He believes that Frege’s treatment of
indirect quotation is a special case of a more general principle governing all
“oblique” contexts, that is, contexts in which words cannot have their ordinary
referents.38 He also thinks that Frege in “Über Sinn und Bedeutung” applies the
theory to direct quotation, taking him to advocate the theory that in direct
quotation the whole of an expression, and each of its component parts, refers to
itself. In other words, just as the preﬁxes “believes that”, “says that”, and the like
create contexts in which terms refer to their senses, so the “says” of direct
quotation (followed by quotation marks in the written language) creates a
context in which words are used autonymously, i.e., referring to themselves.
Now what Frege actually says is:
If words are used in the ordinary way, what one intends to speak of is their Bedeutung. It
can also happen, however, that one wishes to talk about the words themselves or their
sense. This happens, for instance, when the words of another are quoted. One’s own
words then ﬁrst designate words of the other speaker, and only the latter have their usual
Bedeutung. We then have signs of signs. In writing, the words are in this case enclosed in
quotation marks. Accordingly, a word standing between quotation marks must not be
taken as having its ordinary Bedeutung. (Frege, 1892, pp. 153–154)

In the very next paragraph he goes on to give his well-known theory of indirect
quotation and indirect reference (to the ordinary sense), the dominant theme of
this paper, already alluded to in the paragraph just quoted.
proposition is immediately revelatory, whereas the second is not revelatory at all. So, if Church
regards this example as typical, he ought to be a believer in S4. But clearly Church accepts no such
distinctions. There is more that I would have to say here, even from the point of view of Church’s
system, but the matter would call for an extensive digression. For a later writing, see Church (1973)
p. 27, and the accompanying footnote 2. See also Church (1988). But see also footnote 90 below.
38
Kaplan says:
Frege’s treatment of oblique contexts is often described as one according to which expressions in
such contexts denote their ordinary sense or meaning or intension (I here use these terms interchangeably). But this is a bad way of putting the matter for three reasons. (1) It is, I believe,
historically inaccurate. It ignores Frege’s remarks about quotation marks (see below) and other
special contexts. (2) It conﬂates two separate principles: (a) expressions in oblique contexts don’t
have their ordinary denotation (which is true), and (b) expressions in oblique contexts denote their
ordinary sense (which is not, in general, true). And (3) in focusing attention too rapidly on the
special and separate problems of intensional logic, we lose sight of the beauty and power of Frege’s
general method of treating oblique contexts . . . My own view is that Frege’s explanation, by way of
ambiguity, of what appears to be the logically deviant behavior of terms in intermediate contexts is
so theoretically satisfying that if we have not yet discovered or satisfactorily grasped the peculiar
intermediate objects in question, then we should simply continue looking.
. . . Look for something denoted by a compound, say, a sentence, in the oblique context. (In
ordinary contexts sentences are taken to denote their own truth values and to be intersubstitutable
on that basis.) And then using the fundamental principle: the denotation of the compound is a
function of the denotation of the parts, look for something denoted by the parts. It was the use of
this principle which, I believe, led to Carnap’s discovery of individual concepts, and also led Frege to
the view that quotation marks produce an oblique context within which each component expression
denotes itself (it is clear in quotation contexts what the whole compound denotes). (1968, p. 185)

266

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

So far one might think that everything supports Kaplan’s interpretation, but
there is an oddity. If types, not tokens, are in question, then the theory amounts
to what Kaplan says; but if so, why not state things as Kaplan does, that the words
designate themselves, rather than the words of the other speaker?
When I gave the present talk I left the matter there, but assumed that Kaplan
was correct, in spite of the oddity. However, a few pages later Frege says:
In direct quotation, a sentence designates another sentence, and in indirect speech a
thought. (Frege, 1892, p. 159; emphasis added)

So there are two possibilities. One is that here “sentence” means a token, since
otherwise one should not speak of “another” sentence. To me, to use “sentence”
in English to mean a token, so that two people that say exactly the same thing are
uttering different sentences, is very odd. The same thing would seem to apply to
the German “Satz”; I would like to know if “Satz” ever means a token
elsewhere in Frege’s writings. Moreover, even stipulating that tokens are
meant, the proposed Fregean theory in terms of tokens seems to me to have
considerable substantive difﬁculties.39 If such a theory cannot be defended,
one seems forced to conclude that Frege was confused in the passages in question.
As is well known, Frege does use quotation in his own writings to designate signs,
without their necessarily being used by another particular speaker or writer.40 I have
been hard pressed for an explicit statement of his convention. Such a statement
might give his general theory of direct quotation. Perhaps the following helps:
As such proper names of the sentences of the object-language I use these very sentences, but
enclosed in quotation marks. (Frege, 1979, p. 261; original emphasis)

Read very carefully, this does indeed seem to say that quotation simply creates
a context in which the sentences are used autonymously. (One can presume them
to be composed out of their component parts, also used autonymously, in
agreement with Kaplan’s attribution.) But I must say that this is a great deal to
be squeezed out of a single sentence.
39
See, however, Picardi (1992), pp. 284–290. She defends a token interpretation and even
thinks that it is required for the case in question, if I understand her communication to me correctly.
The book, written in Italian and published in Italy, was for these reasons unknown to me then and
now. Obviously she deserves considerable credit for noticing that the autonymous interpretation of
Fregean quotation marks, as stated by Kaplan, does not seem to accord with the text. Notice that the
putative Fregean theory in terms of tokens should not be confused with Davidson (1979).
Picardi has also called my attention to the discussion in Mendelsohn (2005), ch. 10, section 1. He
thinks that Frege was simply mistaken in regarding quotation of another speaker as a case of
reference at all; as opposed to the usual use of quotation marks discussed in philosophy, and indeed
introduced by Frege himself.
However, Künne (2010) regards the use of “another sentence” as due to Black and translates
the original as “again a sentence” (see p. 537 and his note 15). But to me there is still a residual
puzzle: why not “the same sentence”?
40
This is Mendelsohn’s “philosopher’s quotation”, much discussed in the literature, especially
since Davidson (1965) emphasized the theoretical problems involved in earlier accounts.

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

267

One should add (or repeat) that the analogy between direct and indirect
quotation stated by Frege in “Über Sinn und Bedeutung”, as quoted above,
certainly would go best with Kaplan’s interpretation, even though the rest of
the text does not seem to mean that. I will go on, as I originally did, assuming
that Frege does hold the theory of direct quotation that Kaplan
attributes to him.41
Strangely enough no one, to my knowledge, has raised the hierarchy problem
regarding the theory of direct quotation. After all, direct quotation can be
iterated any number of times. Would Frege’s theory lead to a hierarchy problem,
analogous to the problem people see for indirect quotation?
Now, analogously to Frege’s “indirect reference”, we could naturally use the
term “direct reference” for the reference of a term to itself in direct quotation.
But in recent philosophy “direct reference” has come to mean something else, so
instead we shall introduce the cumbersome phrase “the direct quotation reference”. Let me abbreviate this as the “quote-reference”. Then there will be a
quote-sense, and then won’t there also be a whole hierarchy of a quote-quote
reference, a quote-quote sense, and so on? Yet no one has thought that there was
such a mystery here, or at least no one has argued for there being such a mystery,
given Frege’s theory of direct quotation. Nor have the issues that I raised about
indirect quotation (the second German course and so on) been raised about
direct quotation. So let us take another look at this.
Let me ﬁrst mention some analogues to what I want to say. Suppose we make a
very general statement:
(1) When someone uses the word “here” the speaker (or writer) refers to the place
of utterance (or writing).
David Kaplan has made clauses like (1) prominent in his theory of demonstratives (statement (1) is not entirely accurate, and I think Kaplan (1989) realizes
that fact, but to simplify matters let us retain it).42 Is there anything else about
the sense of “here” that you need to know? Doesn’t (1) determine the reference
for all cases? And similarly for other indexicals. For example, “now” refers to the
time of utterance, and “I” (a case that we will return to later) refers to the speaker
or source of the utterance. These are general directions for the referents in the
language, no matter when and by whom they are uttered. One does not, it would

41
Corey Washington (1992) advocates the theory in question and attributes it to Frege and to
Searle (1989, p. 76) (presumably independently; I have not read Searle on this question). Peter
Geach, a great admirer of Frege, advocates the same theory but attributes it to no one else. See Geach
(1963; also in 1972, section 5.8) (in the preface to Geach (1972) he expresses some hesitation as
to whether this theory of quotation is true). Mendelsohn (2005, p. 173) quotes Reichenbach (1947)
as advocating a similar theory. Already Church (1956, p. 61) interprets Frege in the same way
as Kaplan does later.
42
Theories such as those of Davidson and Montague would have similar clauses.

268

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

seem, need anything more. However, in any particular case, to determine the
reference one needs a speciﬁcation of the speaker, the time, or both (or alternatively, of the particular utterance token, which might determine both).43
In other cases, however, general directions like (1) can be given that will
determine the reference for any sentence, or perhaps discourse, without the
supplementation of anything external to the sentence or discourse in question.
I am thinking of anaphora, pronominalization, and the like. In such cases as “the
latter”, “the former”, “the aforementioned person”, and various pronominal
cases such as “him”, where the reference is determined by the sentence itself, as
opposed to demonstrative pronouns, the general rule determines the reference for
each sentence or discourse, without the supplementation of anything else such as
speaker, time, or whatever. The general rule given may be syntactically complicated, but it should determine the reference in any particular case. Hence, as
applied to any particular case, it must be, on a Fregean theory, a Fregean sense,
since anything that determines a reference is a sense.
Let us apply these ideas to Frege’s apparent theory of direct quotation, and to
his theory of indirect quotation.
There are two relevant principles. For direct quotation we have:
(Æ) When words appear in direct quotes, they refer autonymously, that is, to
themselves.
As Kaplan emphasizes, the corresponding principle for indirect quotation is
completely analogous:
() When words appear in indirect contexts, that is, “says that”, “believes that”,
and so on, they refer to their senses in the clause following the “that”.
Both (Æ) and () are intended to be understood iteratively, so that when there
are iterative direct quotations, or “that clauses”, the reference is determined
recursively from the clause within the quote or following “that”.44
Certainly in the case of (Æ), one is unlikely to feel any mystery about the
iteration, since the rule that expressions refer autonymously is very clear. One
would feel no more mystery than in the case of anaphoric usages such as “the
latter”, and the syntactic rule involved is actually more straightforward. What
about the case of ()? Well, consider ﬁrst the simple uniterated case. Words in an
indirect context refer to their ordinary senses. But what is the sense in the indirect
context? Here we should surely say that the rule () itself, applied to each indirect
case, gives the indirect sense. For we have conceded that it determines the

43
This case, and some qualiﬁcations of the apparent drift of this paragraph, will be discussed
again below.
44
Actually, (Æ) and () should be understood together, since a direct quotation may appear
inside an indirect quotation, and vice versa, producing a more complex pattern of iterations.

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

269

reference in each particular case, and whatever determines a reference is a Fregean
sense. This consideration can then be applied iteratively, and we appear to have a
theory of the entire hierarchy.
Something very strange has gone on here, because these are entirely general
directions that ought to determine the reference in every case. How could there
be any mystery here? In the case of (), one aspect of the mystery has come from
such feelings as that the ambiguity involved in indirect senses is an ordinary
ambiguity, as in Kaplan’s exposition, without emphasizing the contextual determination of the ambiguity. This leads to the feeling that in a real Begriffsschrift
the ambiguity ought to be removed, as Frege says (with some fudging) in the
letter to Russell quoted before, and hence to Church’s system. In Church’s
system, as I have said, there is in effect a similar fudge, since the different symbols
in the inﬁnite sequence do systematically resemble each other in the subscripting
system, but in fact are completely independent, as Davidson rightly emphasizes.
I doubt that this aspect of the mystery would have arisen if case (Æ), as brought
out by Kaplan, had been the primary case considered.
However, even more crucial for the feeling of mystery in case () has been the
feeling that we have little real idea what the indirect senses, doubly indirect
senses, and so on, are. When this is combined with the aspect mentioned in the
previous paragraph, one feels that one not only has an unlearnable inﬁnite
hierarchy, but that one has scarcely any idea what this hierarchy might be. My
reply here is that the rule (), every time it (recursively) speciﬁes a reference, also
implicitly gives a sense, since Frege’s theory is that to determine a reference is to
give a sense. Hence, () itself gives the indirect sense, and when recursively
applied gives the doubly indirect sense, and so on. (What I say here will be
expanded, and in a sense qualiﬁed, later.) Here I am in agreement with Dummett
(as I anticipated above) that the contextual ambiguity of phrases in indirect
contexts (both for reference and for sense) is an essential, not an accidental, part
of the theory,45 in spite of Frege’s own ipse dixit.
Important to this presentation of Frege is that he has given general directions
for the reference of terms in all contexts and that this cannot possibly be
incomplete. There are indeed inﬁnite hierarchies generated by both (Æ) and
(), but these are given by a recursive rule.
Two compositional principles are generally attributed to Frege, rightly
I should think, though he himself used them rather than stating them. The
ﬁrst is that the referent of a whole is a function of (or is determined by) the
referents of its parts. The second principle analogously replaces “reference” by
“sense”. What these principles mean is that if in any piece of language one

45
I am not in agreement with his attempt to revise the sense-reference theory, so as to appear to
avoid any hierarchy problem, in parallel with the earlier attempt by Carnap. See footnote 35.

270

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

replaces some signiﬁcant part by one with the same referent (sense), the referent
(sense) of the whole is unchanged.46
A converse principle about senses seems less widely stated: the relation of
senses of a whole to the senses of its signiﬁcant parts is not only that of a function,
but that of a one-to-one function. This is because to understand the whole one
must understand its constituent parts, and hence the sense of the whole breaks
down into the senses of its constituent parts. As Dummett puts the matter:
The sense of a complex is compounded out of the senses of its constituents. (Dummett, 1973,
p. 152; original emphasis)47

But this means that we not only have a functional relationship from the parts to
the whole, but a converse functional relationship, in effect a one-to-one relation.48
(Clearly no such principle holds for reference.) For Frege’s own enunciation of this
principle, see a passage from his letter to Russell of 13 November 1904:
. . . Mont Blanc with its snowﬁelds is not itself a component part of the thought that
Mont Blanc is more than 4000 metres high . . . The sense of the word “moon” is a
component part of the thought that the moon is smaller than the earth. The moon
itself . . . is not part of the sense of the word “moon"; for then it would also be a
component part of that thought. (Frege, 1980, p. 163)
46
For senses (if they are identiﬁed with meanings of the constituent parts of a whole sentence
and hence constituent parts of the thought they express) the principle should be obvious. But is the
principle so obvious for reference (Bedeutung)? Why shouldn’t the reference of the whole be allowed
to depend on other features of the parts? Indeed, why not just say that exceptions to this principle
obviously exist, e.g., in indirect contexts and possibly in quotation? (In fact just this appears to be
Quine’s position. See Quine (1960), p. 151, where he says that Frege “nominally rectiﬁed”
exceptions to the principle by inventing his doctrine of oblique reference, whereas Quine himself
says that such contexts are not purely referential.) Then the entire complicated doctrine of oblique
and, in particular, indirect contexts that has been my main topic would not exist. (See also
Davidson’s remarks quoted in footnote 12.)
Looking over the transcript of my lecture, I see that I raised this question in passing, but did not
give an answer that I had previously proposed in classes on Frege. It could be argued that for Frege
the principle is analytic. The context shows what we are talking about, and that is what the referent
is. See for example Frege (1892), p. 153:
If words are used in the ordinary way, what one intends to speak of is their Bedeutung. It can also happen,
however, that one wishes to talk about the words themselves or their sense. (Full quotation given above.)
I think that what I am saying here is in agreement with Kaplan’s exposition in his (1968).
47
That Dummett has in effect stated the relevant principle, though not perhaps in terms of oneto-oneness, is new to the present version of this lecture.
48
As is well known, there are late passages where Frege appears to go back on this. See his letter
to Husserl of 9 December 1906 (Beaney, 1997, pp. 305–306), which comes close to identifying the
thoughts expressed by logically equivalent sentences, though it has a qualiﬁcation that only adds
perplexity (at least to the present writer).
Since according to Frege arithmetic reduces by appropriate deﬁnitions to logic, a sentence
containing “738” will retain the same sense with “643 + 95” in its place. This is a radical
alteration of Frege’s earlier remarks on sense and reference. See also Frege (1918–1919), p. 331,
on the active–passive transformation, or the corresponding interchange of “give” and “receive”,
which are said not to affect the thought; but perhaps allowing these transformations is compatible
with the principle.

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

271

Russell himself, in “On Denoting”, says:
In the proposition “Mont Blanc is over 1,000 meters high”, it is, according to him
[Frege], the meaning of “Mont Blanc”, not the actual mountain, that is the constituent of
the meaning of the proposition. (Russell, 1905, p. 483, footnote 2; original emphasis)49

The general principle is enunciated in Frege’s late Introduction to Logic, in the
section on sense and reference:
As the thought is the sense of the whole sentence, so a part of the thought is the sense of
part of the sentence. (Frege, 1979, p. 192)

The same passage also mentions the “Mont Blanc” example again.
One does not grasp the sense of the whole, without grasping the sense of the
parts. And to understand something is to grasp its sense.
As I said, Frege has given general directions for a theory of the references of
words in quotation-context in (Æ) and for indirect contexts in (), and no one
has ever suggested that there is a mystery about the theory in (Æ).50
Why is (Æ) not mysterious? What (Æ) says is clear enough. But for it to be of any
use speakers or writers must be able to apply it in particular cases. For example:
Abraham Lincoln said “Four score and seven years ago . . . ”
(Æ) says that the quoted words refer autonymously to themselves. How do we
know what these words are? Well, in a particular case of writing or utterance we
see or hear the entire sentence, and a fortiori hear or see any parts, including the
autonymously referential part. Here what we hear or see are tokens, and thereby
are aware of the corresponding types. So there should be no mystery as to how to
apply the theory in a particular case. Even if we are only contemplating the
sentence type in our mind, to fully comprehend it is to comprehend the type as a
part. It is like Russellian acquaintance.
Similarly for case (). Once we see that any time a referent is given it must be
given by a sense, we have seen that (), just like (Æ), really does give general
(recursive) directions for the entire hierarchy of senses and indirect senses.
However, there is the question of how an individual speaker will apply (). My
suggestion, once again, is that Frege, like Russell, has a doctrine of direct
acquaintance. Every time we determine a referent, we are introspectively acquainted with how the referent is determined, and that is the corresponding
sense. And our introspective acquaintance with this sense gives us a way of
determining it, and of referring to it, and this is the indirect sense. Thus the
49
Note Russell’s terminology: he uses “meaning” for Frege’s “Sinn”. He himself thought (at the
time of the relevant correspondence with Frege) that the mountain itself was a constituent or
component part of the proposition, and takes this position in the correspondence.
50
Although I must admit that it is unfair to stress this fact too much; perhaps no one thought
that there was a mystery about (Æ) because almost all the discussion of Frege and the mysterious
hierarchy has concentrated on (), and (Æ) has received much less attention.

272

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

Fregean hierarchy of indirect senses, doubly indirect senses, and the like is given
this way. Each level of the hierarchy is the acquaintance-sense of the previous
level. So Frege, although the doctrine may be less explicit, depends on a theory of
acquaintance very much like that of Russell.51
I already talked about a revelatory sense, and more strongly, about an immediately revelatory sense. One could now use the term acquaintance-revelatory. An
indirect sense, since it determines its referent by acquaintance, is such that one
needs no information, or even calculation, to realize what the referent is. On this
interpretation, not only does Frege, at least implicitly, have a doctrine of
acquaintance; but also, the list of objects of acquaintance that he would accept
is not so vastly different from Russell’s ﬁnal position. In “On Denoting”, as is
well known, he says, in contrast to Frege, “there is no meaning [that is, there is no
Sinn], and only sometimes a denotation” (Russell, 1905, p. 483, footnote 3;
original emphasis) as he puts it. He also ends the paper with his well-known
conclusion that “in every proposition that we can apprehend . . . all the constituents are really entities with which we have immediate acquaintance”
(ibid., p. 492). Under the pressures of the requirements of his semantical theory,
the list of such entities becomes progressively narrower. One’s own sense-data,
perhaps one’s own self, and abstract entities such as universals, are the objects
of acquaintance and the constituents of propositions.52 One could never be
acquainted with Mont Blanc, with all its snowﬁelds, nor could it be a constituent
of a proposition. There is an unconditional surrender to Frege on this point.
That Russell’s ultimate list of propositional constituents would be acceptable
to Frege, or close to it, is in large part already clear. Some of the rest might
become clearer if we consider Frege’s relatively late paper “Der Gedanke”
(1918–1919).53 This paper contains Frege’s ﬁrst extensive explicit discussion,
as far as I know, of indexicals, demonstratives, the ﬁrst person, one’s own private
inner states, and so on.54
Three distinguished and well-known writers have based important claims
about the interpretation of Frege on a crucial passage in this paper. Tyler
51
The order of presentation here is not the order in which I thought about these problems. Some
years before this lecture I had concluded that Frege must have an implicit doctrine of direct
acquaintance with senses, in order to make sense of the Fregean hierarchy of indirect senses and
so on. I had stated this view in various seminars. That the matter should be put in terms of how
individual speakers apply general directions, as in the case (), and the analogy with the case (Æ) was
much more recent. Nor did I think of the analogy between (Æ) and () and general linguistic rules
for anaphora. Also the relation to cases with indexicals (some of which will be discussed in Fregean
terms later in the lecture). It was probably presented this way in the present lecture for the ﬁrst time.
52
In saying this we ignore his later rejection of propositions altogether.
53
The title is translated by Beaney as “Thought”, by Geach and Stoothoff as “Thoughts”, and by
A. M. and M. Quinton as “The Thought”. (Otherwise Beaney follows the Geach–Stoothoff
translation in the text of the paper.) I will follow the Beaney pagination as usual.
54
On my view, anyway. Tyler Burge, as will be discussed below, interprets “Über Sinn und
Bedeutung” as already involved in a theory of indexicals. (However, see footnote 60 below for a
possible anticipation of one aspect of “Der Gedanke” already in the Grundlagen in 1884.)

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

273

Burge, in his marvelously titled paper, “Sinning Against Frege” (Burge, 1979a),55
argues that “the basic misunderstanding is the identiﬁcation of Frege’s notion of
Sinn (sense) with the notion of linguistic meaning” (Burge, 2004, p. 213) (surely
the “misunderstanding”, if there is one, is indeed a common one). Burge’s
argument is simple. What about tensed senses, or sentences containing indexicals? Consider, for example, “Today it is raining in Stockholm”.56 The meaning
of this sentence does not vary from day to day. Obviously its truth-value does
vary, and the variation in truth-value is due to a variation in the reference of
“today”. But sense determines reference, and the reference of the whole sentence
is its truth-value. Hence, “today” must have different senses on different days
(otherwise sense would not determine reference). Similarly, the whole sentence
must have different senses on different days, since it has different truth-values
(references, and sense here determines truth-value).
John Perry, in his inﬂuential article “Frege on Demonstratives” (1977), ﬁrst
states (correctly) that, where S and S 0 are two sentences, “If S is true and S0 is not,
S and S 0 express different thoughts” (ibid., p. 476).57 Perry then argues that there is
a problem for Frege here: “Russia and Canada quarreled today” can be true on 1
August but false on 2 August (ibid., pp. 478–479):
So, if “today” provides a completing sense on both days, its sense must change just at
midnight. But what we know when we understand how to use “today” doesn’t seem to
change from day to day. (ibid., p. 479)

The main difference between Perry’s argument (which Burge cited) and
Burge’s is that Perry presents the argument simply as a problem for Frege,
where Burge draws the conclusion that for Frege sense and meaning are two
different things. Burge does not note the odd omission in Frege, if Sinn is not
meaning, of any technical term for the ordinary notion of meaning.58 It is as if
David Kaplan, in his well-known distinction in “Demonstratives” (1987), had
introduced his term “content” but no term for “Character”. (If Burge were right,
Frege’s use of Sinn would be closely analogous to Kaplan’s “content”, and
“meaning”, in the ordinary sense, to Kaplan’s “character”.) Kaplan, by the way,
55
All references are to the 2004 reprint. Burge gives some credit for the pun in the title to Paul
Benacerraf.
56
The example is my own, obviously inﬂuenced by the place where the lecture was given. That
I am giving a fair representation of Burge’s argument should be clear to any reader of the ﬁrst few
pages of his chapter. Frege himself discusses “today”, and the passage containing this discussion is
the basis of Burge’s interpretation.
57
Perry refers to some opening passages in “Der Gedanke” to support his claim. Actually, Frege
says there: “And when we call a sentence true we really mean [meinen] that its sense is true” (Frege,
1918–1919, p. 327). But without going into fussy terminological questions (and Perry himself
quotes the passage as saying that it is thoughts for which the question of truth-value arises) it is easy
to see that, carefully phrased, Perry’s claim would obviously be correct.
58
Frege, of course, has preempted “Bedeutung” for denotation or reference, whatever the
translators may decide to do, and therefore, on Burge’s account, still owes us a technical term for
meaning in the ordinary sense.

274

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

is deeply inﬂuenced in his discussion of the relevant issues in Frege by Perry’s
paper, and is the third distinguished author to whom I have alluded.59
But all this goes directly contrary to what I understand to be the plain meaning
of Frege’s explicit ipse dixit in the very passage quoted and emphasized by Burge:
If a time-indication is conveyed by the present tense one must know when the sentence
was uttered in order to grasp the thought correctly. Therefore the time of utterance is part
of the expression of the thought. (Frege, 1918–1919, p. 332)

What does this mean? “Today it is raining in Stockholm”, or even better, “Now
it is raining in Stockholm”, or more simply, “It is raining in Stockholm”, is not the
expression of a complete thought. Also included in the expression of the thought,
and hence in the sentence (Satz), is not merely the verbiage, but also a time. The real
Satz or expression of a thought (Gedankenausdruck) is therefore an ordered pair:
hL,ti
Here t is the time of utterance, where L is the piece of language, such as “It is
raining now in Stockholm”. But really, since it is part of the expression of the
thought, the time of utterance is, for Frege, an unrecognized piece of language.
To what does t refer? That is, what is its Bedeutung? To make any sense of the
passage, it must refer autonymously, that is, to itself. Thus, “It is raining in
Stockholm” is incomplete—what it expresses must be ﬁlled out.60 Take it to be
“It is raining in Stockholm at—”. If this were read with a tenseless “is” (not really
much to be found in ordinary language in connection with times and dates; it is
really philosophers’ jargon)61 it could be ﬁlled out with various completions such
as “noon”, “15 April 2005”, or “the same moment when Kennedy was shot”, and
the like. But if uttered with the ordinary present-tense “is”, the completion is the
time of utterance used autonymously. It therefore stands in place of a speciﬁc
date and time, or deﬁnite description, as in the examples above, which are
conventional pieces of language.

59
See Kaplan (1989). Kaplan gives no sign of agreement with Burge on the point in question,
and I do not intend to give the opposite impression. Perry’s inﬂuence on him will come out below.
60
See already in the Grundlagen where he says:
The concept “inhabitant of Germany” contains, in fact, a time-reference as a variable element in it,
or, to put it mathematically, is a function of the time. Instead of “a is an inhabitant of Germany” we
can say “a inhabits Germany”, and this refers to the current date at the time. (Frege, 1884,
pp. 59–60)
Perhaps the last sentence is a bit vaguely stated, but the whole is an anticipation of the later doctrine
of “Der Gedanke”—that present-tensed verbal expressions are incomplete.
61
In his discussion of the matter, Frege explicitly recognizes the use of “is” in the laws of
mathematics as tenseless. This we may accept, and there may be other cases, but I do not think that a
tenseless “is” is involved in ordinary language very often in connection with ordinary things. In
particular, ordinary language giving the time when an event occurred (occurs or will occur) is
invariably tensed. If a speaker does not know whether a given date is past, present or future, she/he
will use a disjunction of tensed clauses, not a tenseless “is”.

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

275

The Sinn of the time of utterance in the corresponding Gedanke is therefore
that of autonymous designation via acquaintance with the referent, just as in the
case of quotation.62 The speaker (or writer or thinker) is acquainted both with
the time of utterance (or writing or thought), and he must be acquainted with
the Sinn as well, a Sinn of autonymous designation. Everything could be put in
terms of general truth-conditions analogous to (Æ) above, but to apply these
general conditions the subject must be acquainted with the time of utterance,
as in the quotation case and the application of (Æ). As general conditions, we
have conditions for when a present-tense expression of a thought is true, even
though no token needs to be uttered, written, or thought. What expresses the
thought is an ordered pair of a sentence and a time.63 But in particular
applications, there is a token, and the speaker (writer, thinker) is acquainted
with the time it is uttered. The speaker is also acquainted with the autonymous
Sinn involved.64, 65
62
Thus Burge is right to deny that the referent is a part of the thought, or that in this case sense is
to be identiﬁed with referent. See Burge (2004, p. 216). Rather the sense is that of autonymous
designation. Nevertheless, Burge does recognize that Frege says that the time of utterance is part of
the expression of the thought. How after all can something be part of the expression of a thought
and not have a Sinn that is part of the thought? Burge simply seems to ignore this question in his
argument against the identiﬁcation of Sinn and meaning, and does not recognize that it threatens his
argument, regardless of what the Sinn of the time may be. For there is no longer a Sinn that changes
while the meaning is constant, once one realizes that the Sinn of a time is part of the thought too.
If my exegesis is correct, the situation is very close to what Burge wants to deny, even though sense
and referent cannot literally be identiﬁed.
Dagﬁnn Fllesdal has called my attention to the writings of Wolfgang Künne of which Künne
(1992) is a representative example. Like the present account, Künne stresses that for Frege times,
persons, etc., can be part of the expression of the thought. However, his reading is certainly not mine
in signiﬁcant respects. For example, he agrees with Burge that Frege’s Sinn is not meaning, and
concludes that Frege has no term for linguistic meaning (see p. 723). Nor, at least here, does he say
anything about my doctrine of acquaintance with Sinne for autonymous designation. I should add,
where demonstration is involved, as in pointing, to me it is clearly that act of demonstration, not the
object designated (as in Künne), which is part of the expression of the Gedanke. The object itself is
the Bedeutung, and the Sinn is the rule connecting a demonstration such as pointing to its object.
63
The ordered pair representation is of course my own mathematical transcription of Frege’s
informal idea that the time is part of the representation of the thought. Nothing hangs on it if
someone prefers something else. Frege himself would no doubt think of this as a simple expression
F(t), where F is the unsaturated linguistic part and t is the time of utterance.
64
Perry writes:
By breaking the connection between senses and thoughts, we give up any reason not to take the
options closed to Frege. We can take the sense of a sentence containing a demonstrative to be a role,
rather than a Fregean complete sense, and thoughts to be the new sort, individuated by object and
incomplete sense, rather than Fregean thoughts. (1977, p. 493)
Actually, the theory Perry is suggesting (which I have not entirely tried to grasp) seems to be related
to Frege’s actual theory. The real Frege holds that the senses of statements containing demonstratives and indexicals are incomplete. They are completed by senses given by objects that autonymously designate themselves, or sometimes by gestures such as pointing, whose senses are that the
object pointed to is what is designated.
65
Gareth Evans, in his important paper “Understanding Demonstratives” (1981; all references
are to the 1985 reprint), also discusses the question of whether Perry’s position is “just a notational
variant of Frege’s [real] theory” (1985, p. 314; and see also the subsequent pages through 317). See

276

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

Frege reiterates his view towards the end of the paper:
The thought that we express by the Pythagorean theorem is surely timeless, eternal,
unvarying. But are there not thoughts which are true today but false in six months’ time?
The thought, for example, that the tree there is covered with green leaves, will surely be
false in six months’ time. No, for it is not the same thought at all. The words “This tree is
covered with green leaves” are not sufﬁcient by themselves to constitute the expression of
a thought, for the time of utterance is involved as well. Without the time speciﬁcation
thus given we have not a complete thought, i.e. we have no thought at all. Only a sentence
with the time-speciﬁcation ﬁlled out, a sentence complete in every respect, expresses a
thought. But this thought, if it is true, is true not only today or tomorrow but timelessly.
(Frege, 1918-1919, p. 343)66

On this theory, then, tensed sentences are on Frege’s view incomplete. What is
their Bedeutung? Plainly concepts, that is concepts applying to times, or functions
from times to truth-values. On this theory “now” designates an identity function
mapping each time to itself. “Today” denotes a function mapping each time into
the day containing it (it could be explicitly deﬁned as “the day it is now”).67
However, the way Frege continues the earlier passage, where he asserts that the
time is part of the expression of the thought, does create some confusion:
If someone wants to say today what he expressed yesterday using the word “today”, he will
replace this word with “yesterday”. Although the thought is the same its verbal expression
must be different in order that the change of sense which would otherwise be effected by
the differing times of utterance may be cancelled out. (Frege, 1918-1919, p. 332)

Burge instead translates the end of the passage as:
. . . the verbal expression must be different, to compensate for the change of sense which
would otherwise be brought about by the different time of utterance. (Burge, 2004,
p. 214)

also his representations by ordered triples, etc., of various Fregean thoughts in reply to Perry. It is
clear that Evans’s views have some strong relation to my own, though I have not attempted a
detailed comparison.
I regret that when I gave the present lectures I was apparently unaware of Evans’s discussions of
the relevant issues about time, the ﬁrst person, demonstratives, and his reply to Perry. Perhaps I did
not know this paper at the time (though I have discussed Evans’s views in some later presentations of
the material). Alternatively, I may have remembered it primarily for its controversial and, as stated,
I think unacceptably strong claim (under some inﬂuence of John McDowell) that “I know of no
passage in which Frege can be construed as insisting that singular terms must have an existenceindependent sense”, even in natural language. I may have mistakenly thought of the paper as entirely
resting on this claim. (Evans seems to have softened his position on the issue later, and he is right to
call attention to Frege’s emphasis in some passages on ﬁction and lapses into ﬁction.)
66
I am indebted to Evans’s “Understanding Demonstratives” (1981) for emphasizing this
passage.
67
Frege thinks that in a Begriffsschrift functions should be deﬁned for all arguments, and
artiﬁcially extends the deﬁnitions of functions with restricted domains. But here we are concerned
with ordinary language.

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

277

If Frege really means that we have expressed literally the same thought again, it is
very hard for me to see how to reconcile this assertion with his other doctrines.
On my own exegesis, there are two times of utterance t0 and t1 and the two
utterances are ordered pairs, hS0, t0i and hS1, t1i, where S0 is the earlier utterance
with “today”, and S1 is the later utterance with “yesterday”. “Today” denotes a
function which when applied to t0 (used autonymously) gives the day containing
t0, and “yesterday” similarly denotes a function that gives the previous day to the
day containing t1. Although these are indeed the same day, they plainly pick it
out in different ways, paradigmatic cases of difference in sense. Moreover, it is
hard to see how any exegesis compatible with Frege’s general principles could
yield a different result. If times of utterance are indeed part of the expression of a
thought, and designate autonymously, it is clear that different times (considered
as bits of language) have different senses. Also, the sense of “the previous day to
the day containing” is part of the sense of the second sentence.
How could anyone argue that the two sentences in question have the same
sense? The basic principle that would have to be violated is that the sense of a
sentence (the thought) is composed of the senses of its parts. In this case the
principle would have to be replaced by Frege’s talk of “canceling out” or
“compensation”. But such a move would be a highly specialized violation of
Frege’s own general principles.
My own view is that a present-tense thought expressed at a time t0 (and
perhaps using “now” or “today”) cannot be recaptured at any later time,
if Frege’s account of how these thoughts are expressed is correct.68 This is simply
because the earlier time is never with us again, and it is supposed to be part of the
expression of the thought. We can indeed remember having had such a thought,
and describe it, including the time at which it occurred, but it can never be
repeated in exactly the same way.69
These considerations are reinforced when one considers longer passages of
time. In English we have to say “the day before yesterday”. But in Frege’s own
language we could say “vorgestern”.70 In principle we could imagine expressions
for arbitrarily long time lapses. Or we could consider expressions frankly involving a number, for example, “n days ago”, “524 days ago”. How could anyone
imagine that they preserve the sense of the original? One could doubt them, or
make mistakes about them, not because of any change of mind, or forgetting the
original situation, but rather because of a miscalculation of the number of days. It
68
Thus I do not agree with Evans’s attempt to rescue Frege on this point, even though his paper
should certainly be consulted, as an attempt to argue the contrary. I will not go into his arguments
against the “atomistic” nature of my conception.
69
What about modern “four-dimensionalist” views? Perhaps in some sense the earlier time is still
with us. First, there is little evidence that Frege is involved in these all-too-modern views. Second,
in any case the time t0 was the time of utterance; this indeed happened only once.
70
I mentioned Hebrew in the lectures, but as people pointed out, why not emphasize Frege’s
own language?

278

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

would be very un-Fregean to say that the thought is the same as long as the
number of days involved is reasonably short. What would be the boundary for
“reasonably short”?71
However, there are some important problems to be considered here. We can
pick up an old newspaper and read, “Russia and France are now at war”. How can
we understand this if the thought expressed can never be entertained at any later
time, as I have claimed must be the Fregean view? We understand this because we
understand the general rule, discussed above, as to how to understand sentences
containing “now”. They are incomplete and are to be completed by the time of
utterance considered as part of the expression of the thought, and so on, as we have
seen. A general rule was given, and we know how the rule is to be applied by a
writer, speaker, or reader, at any time. This involves the fact that the writer was
acquainted with the time of writing when he wrote the sentence, just as we are
acquainted with the present time when we are reading the old report. And so on.
What if we report on what the newspaper said? We express this by something
like, “At the time of its appearance, the newspaper said that Russia and France
were then at war”. This does not mean that “Russia and France were then at war”
expresses the same thought at the present time as “Russia and France are now at
war” expressed at that time in the newspaper. Rather, the change from “now” to
“then” expresses at the present time a conventional way of describing a thought
expressed with “now” at the earlier time. The very same convention would be
followed by the journalist who wrote the report at the earlier time.72
The case of reporting on the next day is similar. If someone says, “today it is
raining in Stockholm”, the next day we can report “yesterday John said that it
was raining in Stockholm”. Perhaps more relevantly, someone can tell me today
“yesterday it was raining in Stockholm”, and I can report “John told me that
yesterday it was raining in Stockholm”. The same will hold for an individual
71
See Frege’s remarks on Kant in Frege (1884), p. 6 (last paragraph). Even if only one day’s lapse
in time appears to be involved, one can be confused about the time period. See Kaplan (1989),
p. 538, who mentions Rip van Winkle (in spite of his admiration for Frege’s remarks on “yesterday”
and “today” as anticipating the modern theory of demonstratives).
72
Gareth Evans mentions the problem of an old newspaper (yesterday’s in his case), using it to
argue that of course we understand yesterday’s newspaper, that we would report on it using
“yesterday”, and that these facts must support Frege’s statements that we still understand the old
Gedanke and can report on it using “yesterday”. He quotes some other philosophers as taking Frege
to hold that we (nearly enough) can reproduce a thought provided that the reference of the subject is
preserved even with a change of sense.
Evans rejects these philosophers’ interpretation of Frege as totally “antagonistic . . . to the
theory . . . of sense and reference” (Evans, 1985, p. 307). He asks whether Frege might just as well
have used “my birthday” instead of “yesterday”. In view of Frege’s notorious footnote on “Aristotle”
as quoted in Naming and Necessity and this chapter, there is some opening for the philosophers he
opposes to be right. (See also Kaplan on the pseudo de re, (1989), p. 555.) However, I think Evans is
right that Frege is supposing a more intimate relation between the “yesterday” and “today”
statements, leading him to suppose that they express the same thought. In the “Aristotle” case, he
plainly does not think that the same thought is literally expressed by different speakers, as I have
argued.

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

279

recalling his own past beliefs. These reporting conventions should not give rise to
the illusion (in a Fregean analysis)73 that “yesterday it was raining in Stockholm”
expresses the same thought on one day that “today it was raining in Stockholm”
expresses on the previous day. The point is that we know what it is like to express
beliefs involving “now”, both because of the general principles enunciated involving the content of these beliefs and what it is like for a believer to be acquainted
with a given moment. We apply conventional transformations in indirect discourse reports on these beliefs, even though such reports describe thoughts that are
no longer, strictly speaking, available to us.74 And we can read the old newspaper
and understand it, though the thought it expresses is no longer available.75
Frege’s treatment of the analogous case of ﬁrst person statements will be
described below. My revision of Frege’s remarks on “today” and “yesterday” is
meant to make Frege’s treatment of the temporal case consistent with his
treatment of the interpersonal case. The later discussion of that case may make
my remarks on the temporal case clearer.
Let me return to Burge’s views on the nature of Sinn. Burge argued that
Frege’s treatment of (temporal and other) indexicals shows that Sinn cannot be
identiﬁed with meaning. My own analysis is that Frege’s treatment of the
phenomena in question, properly understood, creates no objection against such
an identiﬁcation. Burge uses his analysis to criticize some of my remarks in
Naming and Necessity (Kripke, 1980) on Frege’s view of ordinary proper names.
Since I have rejected Burge’s view, it will give me no reason to retract the remarks
in question. However, in my own self-defense, I will take the opportunity to
elaborate a bit further on the issue.76

73

I am not saying what one should think in a non-Fregean analysis. See footnote 80, 81 below.
In a discussion session after my lecture, Gunnar Björnsson asked how I would handle “you
promised (yesterday) that you were coming today”. At the time I took this question under
advisement. John Perry also thinks, in his “Afterword” to the reprinted version of “Frege on
Demonstratives” in Perry (1993), that indirect discourse reports, both in the temporal and the
interpersonal cases, form a crucial objection to Evans’s defense of Frege. In the discussion above,
I have tried to reply to these objections. The indirect discourse reports, and other reports on
thoughts we cannot express or even think, give our own conventional descriptions of the nature of
these thoughts.
I should add that although Perry is not sure he is interpreting Evans rightly on the issue (and I have
not looked into the matter), he takes Evans to be defending Frege by proposing that days (times,
subjects) actually are components of thoughts. To this notion of thoughts he objects that “if objects,
rather than modes of presentation of them, ﬁgure in Evans’s thoughts, then they represent the same
sort of departure from Frege’s theory as . . . I proposed . . . It is a departure, for Frege disavowed such
hybrids” (Perry, 1993, p. 23). As I have said, I have not tried to ﬁgure out the relation to Evans’s
proposal, but on my interpretation, it is not the time of utterance itself that ﬁgures as a Sinn in the
“now” thought, but the type of autonymous designation of a time by itself given by the speaker’s
acquaintance with the time. “Today” is analysed as “the day containing now”, etc.
75
I am indebted here to conversations with Romina Padró.
76
Burge also has things to say about rigid designation and the like. I conﬁne my remarks here to
what he says about one issue, the issue raised by Frege’s “Aristotle” footnote in “Über Sinn und
Bedeutung.”
74

280

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

Consider the following well-known footnote in “Über Sinn und Bedeutung”,
which I quote from Burge’s own translation:
In the case of an actual proper name such as “Aristotle” opinions as to the sense may
differ. It might for instance be taken to be the following: the pupil of Plato and teacher of
Alexander the Great. Anybody who does this will attach another sense to the sentence
“Aristotle was born in Stagira” than will a man who takes as sense of the name: the teacher
of Alexander the Great who was born in Stagira. So long as the reference remains the
same, such variations of sense may be tolerated, although they are to be avoided in the
theoretical structure of a demonstrative science and ought not to occur in a perfect
language. (Burge, 2004, p. 217)

Since Burge makes a point of giving his own translations of all quotations from
Frege, and seems to be suggesting that previous translators are unreliable, I must
add that in this instance his translation is virtually identical with that of Max
Black, as anyone who compares the two will see. I myself took Frege to be saying
that given the ﬁrst deﬁnition, “Aristotle was born in Stagira” would be nontrivial, whereas someone who used the second deﬁnition would regard the same
sentence as trivial. I also took him to be supposing that the deﬁnition of proper
names by deﬁnite descriptions was typical, and attacked the description theory of
ordinary proper names as a view to be found in Frege and Russell.
Whether I was right in ascribing a description theory of proper names to Frege
(which certainly agrees with his examples) would not be the main issue here.
Gareth Evans, in a piece of writing that as far as I know was not published,
remarked that certainly Frege, like Russell, had generally been understood in this
way. This made it important for me to rebut the theory, whether historically it
was Frege’s theory or not.
More important for present purposes is the following: I certainly had understood Frege as saying that many proper names mean one thing to one speaker and
another to another; that there is a divergence of idiolect, and that this result is
counterintuitive. Burge thinks that his own understanding of Frege on the
distinction between “sense” and “meaning”, and its relation to Frege’s theory
of indexicals, will give rise to an entirely different interpretation of the passage.
Burge points out that Feigl’s translation, though it usually renders “Sinn” as
“sense”, translates one sentence in the footnote just quoted as: “Whoever accepts
this sense will interpret the meaning [my italics] of the statement ‘Aristotle was
born in Stagira’ differently from one who interpreted the sense of ‘Aristotle’ as
the Stagirite teacher of Alexander the Great”.77 According to Burge, this “slip”
reads the identiﬁcation of sense and meaning into the passage, and was “probably
inﬂuential, as we shall see” (Burge, 2004, p. 220).

77
“On Sense and Nominatum”, trans. H. Feigl, in H. Feigl and W. Sellars (eds.), Readings in
Philosophical Analysis (New York, Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1949).

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

281

The inﬂuence turns out to be on me. I did indeed quote the Feigl translation
in Naming and Necessity (Kripke, 1980, p. 30). Burge seems to suggest (Burge,
2004, p. 203) that if I had only been aware of the Black translation, I would not
have been misled into thinking that, strictly speaking, different speakers have
different idiolects in which “Aristotle” and other names mean different things.
And I guess my readers must have been unaware of Black’s translation also, or at
least they failed to look it up.
As against all this let me say the following: I do not remember why I quoted this
particular translation. I may simply have grabbed it before the lecture, which was
orally delivered, or perhaps I thought that it makes the point more explicit. However,
I doubt that the point would appear to be any different had I quoted Black’s
translation (which, as I said, is substantially the same as Burge’s). I submit that if
the translation I read had been “will attach a different sense”, as in Black and Burge,
a reader understanding this as ordinary English, and innocent of Burge’s special
exegesis, would understand the passage in exactly the same way as I intended, that is,
that different speakers use the name “Aristotle” differently, though preserving the
reference. I myself had taught the Geach–Black collection (Frege, 1952) in classes on
Frege, including other papers, especially “Function and Concept” (Frege, 1891). As
against any serious suggestion that I was unaware of the Black translation, note that
I follow Black in my book in using “reference” rather than Feigl’s “nominatum” or
Russell’s “denotation” (in contrast to Carnap, Russell, and Church. See footnote 2).
To get to the really substantive issue: Burge suggests that “the senses associated
with proper names and other indexical constructions shift with context . . . In this
respect Frege treats names and indexicals in the same way” (Burge, 2004, p. 217).
However, we have seen that Frege does not hold that tensed sentences (and senses
involving demonstratives and indexicals) shift their senses from time to time
(context to context). Rather their senses are constant but incomplete, and must
be completed by the time of utterance (or other relevant contextual factors). It is
strange in any case that one must rely on “Der Gedanke”, which was written more
than a quarter of a century later than “Über Sinn und Bedeutung”, to understand
the former paper. Readers must have been greatly misled for a long time!78
78

Really, an even longer time. Long after “Über Sinn und Bedeutung” was well known to
philosophers, the importance of “Der Gedanke” was not recognized. It was not included in the
Geach–Black collection (Frege, 1952). The ﬁrst translation of it into English was that of the
Quintons, appearing only in 1956. The Geach–Stoothoff translation dates from 1977. My
impression is that the contemporary philosophical community only gradually recognized the
fundamental importance of this paper.
Burge does quote a sentence from “Über Sinn und Bedeutung” itself: “To every expression
belonging to a complete totality of signs, there should certainly correspond a deﬁnite sense; but
natural languages often do not satisfy this condition, and one must be content if the same word has
the same sense in the same context” (Burge, 2004, p. 217). Without Burge’s special exegetical
apparatus, I would have understood the passage as saying that in natural language, unlike in a
scientiﬁc Begriffsschrift, ambiguities occur and one must be content that an ambiguous term has a
ﬁxed sense in a given context. (And see my reference to this remark in footnote 32 above.)

282

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

Having made this joke, I myself wish to cite a passage from “Der Gedanke”
that conclusively shows that Frege thinks that different speakers, attaching
different descriptions to the same name, strictly speaking have different idiolects.
Now if both Leo Peter and Rudolph Lingens understand by “Dr Gustav Lauben” the
doctor who is the only doctor living in a house known to both of them, then they both
understand the sentence “Dr Lauben was wounded” in the same way; they associate the
same thought with it . . .
Suppose further that Herbert Garner knows that Dr Gustav Lauben was born on 13
September 1875 in N.N. and this is not true of anyone else; suppose, however, that he
does not know where Dr Lauben now lives nor indeed anything else about him. On the
other hand, suppose Leo Peter does not know that Dr Lauben was born on 13 September
1875 in N.N. Then as far as the proper name “Dr Gustav Lauben” is concerned, Herbert
Garner and Leo Peter do not speak the same language, although they do in fact designate
the same man with this name; for they do not know that they are doing so. (Frege, 1918–
1919, pp. 332–333)

The relevant original German, which I cite because of the suggestions that
readers are relying on erroneous translations, is “sprechen . . . nicht dieselbe
Sprache” (ibid., p. 65 in the original German). I cannot imagine a more explicit
statement—in the very paper that Burge is relying on—of the view that Burge
says that Frege has been misunderstood to hold; namely, that common natural
languages are really unions of idiolects or dialects that differ from person to
person according to what sense they associate with a given name, even when the
reference is the same.
This is exactly in accordance with the usual and orthodox exegesis of the “Über
Sinn und Bedeutung” footnote on different senses of “Aristotle”.79 There is no
79
It is unlikely that Frege is basing his point about “Dr Lauben” on the view, pressed by some
philosophers, that proper names are not part of the language (German, English, etc.). Whatever
plausibility this view may have with respect to “Dr Lauben”, plainly some proper names are parts of
natural languages. I may wonder what Aristotle is called in Hebrew or Greek. A German may
wonder what word we English speakers use for his country, and an English speaker may ask the
converse question about the German word for “Germany”. In the case, for example, of the last
question my knowledge of German has a gap if I do not know the answer. Yet the point that
different descriptions might be associated with a name remains the same. If Frege thought
“Dr Lauben” was a special case, he might have said so.
The issue raised in the previous paragraph is a brief and only partial treatment of views about
proper names expressed by some philosophers. It deserves a fuller treatment elsewhere.
One must also admit that the situation supposed regarding Dr Lauben is rather peculiar. When
Frege supposes that someone associates with the name “Aristotle” the sense “the pupil of Plato and
teacher of Alexander the Great” (who may or may not have any idea where Aristotle was born), while
someone else associates with the name “the teacher of Alexander the Great who was born in Stagira”,
the situation is completely analogous to that of Dr Lauben. But would Frege have actually written
that the two different speakers “do not know” that they are designating the same man? Surely this
would be an embarrassment. His statement that such variations of sense are tolerable in natural
language seems to go in a different direction. Perhaps the difference in attitude does indeed have
something to do with the fact that “Aristotle” is the name of a well-known man, part of the common
language. But theoretically the cases are the same.

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

283

reason to doubt the exegesis on the basis of suspicions of bad translation, or
unfamiliarity with Frege’s theory of indexicals, or anything else.80
Let me go back to our current topic, indexicals. What about Frege’s theory of
the ﬁrst person singular, of “I”? There is of course much current and past
discussion of the ﬁrst person point of view—Descartes, Wittgenstein, Castañeda,
and many others.
“Now”, Frege says, “everyone is presented to himself in a special and primitive
way, in which he is presented to no one else” (Frege, 1918–1919, p. 333). Perry
and, following him, Kaplan (who in one place calls the passage beginning with
this sentence “tortured”, while he commends Frege’s remarks on “yesterday” and
“today” criticized above),81 seems to take Frege to be saying that each person
must be presented to himself in a special, unique qualitative way, statable in the
common language. It is easy to doubt, or indeed to reject, such a view. And, as
Perry says, the analogue would be to interpret “now” in such a way that each
instant must have its own qualitative character. We have seen that Frege’s
treatment of “now” involves no such thing. Let me continue the passage where
Frege discusses tense, passing over some of the discussion (such as the remarks on
“yesterday” and “today”):

If Frege’s view of names like “Aristotle” in natural language makes his view problematic, as I think
it does, then, modifying a suggestion of Devitt and Sterelny (1999), I would call it “the problem of
unwanted idiolects”.
80
Burge claims (2004, p. 217) that “Der Gedanke” conﬁrms his theory that for Frege names are
like indexicals, and so on. But I do not see how.
It might be mentioned that Burge himself (in Burge, 1973) holds that names are demonstratives
followed by special predicates. But presumably he is not reading his view back into Frege.
I must admit that some passages in Burge’s paper make me wonder whether he is consistently
disputing the point I am reiterating here. For example, in (2004), p. 232, he acknowledges that the
Aristotle footnote implies that what may be a near logical truth in one speaker’s mouth will be a
factual assertion in that of another. On p. 218, ﬁrst paragraph, perhaps Burge might be read as after
all agreeing that according to Frege different speakers speak different idiolects in connection with
names. These and other passages make me wonder sometimes whether on the points in question he
really disputes my interpretation or rather disputes my claim that Frege’s view, so interpreted, is
implausible. But then the emphasis on indexicals and the dispute over the nature of Sinn would have
little relevance.
81
Kaplan (1989), p. 501. Probably Kaplan is thinking of “yesterday” and “today” as directly
referential demonstratives, picking out the same date in two different ways, and yielding the same
“content”, in Kaplan’s terminology (see also my own distinction between ﬁxing a reference and
giving a meaning). However, I am discussing the passage from Frege’s point of view, not alternative
later points of view. It is possible that some of the remarks I have made against the view in Frege
could be maintained against the later points of view, but we need not discuss the issue here.
Kaplan’s emphatic rejection, under the inﬂuence of Perry, of the passage beginning with what
I have quoted, seems to me simply to be wrong. (In fairness to Kaplan, I should add that in later
communications with me about this issue, he could see my point and described his earlier writing as
inﬂuenced by “irrational exuberance”. See also Kaplan’s later discussion of the passage from Frege
on pp. 533–535, which is more nuanced than the earlier characterization, though, in my opinion,
still not free of serious objections.)

284

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

In all such cases the mere wording, as it can be preserved in writing, is not the complete
expression of the thought; the knowledge of certain conditions accompanying the
utterance, which are used as means of expressing the thought, is needed for us to
grasp the thought correctly. Pointing the ﬁnger, hand gestures, glances may belong here
too. The same utterance containing the word “I” in the mouths of different men will
express different thoughts of which some may be true, others false. (Frege, 1918–1919,
p. 332)

We recall that Frege’s theory is that the present tense and “now” involve an
autonymous use of a time as a piece of language. In general, Frege thinks that
such wording leaves an incomplete sense. Pointing, for example, is part of the
expression of the thought. Its sense determines the referent as the object
pointed to.
If one looks at the last sentence about “I” in isolation it might appear to
suggest that ﬁrst person sentences express complete thoughts, with different
interpretations in the mouths of different people. But if the analogy with tense
is to be strict, just as the time used autonymously completes the expression of the
thought, so the subject, also taken as an autonymous designator of himself,
completes the expression of the ﬁrst person thought. Thus, by analogy to what
has been said before, a ﬁrst person sentence (with the word “I”) can be represented as an ordered pair of the wording and the subject. The subject (not a name
of the subject, but the subject him-or herself) is part of the sentence. The wording
is an incomplete predicate, standing for a concept applying to people. “I” must
denote a function, mapping each person to herself (himself), just as “now”
functions for times. And the sense in the complete thought is one given by
autonymous designation, just as in the tensed case. Only here it is the subject
who is an autonymous designator.82
It should be clear what the role in this is for the remark that “everyone is
presented to himself in a special and primitive way, in which he is presented to
no one else”. In this, as in other cases of autonymous designation, the use
requires that the speaker or thinker be acquainted with the object. Just as the
speaker is acquainted with the present time, so following the familiar Cartesian
idea, each speaker or thinker is acquainted with him- or herself. The role of this
acquaintance is strictly analogous to its role in the temporal case. And notice that
here Frege does not think that the very same thought can be expressed by anyone

82
Since most ﬁrst person statements will be tensed, they should really be triples, in the obvious
way, of verbal wording, speakers, and times. If they contain demonstratives (with pointing, gestures,
etc.) the representation is even more complicated. In a portion of the passage that I have not quoted
Frege also mentions “here” and “there”.
I should add that the important point about ﬁrst person statements just stated in my text is not in
the original transcript of my lecture. It is new to the present version. For more discussion of this
issue see also Chapter 10, section I.

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

285

else. The cases are analogous, and so should the corresponding doctrines be
analogous.83, 84
Before discussing this further, let me make some remarks on Perry’s discussion, which inﬂuenced Kaplan. Perry (more or less followed by Kaplan) argues
that “what is needed is a primitive aspect of me, which is not simply one that only
I am aware of myself as having, but that I alone have” (Perry, 1977, p. 490).85 If
we did assume that “I” must be deﬁned by a deﬁnite description in the common
language, Perry’s conclusion would indeed follow. But it is not in Frege’s text at
all, nor will it turn out to be needed. Certainly this plays little part in the
philosophical tradition about the ﬁrst person to which Perry himself alludes.86
Second, Perry writes at the very beginning of his paper that “nothing could be
more out of the spirit of Frege’s account of sense and thought than an incommunicable, private thought” (Perry, 1977, p. 474). He thinks that Frege was
driven to a doctrine of private, incommunicable thoughts by the pressures of his
linguistic theory. Peter Geach goes further:
. . . certain ideas he [Frege] plays with in the essay [“Der Gedanke”]—private sensations
with incommunicable qualities, a Cartesian I given in an incommunicable way—are
really bogus ideas . . . For Frege afﬁrms (1) that any thought is by its nature communicable, (2) that thoughts about private sensations and sense-qualities, and about the Cartesian I, are by their nature incommunicable. It is an immediate consequence that there can
be no such thoughts. Frege never drew this conclusion, of course . . . But . . . Wittgenstein
was to draw it. (Geach, preface to Frege, 1977, p. viii)

Would that the notoriously difﬁcult and controversial “private language argument” of the later Wittgenstein were so easy! Frege would really have to be
censured for his failure to see the obvious contradiction in his own remarks. In
fact, although Frege distinguishes between thoughts, abstract entities, and ideas,
events in particular minds, so that different people could have the same thought,
and thoughts could be (and usually were) communicable, this in no way

83
Many contemporaries who think in terms of person-stages might think that there is really only
one acquaintance here, with “I-now”. There would not be an analogy, but perhaps a single case. But
there is little reason to ascribe this doctrine to Frege.
Of course Descartes would have granted that one can doubt whether one existed in the past or
will exist in the future. But this is not the same thing as saying that the enduring self is simply a
union of temporal stages.
I should add that one need not ascribe to Frege a doctrine that the object of acquaintance is some
special evanescent entity, a “Cartesian ego”. What Frege says is that everyone is acquainted with
himself in a special way, not that the entity with which one is acquainted in this way is different from
the ordinary person.
84
I am indebted here to conversations with Romina Padró.
85
He also argues (p. 491) that analogous considerations would place the same requirement on
“now”, making each time separately speciﬁable in a unique way associated with that word.
86
Little part, but perhaps it goes too far to say “no part”. Perhaps some have argued that “I”
denotes “the metaphysical subject”, or even that these two phrases have the same sense. But if
anyone really held this, his conclusion was surely some sort of metaphysical solipsism.

286

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

precludes the existence of thoughts that for special reasons might be intelligible
to only one person.87
The fact is that Frege always held that certain thoughts were incommunicable.
See his example already in the Grundlagen der Arithmetik about two people
whose inner perceptual spaces were of three-dimensional projective spaces, but
one means by “point” what the other means by “plane”, and vice versa. He
concludes that the two persons could not detect the difference: “What is purely
intuitable is not communicable” (Frege, 1884, p. 35).88 A simpler geometric
example would be that of two people whose inner spaces were three-dimensional
Euclidean mirror images of each other. On the next page Frege says that “the
word ‘white’ ordinarily makes us think of a certain sensation, which is, of course,
entirely subjective; but even in ordinary every day speech it often bears, I think,
an objective sense. When we call snow white, we mean to refer to an objective
quality . . . ” (ibid., p. 36). It is easy to conclude that the subjective usage is
incommunicable. This, in fact, is Frege’s view in “Der Gedanke” itself:
My companion and I are convinced that we both see the same ﬁeld; but each of us has a
particular sense impression of green . . . For when the word “red” is meant not to state a
property of things but to characterize sense impressions belonging to my consciousness, it
is only applicable within the realm of my consciousness. For it is impossible to compare
my sense impression with someone else’s. (Frege, 1918-1919, p. 334)89

Here the view is adopted, not because of any semantic pressures, but simply
because this is the way Frege himself sees things. Presumably any one of us can
entertain thoughts about our color impressions.
These issues having been cleared away, what is the role of the special ﬁrst
person use of “I”? Simply as before, in the cases of direct quotation, indirect
quotation, the present tense, and so on, a competent user of the language must be
acquainted with the appropriate sense.90 One need not be a rigid follower of
87
Gareth Evans elaborates on this point (1981, p. 313). I ﬁnd myself in complete agreement
with him here.
88
My thanks to Eva Picardi for calling my attention to this passage. The point is that in threedimensional projective geometry any statement about “points” and “planes” retains its truth-value if
the terms are interchanged.
89
The switch from “green” to “red” becomes clear when the omitted material, also involving
color blindness, is read.
90
Here I will take the opportunity to say something about how Church’s system, criticized above
for its unexplained hierarchies (say of material conditionals), each of which denotes the sense of the
previous one, should be recast. We saw that Church has no doctrine of “privileged” senses. But on
our interpretation of Frege, there are such privileged senses. Every term in the inﬁnite sequence of
conditionals, etc., ought to be given by our introspective awareness of the way the previous one
determines its referent (the “backward road”).
Each level might be called the sense given by acquaintance of the previous one, and indicated by
an explicit operator. One might even suppose that this is what Church really had in mind, even
though it is not part of his ofﬁcial doctrine. See also footnote 16 above, where I cite Church’s
remarks that his translation argument is only a way of bringing out the arbitrariness of the
connection of a given piece of language and what it means. The point must be that the “that

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

287

Descartes to see that indeed each of us is acquainted with her/himself in a special
ﬁrst person way. There is nothing mysterious about this. I have taken longer
about the matter than necessary, simply because I have had to deal with statements made by other writers.
Frege writes:
So, when Dr Lauben [the character who was mentioned before] has the thought that he was
wounded, he will probably be basing it on this primitive way in which he is presented to
himself. And only Dr Lauben himself can grasp thoughts speciﬁed in this way. (ibid., p. 333)

Here, Dr (Gustav) Lauben has said to himself “I was wounded”, or he can just be
thinking this. In either case, he is using an acquaintance-sense, given by the ﬁrst
person view point.
However, Frege goes on to say that:
. . . he [Dr Lauben] may want to communicate with others. He cannot communicate a
thought he alone can grasp. Therefore, if he now says “I was wounded”, he must use “I” in
a sense which can be grasped by others, perhaps in the sense of “he who is speaking to you
at this moment” . . . (ibid., p. 333)

It is easy to see why this remark might encourage others to think that Frege has
gone wrong in his analysis of “I”. Is it really plausible that everyone uses “I” in
two senses, one when he is speaking to himself, and one when he is speaking to
others? The tentative proposal Frege makes is beset by difﬁculties. Perhaps more
than one person is speaking to the other at the moment, so the description is not
uniquely speciﬁed. Or perhaps Dr Lauben suffers from a temporary attack of
hoarseness or muteness, so that the description in question is vacuous, or if at the
same time exactly one other person is speaking to Dr Lauben’s intended hearer,
the description denotes someone else. But even if Dr Lauben cannot speak, there
was an intended referent of his use of “I”, though he failed to produce the sound,
and this must be Dr Lauben himself. David Kaplan, both in “Demonstratives”
(1989) and in “What is Meaning? Explorations in the Theory of Meaning as Use”
(unpublished), wittily ridicules various analyses of “I” of this kind. If we ask for
a volunteer to do something, and someone in the crowd raises her hand and
says, “I volunteer”, just imagine it replaced by “The person who is speaking
volunteers”. Maybe the point would still come across, but it would be oddly put.
Frege’s implausible moves are quite unnecessary. A speaker who uses the word
“I” is part of the expression of the thought, autonymously designating himself. The
sense of this designation is given by acquaintance. Everyone knows what this type of
acquaintance is by analogy with his own case. So the hearer who hears Dr Lauben
clause” designates the proposition meant more directly than any metalinguistic paraphrase. (Church
also uses the argument to show that propositions are not dispensable in favor of sentences.) And see
also the accompanying example in my text. C. Anthony Anderson tells me he has a transcript of a
lecture where Church does say that terms have preferred senses. So there seems to be some ambiguity
and tension in Church on this point.

288

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

knows what type of thought is being expressed, even though, strictly speaking, he
cannot have the thought. It is like the case of the reader of the old newspaper.91
In indirect discourse we use the type of expression emphasized by Castañeda
and others. Dr Lauben said (thought) that he himself was wounded. Here what
follows the that clause is plainly not a literal repetition of Dr Lauben’s thought,
but rather our own description of it.92
Let me restate our main points. First, there is in a sense a “backward road”
from references to senses. For everyone who speciﬁes a reference must do so in
some way. Then, by her awareness of how she has speciﬁed the reference, she is
aware of the way the reference is ﬁxed, and hence is aware of the sense. Frege’s
most explicit use of this known to me is in the beginning of the Grundgesetze
(1893), where, after concluding that every term has a unique referent, and every
sentence a truth-value, he concludes that every sentence of the system expresses a
thought given by the way the truth-conditions are speciﬁed.93 Linguistic rules,
and the Fregean thoughts involved, can normally be given by general directions
exempliﬁed by (Æ) and (). [() makes sense as a recursive speciﬁcation of indirect
senses because of the backward road, and the requirements about being revelatory
are satisﬁed.]
But to apply these rules, and indeed to understand them, a user of the language
or a thinker must have something very like Russellian acquaintance with directly
or indirectly quoted material, senses, times, subjects, and inner mental states.
Despite their differences over the analysis of descriptions, Frege and Russell are
basically more similar than is usually thought.94 The doctrine of acquaintance is
much less explicit in Frege than in Russell, but I have long believed that it is
needed for a proper understanding of him. Let me hope that I am right.*

91
The late Wittgenstein might object to the suggestion that hearers can grasp the subjective ﬁrst
person use of “I” by analogy to their own case, but there is no reason to suppose that Frege would
have so objected.
92
I have made several corrections of Frege’s formulations, trying to make his view consistent
according to his own lights. Naturally it is something in favor of an exegesis that it makes the author
studied correct in terms of his own system, but people do make mistakes even in terms of their own
view. I have not been forced to go nearly as far as Perry in claiming that various pressures have led
Frege to abandon some of his own fundamental beliefs.
93
Frege, 1893, sections 31 and 32, pp. 87–90.
94
One might think that my doctrine of acquaintance implies that phrases with the same sense
will automatically have the same indirect sense. In a later seminar on Frege, I came to think that this
may not necessarily follow, but a discussion would be beyond the scope of the present paper.
* I would like to thank Sama Agahi and Peter Pagin for transcribing the original lecture. My
thanks to Harold Teichman and especially to Romina Padró for their help in producing the present
version. Also thanks to Dagﬁnn Fllesdal and Eva Picardi for the references attributed to them
above. In relatively late correspondence, having seen a draft of this paper C. Anthony Anderson,
Dagﬁnn Fllesdal, and Nathan Salmon added helpful comments that have been imperfectly taken
into account. This paper has been completed with support from the Saul A. Kripke Center at The
City University of New York, Graduate Center.

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

289

R E F E R EN C E S
Beaney, M. (1997) The Frege Reader. Oxford: Blackwell.
Boër, S. E. and Lycan, W. G. (1986) Knowing Who. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Burge, T. (1973) “Reference and Proper Names.” Journal of Philosophy, 70: 425–439.
——— (1979a) “Sinning Against Frege.” Philosophical Review, 88: 398–492. Reprinted
with a postscript in Burge (2004), pp. 213–242.
——— (1979b) “Frege and the Hierarchy.” Synthese, 40: 265–281. Reprinted with a
postscript in Burge (2004), pp. 153–210.
——— (2004) Truth, Thought, Reason: Essays on Frege. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carnap, R. (1947) Meaning and Necessity. A Study in Semantics and Modal Logic.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Castañeda, H. N. (1967) “The Logic of Self-Knowledge.” Noûs, 1: 9–22.
——— (1968) “On the Logic of Attributions of Self-Knowledge to Others.” Journal of
Philosophy, 65: 439–456.
Church, A. (1950) “On Carnap’s Analysis of Statements of Assertion and Belief.”
Analysis, 10(5): 97–99.
——— (1951) “A Formulation of the Logic of Sense and Denotation.” In P. Henle,
H. M. Kallen and S. K. Langer (eds.), Structure, Method, and Meaning, Essays in Honor
of H. M. Scheffer, pp. 3–24. New York: The Liberal Arts Press.
——— (1956) Introduction to Mathematical Logic. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
——— (1973) “Outline of a Revised Formulation of the Logic of Sense and Denotation
(Part I).” Noûs, 7(1): 24–33.
——— (1988) “A Remark Concerning Quine’s Paradox about Modality.” Reprinted in
Salmon and Soames (1988), pp. 58–65. Originally published in Spanish in Análisis
Filosóﬁco, 2(1982): 25–32.
——— (1995) “A Theory of the Meaning of Names.” In V. F. Sinisi and J. Woleski
(eds.), The Heritage of Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz, pp. 69–74. Amsterdam and Atlanta:
Rodopi.
Davidson, D. (1965) “Theories of Meaning and Learnable Languages.” In Y. Bar-Hillel
(ed.), Proceedings of the 1964 International Congress for Logic, Methodology, and Philosophy of Science, pp. 383–393. Amsterdam: North Holland. Reprinted in Davidson
(1984).
——— (1968) “On Saying That.” Synthese, 19(1/2): 178–214. Reprinted in Davidson
(1984).
——— (1979) “Quotation.” Theory and Decision, 11: 27–40. Reprinted in Davidson
(1984).
——— (1984) Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Devitt, M. and Sterelny, K. (1999) Language and Reality: an Introduction to the Philosophy
of Language. Oxford: Blackwell.
Dummett, M. (1973) Frege: Philosophy of Language. London: Duckworth.
——— (1981) The Interpretation of Frege’s Philosophy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

290

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

Evans, G. (1981) “Understanding Demonstratives.” In H. Parret and J. Bouveresse (eds.),
Meaning and Understanding. Berlin: W. de Gruyter. Reprinted in Evans (1985),
pp. 291–321.
——— (1985) Collected Papers. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Frege, G. (1884) Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik. Breslau: Verlag von Wilhelm Koebner.
Trans. by J. L. Austin as The Foundations of Arithmetic. Oxford: Blackwell, 1950.
——— (1891) “Function and Concept.” In Beaney (1997), pp. 130–148.
——— (1892) “Über Sinn und Bedeutung.” Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische
Kritik, 100: 25–50. Trans. by Max Black, in Beaney (1997), pp. 151–171.
——— (1893) Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, begriffsschriftlich abgeleitet, Vol. I. Jena:
Pohle. Trans. in part by M. Furth as The Basic Laws of Arithmetic. University of
California, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1967.
——— (1918–1919) “Der Gedanke.” In Beiträge zur Philosophie des deutschen Idealismus
I, pp. 58–77. Trans. as “Thought” by P. Geach and R. H. Stoothoff, in Beaney (1997),
pp. 325–345. Also translated by A. M. and M. Quinton (1956), “The Thought:
A Logical Inquiry”, Mind, 65(259): 289–311.
——— (1952) Translations from the Philosophical Writings of Gottlob Frege, edited by
P. T. Geach and M. Black. New York: Philosophical Library.
——— (1977) Logical Investigations, ed. with a preface by P. T. Geach, trans. by
P. T. Geach and R. H. Stoothoff. New Haven: Yale University Press.
——— (1979) Posthumous Writings, ed. by H. Hermes, F. Kambartel and F. Kaulbach.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——— (1980) Gottlob Frege: Philosophical and Mathematical Correspondence, ed. by
G. Gabriel, H. Hermes, F. Kambartel, C. Thiel, A. Veraart, B. McGuinness and
H. Kaal, trans. by Hans Kaal. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Geach, P. T. (1957) Mental Acts. Their Content and Their Objects. London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul.
——— (1963) “Quantiﬁcation Theory and the Problems of Identifying Objects of
Reference.” Acta Philosophica Fennica, 16: 41–52. Also included in Geach (1972),
section 4.3 and 5.8.
——— (1972) Logic Matters. Oxford: Blackwell.
Hintikka, J. (1962) Knowledge and Belief: An Introduction to the Logic of the Two Notions.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Kaplan, D. (1968) “Quantifying in.” Synthese, 19(1/2): 178–214.
——— (1989) “Demonstratives.” In J. Almog, J. Perry and H. Wettstein (eds.), Themes
from Kaplan, pp. 481–563. New York, Oxford University Press.
——— (1990) “Words.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volumes,
64: 93–119.
——— (unpublished) “What is Meaning? Explorations in the Theory of Meaning as
Use.”
Kripke, S. (1980) Naming and Necessity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
——— (unpublished) Whitehead Lectures: Logicism, Wittgenstein, and De Re Beliefs about
Numbers.
Künne, W. (1992) “Hybrid Proper Names.” Mind, 101(404): 721–731.
Künne, W. (2010) “Sense, Reference and Hybridity: Reﬂections on Kripke’s Recent
Reading of Frege.” Dialectica, 64: 529–551.

Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference

291

Lewy, C. (1949) “Review of Carnap’s Meaning and Necessity.” Mind, 58: 228–238.
Mendelsohn, R. (2005) The Philosophy of Gottlob Frege. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Parsons, T. (1981) “Frege’s Hierarchies of Indirect Sense and the Paradox of Analysis.”
Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 6: 37–57.
Perry, J. (1977) “Frege on Demonstratives.” Philosophical Review, 86(4): 474–497.
Reprinted with a postscript in Perry (1993).
——— (1993) The Problem of the Essential Indexical and Other Essays. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Picardi, E. (1992) Elementi di Filosoﬁa del Linguaggio. Bologna: Patron.
Quine, W. V. O. (1960) Word and Object. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——— (1979) “Intensions Revisited.” In P. French, T. Uehling, Jr. and H. K. Wettstein
(eds.), Contemporary Perspectives in the Philosophy of Language, pp. 268–274. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Reichenbach, H. (1947) Elements of Symbolic Logic. New York: Macmillan.
Russell, B. (1905) “On Denoting.” Mind, 14(56): 479–493.
Salmon, N. (2005) “On Designating.” Mind, 114(456): 1069–1133.
——— and Soames, S. (1988) Propositions and Attitudes. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Searle, J. (1989) Speech Acts. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Sosa, E. (1970) “Propositional Attitudes De Dicto and De Re.” Journal of Philosophy, 67
(21): 883–896.
Washington, C. (1992) “The Identity Theory of Quotation.” Journal of Philosophy, 89
(11): 582–605.

10
The First Person*

I
I will concentrate here on the perplexities some philosophers have felt concerning
the simple ﬁrst person pronoun ‘I’. The genesis of these reﬂections is a fairly
recent invitation to Barcelona1 to give a talk about my views on David Kaplan’s
manuscript ‘What Is Meaning? Explorations in the Theory of Meaning as Use’
(n.d.),2 as well as on his classic publication, ‘Demonstratives’ (1989).
Were I to be making a general discussion of Kaplan’s recent material, I would
emphasize my enthusiasm for his general approach.3 There is one aspect of his
* The present paper was delivered at the conference ‘Saul Kripke: Philosophy, Language, and Logic’
held at the City University of New York, Graduate Center on January 25, 2006. There has been
substantial revision of the original talk, which was delivered without a written text, but I have not entirely
eliminated the conversational tone. I give special thanks to Gilbert Harman and Robert Stalnaker for
showing me that one of my criticisms of David Lewis in the original version was too strong.
My paper ‘Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference: Some Exegetical Notes’ (chapter 9) was
unpublished and unknown to the audience when I gave the present talk—thus my presentation
included much overlapping material, since it was highly relevant to the topic. In the current version
I have cut down on the overlap but certainly not eliminated it. There are some signiﬁcant
considerations raising problems for Frege that should have been in Kripke (2008) (included here
as chapter 9), but were not known to me when I wrote its ﬁnal version; nor were they known when
I gave the original presentation of this talk. See pp. 303–04.
1
I was invited by the Logos Group to give three lectures at the University of Barcelona, Spain, in
December 2005. Joseph Macià suggested Kaplan’s papers as a possible topic for one of the lectures.
For further remarks on the background of this topic in the philosophy of language, especially due to
the inﬂuence of Castañeda, see note 12 below.
2
From now on I will call this manuscript ‘Meaning as Use’. The version that I have is subtitled
‘Brief Version—Draft #1’. Of course, the slogan ‘meaning is use’ is derived from Wittgenstein, and
certainly Kaplan’s manuscript to some extent is inﬂuenced by Wittgenstein’s later work and even
some of his most famous examples, but the manuscript should probably not be regarded (nor was it
so regarded by its author) as adopting a ‘Wittgensteinian’ approach.
3
In particular, I share (and have always shared) his broad conception, as I understand it, of what
should be included in semantics (and not relegated to pragmatics). Anything that a language teacher
should regard as part of the teaching of the meanings of a particular language, as opposed to customs
and sociological facts about speakers of the language at a particular time, should be included in
semantics. I have never understood why some people wish to restrict semantics so as to include only
what is clearly to be given by truth-conditions, excluding, among other things, the study of indexical
expressions. One may think that the issue is purely terminological, but I have a strong feeling that

The First Person

293

approach that I would also applaud in general terms, but that I would warn may
lead one astray in its particular application to the main theme of this talk. One
should not, he argues, think of the task of the linguist or the semanticist—as, for
example, Quine does in some of his writings—as analogous to that of translating
utterances into one’s own language. That presupposes the semantics of one’s own
language and doesn’t get us very far. Rather, the linguist or the semanticist gives a
description ‘from above’ of the uses in the community.
Kaplan refers to what some philosophers have called ‘scientiﬁc language’,4 and
assumes that the description ‘from above’ is formulated in such a language. The

this is not entirely so, that the opposite conception will lead one astray. For example, Ludlow and
Segal (2004) think that on Gricean principles ‘but’ and ‘and’ ‘literally mean the same thing’ (424),
though they differ in conventional implicature. Similarly, they think that ‘a’ and ‘the’ are synonyms
in English (424), even though they state how they are used differently in English (in this view, they
have surprised many philosophers who might have followed them thus far). Following Kaplan, as
I understand him, ‘tu’ and ‘vous’ (as the polite second person singular) are not synonymous in
French. In contrast, changes in French attitudes as to when it is appropriate to use ‘tu’ are matters of
the changing sociology of the French, not of changes in the language. (Perhaps one can imagine
cases where the distinction is not sharp.) Distinctions of Gricean ‘conversational implicature’, as in
my own suggested treatment in Kripke (1977) of the referential-attributive distinction for deﬁnites,
are not distinctions in the language. (At the end of Kripke 1977, I suggested that the same strategy
might apply to indeﬁnites, as was carried out by Ludlow and Neale 1991.) Ludlow and Segal (2004)
should not have considered their own strategy to be a case of the same one that was used in the two
papers just mentioned. Note that the issue has nothing to do with whether Ludlow and Segal are
correct in their views about ‘a’ and ‘the’. However, they are not entitled to say that, on their view ‘a’
and ‘the’ ‘are two expressions with different spellings, but the same meanings—synonyms, rather
like “gray” and “grizzled” or “grisly” and “gruesome” ’ (424). In contrast, ‘and’ and ‘but’, on my
view, though not theirs, are not differently spelled expressions with the same meanings.
I hope I understand Kaplan correctly when I express agreement with him about this. He has a
great deal of illuminating material, in particular, about a novel conception of logical validity that
accords with this conception of semantics. His remarks about ‘oops’ and ‘goodbye’, and about
pejoratives, looked at in terms of a use theory of meaning, are also very illuminating.
4
Kaplan mentions Quine as an originator of the conception that scientiﬁc language should not
contain indexicals, tense, and the like, even though Kaplan himself disagrees with the view (which he
states Strawson got from Quine) that such devices are not susceptible to logical study. I believe that
in conversation he also mentioned Russell in connection with this conception of ‘scientiﬁc
language’. Even though he also (see below) clearly would recognize that this conception has little
to do with what is allowed in actual scientiﬁc papers, it nevertheless inﬂuences his idea of how to
describe a language ‘from above’.
Quine is a philosopher who might be described as ‘pro-scientiﬁc’ (by an admirer of the orientation),
or ‘scientistic’ (by a detractor). On the other hand, the later Wittgenstein was probably ‘anti-scientistic’.
However, he has a similar conception of ‘scientiﬁc language’. In Philosophical Investigations he writes:
‘“I” is not the name of a person, nor “here” of a place, and “this” is not a name. But they are connected
with names. Names are explained by means of them. It is also true that physics is characterized by the
fact that it does not use these words’ (Wittgenstein 1953: }410) (I have altered the translation of the last
sentence, which is weaker and less puzzling in the printed version: ‘. . . it is characteristic of physics not
to use these words’.) What does he mean here? Certainly, as I have said, not that such indexical
terminology never appears in physics papers. It might be claimed that such terminology never appears
in physical laws, but once it is granted that many terms are explained by them, this strikes me as
dubious. Moreover, physics may say that such-and-such a physical quantity has a certain value now, but
it is decreasing. Even more puzzling to me (if my translation is right) is the claim that this restriction
(the absence of indexicals and demonstratives) tells us what physics is.

294

The First Person

so-called scientiﬁc language itself would contain neither indexicals nor tense, but
be generally stated as applicable to arbitrary speakers, places, times, and the like;
if modality is involved, to arbitrary possible worlds as well. Moreover, all this
must be done coolly. For example, as Kaplan says, one must be able to describe
words expressing anger without getting angry at the same time. This is relevant to
what others have written on historiography. We have at one extreme the view of,
for example, C. G. Hempel (1942), which takes historical writing to be little
different in principle from writing in physics, involving general laws, conﬁrmations, refutations, and so on. The other extreme says that history employs a
particular method of Verstehen. I think the second view certainly has something
to it: the historian is trying to put himself in the position of his subjects to see
what they themselves might have thought. Some have given a strong formulation:
if you write about any historical character, you should literally try to become that
character.5 Whatever one might say about history, surely the ‘coolness’ requirement as Kaplan states it is correct for the description of a language ‘from above’.6
What is description ‘from above’? (I perhaps add something here to Kaplan’s
formulation.) The description, ﬁrst and foremost, is a description of how the
language is used, but it also has an instructional aspect. If language can be
described completely and correctly ‘from above’, in a neutral indexical-free
language, the description (of, say, English) should be usable as an instruction
manual, a set of imperatives for a foreigner wishing to learn English. The instructions themselves should, if given for this purpose, be stated in the foreign language.
Thus they will tell the foreigner that ‘goodbye’ is conventionally used in English
when taking leave. Even when only truth-conditional semantics is in question (or
truth-conditions with respect to indices—such as speaker, time, possible world
described, and the like), the description from above should be usable not just as a
description but also as an instruction manual for a language learner.
Now, in ‘Meaning as Use’ (in the section ‘Meaning vs. Uses’), Kaplan writes:
Consider the indexical ‘I’. What does it mean? An initial answer might be that it is the
ﬁrst person pronoun. But this is a kind of functional description. What does the ﬁrst
person pronoun mean?

As I said, I was invited to speak on Kaplan, and under such circumstances one
naturally emphasizes those points where one disagrees. (Having been invited to
5
When I was in college, I wrote a paper on this topic called ‘History and Idealism: The Theory
of R. G. Collingwood’, which I never published, though an expert in the ﬁeld did recommend that
I do so. In the paper, I remarked that if you write about Hitler, you should not try to become Hitler;
this would be a very dangerous idea. Some of you have probably heard of the writer David Irving—
he originally started with very respectable publishers, and he is at any rate something of an
embodiment of this approach (see, e.g., Irving 1977, where he explicitly says that he will attempt
to describe the war through Hitler’s eyes). Unfortunately, from this book onward he became
increasingly successful at fulﬁlling my youthful fear that it was a dangerous idea.
6
However, even in that case there is something to be said for the method of Verstehen. One
might have to experience anger to understand descriptions of words expressing anger.

The First Person

295

give a paper on Kaplan’s material, my audience would not have been so enthusiastic if I could only remark, ‘Yes, I agree, and this says it all’.) So here I will
comment on one point on which I have some agreement but on which I ultimately
diverge signiﬁcantly from Kaplan—namely, his views on the proper treatment of
the ﬁrst person pronoun. And I will talk about some other authors as well.
Kaplan gives the following example to show that in the case of ‘I’ a proper
semantical treatment is not provided by a deﬁnition but rather by an account of
how the term is used:
For example, my Webster’s Third provides, ‘the one who is speaking or writing’ and they
quote the Psalm ‘I shall not want’ in order to drive the point home. (This caused me to
imagine sitting in the back of the auditorium at a lottery award ceremony, and whispering
to the psalmist, ‘which of the people here won the ten million dollars?’, and he whispers
back ‘the one who is speaking’ or, equivalently, according to Webster’s Third, ‘I did; I shall
not want’.) (Ibid.)

Two or three comments here. I, of course, am in agreement7 with the
semantical point Kaplan is trying to make about how to explain the word ‘I’.
But does ‘the psalmist ’ say ‘I shall not want’? Many educated Americans appear to
think that the psalmist (like other biblical authors) wrote, or completed his work,
in 1611.8 In fact, ‘the psalmist’ who ‘wrote’ the 23rd Psalm must have consulted
the published standard Hebrew Urtext. It does not contain a Hebrew equivalent
of the separate word ‘I’ at all: as in many languages, ‘I’ is used only for emphasis
and is, in most cases, simply a sufﬁx or preﬁx to the verb.9)
Now, in some respects this observation may even support Kaplan, because his
point is that you should not look for the meaning of ‘I’. Kaplan’s basic thought is
that the search, as in Frege, for what the word ‘I’ means, or the sense of ‘I’, is
obviously a mistake. The correct semantical account of ‘I’ is wholly given by the
‘scientiﬁc language’ in which its truth-conditions are neutrally expressed from
above: when a speaker S says ‘I . . . ’ what he says is true (or true of the possible
world he is thinking of at the time, if that is relevant) if and only if S . . . This is a
purely general statement, and it wholly determines the semantics of ‘I’.10 The
point (that a deﬁnition of ‘I’ as a term denoting the speaker is not really in
7

However, Kaplan is not completely right. If I were writing a paper I could say ‘the present
writer thinks there is a mistake’. ‘The present writer’ may or may not be synonymous with ‘I’, but it
is standard in some academic writing to use it to replace ‘I’, perhaps to be a little more formal or
impersonal. ‘The present speaker’ in the same sense is rarer, certainly not a stock phrase like ‘the
present writer’, but maybe on some occasions it can be used in that way.
Or suppose someone has written, ‘all Americans support such-and-such’. One could object, ‘not
this American’, meaning not me. One could no doubt imagine many other such cases.
8
I believe, if my memory is correct, that I read in the New York Times something like this: ‘The
Bible says . . . [or ‘the Old Testament says’], as opposed to the more recent Bible versions.’ My father
heard a Christian fundamentalist radio preacher say ‘until, or rather ’til, as scripture says, . . . ’
9
In the perfect and imperfect respectively (in Biblical Hebrew).
10
This point is independent of Kaplan’s emphasis on meaning as use, as in the later
Wittgenstein. It would be compatible with a truth-conditional (or truth-conditional with

296

The First Person

question) can only be strengthened when we consider the existence of languages
in which the ﬁrst person is expressed exclusively by a preﬁx or sufﬁx (or where
this is usual and ‘I’ or its equivalent occurs only in cases of special emphasis).11
Kaplan notes that Webster’s itself realizes that its attempt to deﬁne ‘I’ ‘won’t
do’ and that it goes on to say ‘used . . . by one speaking or writing to refer to
himself.’ He comments ‘Now here they have ﬁnally given us what we need to
know, how the expression is used ’.
Consider Kaplan’s distinction between character and content. The character
gives a general rule for the use of ‘I’, and the content will depend on one’s view of
content. If one takes the simple propositional view, it will be about the speaker;
or, as Kaplan states, it doesn’t have to be a speaker, it could just as well be a
writer, or a thinker, thinking to herself. We will return to this.
Kaplan’s treatment of the ﬁrst person in ‘Demonstratives’ (1989) is rather
strongly inﬂuenced by Perry’s criticisms of Frege (Perry 1977) on ﬁrst person
statements (and other demonstratives).12 I myself have dealt with Frege’s views
on these issues, including the problems Perry raises for Frege, and their relation
to Frege’s much-discussed views on indirect quotation and his less-discussed
views on direct quotation (see chapter 9). But here I not only want to talk about
what is true according to Frege but also about what is true according to the truth, or,
that is—to use a predicate that I should like to think is coextensive—true
according to me.
In conversation, Kaplan has acknowledged that ‘scientiﬁc language’, in the
sense that he has used the term, is obviously not satisﬁed by the language of
scientists in a lab, who use tenses and indexicals all the time. It is not satisﬁed in
respect to various indices, such as speaker, time, possible world described, etc.) conception of
semantics.
At the end of Anscombe (1975), discussed below at some length, she attributes to J. Altham the
remark that such a rule about ‘I’, viewed truth-conditionally, has a problem of sufﬁciency: ‘How is
one to extract the predicate for purposes of this rule in “I think John loves me”? The rule needs
supplementation: where “I” or “me” occurs within an oblique context, the predicate is to be
speciﬁed by replacing “I” or “me” by the indirect reﬂexive pronoun’ (65). The grammatical
notion ‘indirect reﬂexive’ is explicated in Anscombe’s paper.
In Kaplan (1989:505) the two main rules are that ‘“I” refers to the speaker or writer’ and that ‘I’
directly refers. Perhaps Kaplan thinks that a direct reference account of ‘I’ and ‘me’ gives an
adequate treatment of examples such as Altham’s. I am sympathetic to such a viewpoint myself.
It would have been good if this had been spelled out.
11
I spoke with Kaplan about this, and he said he was familiar with the example of Latin.
12
One should mention, whenever one talks of the ﬁrst person as a special subject in
contemporary philosophy, the papers of Hector Neri Castañeda (1966, 1968, and others), who
more than anyone else made this a special topic for the philosophy of language (both ﬁrst person
sentences and their relation to the indirect discourse locution exempliﬁed by ‘Betty believes that she
herself . . . ’). See also Geach (1957a) and Prior (1967), cited by Lewis (1983:139). I think also of
Wittgenstein (1953), as mentioned below.
There is a mutual inﬂuence between Kaplan and Perry. Perry himself mentions an earlier version
of Kaplan (1989) in Perry (1977).
Of course, contemporary philosophy of mind, as well as philosophy of language, has emphasized
the difference between ﬁrst and third person points of view, and this is also related.

The First Person

297

scientiﬁc papers either. No scientiﬁc journal would reject a paper for failing to
use exclusively ‘scientiﬁc language’, especially tense. I think it is relatively hard to
give genuine examples of tenseless sentences about particular ordinary objects
(though not about mathematical objects or the like) in natural language. Some
examples that I have seen in the literature are not really tenseless.13 Scientiﬁc
language in the sense in question is a philosophers’ invention, spoken by no one.
In spite of Kaplan’s recognition of these facts, this conception of what can be
stated in a ‘scientiﬁc language’ is important to his own account.
Now, Kaplan calls some statements Frege makes about the ﬁrst person
‘tortured’ (1989:501), though later (533) he says that reinterpreted in the light
of his own theory, Frege could be thought of as talking about the character of ‘I’,
and that under such an interpretation this passage (which supposedly ‘has
provoked few endorsements and much skepticism’) could be defended as essentially correct. Kaplan goes on to say how ‘a sloppy thinker’ might misinterpret
the situation. Given his earlier characterization of the passage, and taking into
consideration the inﬂuence of Perry (1977), I think that Kaplan really thinks that
the sloppy thinker is Frege himself.14
Frege writes:
Now everyone is presented to himself in a special and primitive way, in which he is
presented to no one else. So, when Dr Lauben has the thought that he was wounded, he
will probably be basing it on this primitive way in which he is presented to himself. And
only Dr Lauben himself can grasp thoughts speciﬁed in this way. But now he may want
to communicate with others. He cannot communicate a thought he alone can grasp.
Therefore, if he now says ‘I was wounded’, he must use ‘I’ in a sense which can be grasped
13
For example, Sider’s impressive book (2001) gives as examples ‘World War I occurred after
the American Civil War’ and ‘There existed dinosaurs before the appearance of this book’. Neither
of these sentences can change their truth values if uttered at different times, but to me it is obvious
that both are past tense; I don’t know exactly what someone would have in mind imagining them
uttered before World War I or before the appearance of ‘this book’.
Another example Sider gives, ‘It is raining on 28 June 2000’, is dubious English, unless uttered on
28 June 2000, in which case ‘It is raining today, 28 June 2000’ is much better. After 28 June 2000
one must say ‘It was raining on 28 June 2000’, and before that date ‘will be’. (Obviously, a particular
place in which the raining occurs is presupposed.) Someone might of course be sure of the rain on
the date in question, but not be sure of the date now, or not wish to commit herself. But in that case
she should say, ‘It either was, is, or will be raining on June 28 2000’. This is not a tenseless
statement, but amounts to a disjunction of tensed statements (or, alternatively, applies a disjunction
of tensed predicates). Probably something amounting to this disjunction is what Sider has in mind
as the interpretation for his ‘tenseless’ statement, but his attempt at expressing it in English seems
defective. His example was supposed to contrast with ‘It is now raining,’ which he gives earlier as an
example of a tensed statement but which does not appear to be a proper English sentence. While
genuine examples of such tenseless statements may exist in English, they do not occur nearly as
much as has been suggested.
In spite of these remarks, I am not suggesting that we have no conception of a language giving the
entire history of the world tenselessly. I think that we can imagine such a language. However, most
of it will be a philosophical invention. It is an intelligible language but does not overlap with
natural language to any signiﬁcant degree.
14
See chapter 9 (page 284).

298

The First Person

by others, perhaps in the sense of ‘he who is speaking to you at this moment’; by doing this
he makes the conditions accompanying his utterance serve towards the expression of
a thought. (1918–19:333, note omitted)15

Not only has the passage been discussed critically by Perry and by Kaplan (under
Perry’s inﬂuence), it has also been defended against Perry’s criticisms in Evans
(1981). What Frege is saying about the way everyone is presented to himself
seems to me not to be at all unfamiliar. It is the familiar view, going back at least
to Descartes, that I am aware of myself in a special ﬁrst person way. However,
Perry, and following him, Kaplan, both argue that for his view of the ﬁrst person
to go through, ‘what is needed is a primitive aspect of me, which is not simply
one that only I am aware of myself as having, but that I alone have’ (Perry
1977:490).
Why does Perry think that this is needed? Well, the special ﬁrst person
Cartesian sense would have to be something like the subject, or the thinker. But
who is that? Is there only one thinker, only one subject? If one reformulates it as
the subject for me, the subject that I am aware of, by being aware of my own thinking,
the formulation obviously runs into a circle. How can one avoid the circle? Only
by there being a special quality, a primitive aspect of me, that I alone have. This is
Perry’s argument for his conclusion, and Kaplan follows him.
Following Perry, Kaplan makes two objections to Frege. First, he says:
I sincerely doubt that there is, for each of us on each occasion of the use of ‘I’, a particular,
primitive, and incommunicable Fregean self-concept which we tacitly express to ourselves. (1989:534)

So far, Kaplan might just seem to be doubting the neo-Cartesian doctrine of a
particular ﬁrst person perspective (except to the extent that it is given by his theory
of the ‘character’ of ‘I’). However, he immediately goes on to assume that the
theory must involve Perry’s stronger conclusion that the self-concept in question
would have to characterize its subject uniquely in a neutral language, and objects:
[E]ven if Castor were sufﬁciently narcissistic to associate such self-concepts16 with his
every use of ‘I’, his twin, Pollux, whose mental life is qualitatively identical with Castor’s,
would associate the same self-concept with his every (matching) use of ‘I’. (Kaplan
1989:534; italics in the original)

One of Kaplan’s basic points in ‘Demonstratives’ is the distinction between
demonstratives and indexicals. Demonstratives (such as ‘this’) require some
gesture or something else (such as pointing) to determine their reference, whereas

15

All references to ‘Der Gedanke’ (Frege 1918–19) are to the Geach and Stoothoff translation,
titled ‘Thoughts’, as reprinted in Beaney (1997) with the title ‘Thought’. Note that the translation
of the passage that Kaplan himself uses (1989:533) is the earlier Quinton and Quinton translation.
As far as I can see, the differences do not affect the discussion.
16
Kaplan plainly means to write ‘such a self-concept’.

The First Person

299

indexicals (such as ‘I’ and ‘now’) require only a general linguistic rule to
determine their reference.17 For example, ‘I’, when used by a given speaker,
always refers to the speaker (or thinker, or writer, etc.); ‘now’, when said at a
given time, refers to that time; and so on.18
Kaplan accuses ‘the sloppy thinker’ (Frege in the naı̈ve interpretation) of
holding a ‘demonstrative theory of indexicals’. It is as if one needed something
other than the semantical rule for ‘I’, a subject somehow pointing to himself in a
special inner way, to determine the reference of ‘I’, and similarly for ‘now’ and
‘here’ (Kaplan 1989:534–35). Descartes, and many who have followed him,
might be accused of this mistake, except that it is hard to see that Descartes’s
point was particularly semantical.19
Returning to the earlier view that Frege requires some unique qualitative
description of the subject that the subject alone is uniquely aware of and that,
in fact, uniquely characterizes ‘the subject’, it may be tempting to conclude that
there can be only one subject in existence. Indeed, there may be some philosophers who have drawn such a conclusion, a special form of solipsism about
minds, but I am not sure who.20, 21
17
Perry later called them ‘automatic indexicals’ (1997). The speaker need not indicate speciﬁc
demonstrative intentions on the occasion of utterance.
18
Kaplan (1989:491) attributes to Michael Bennett the point that ‘here’ is usually an indexical,
but sometimes is a demonstrative, as when one says ‘she lives here’ and points to a location on a
map, and so on. Similarly, in a footnote on the same page, Kaplan concedes that the rule given for
‘now’ is too simple. If someone leaves a message on the answering machine ‘I am not at home now’,
‘now’ refers to the time when the message was heard, not the time when it was recorded. The
opposite can be true: ‘I am in Italy now but will be in Belgium by the time you get this letter’ makes
good sense. (My own example; I also changed the answering machine example a bit.)
As far as I can see, no such problems arise for ‘I’, as, indeed, in the ﬁrst clause of this very sentence.
19
Perry does in fact concede that some philosophers ‘have come to hold somewhat similar views
about the self, beliefs about oneself, and “I” ’ without being motivated by any semantical problems
(1977:489). He thinks it is possible that Frege was simply writing under the inﬂuence of these views,
but he thinks it more likely that it was the pressures of an attempt to ﬁnd a theory of demonstratives
compatible with his overall semantical framework that is responsible for Frege’s views.
20
In the talk I suggested, though I wasn’t sure, that perhaps the early Wittgenstein (1961) could
be an example. Since then it has been suggested that L. E. J. Brouwer might be an example; once
again this is uncertain (see, e.g., Brouwer 1948).
21
Let me here make the following digression concerning ‘other minds’. People argue that there
have to be other minds: after all, everyone behaves similarly to me and since I have a mind they
must, too. But some other people say one shouldn’t generalize from only one case. A reply to this
objection might perhaps be that minds form a natural kind, so that an examination of one instance
is sufﬁcient to determine the basic features of the entire natural kind. But what’s really the trouble
here is this: there’s lots of evidence that we are not members of the same kind, because various
philosophers—or so-called philosophers—of mind state theories that would seem to me to imply
that they themselves have no inner states (or if they do use expressions that purport to say that they
have inner states, they give analyses which I know perfectly well are not compatible with genuine
inner states). So, what explanation of their behavior can there be? Otherwise, they seem to satisfy
criteria of sincerity, honesty, and intelligence (if one assumes that they have minds). So, they are
obviously just what they themselves claim to be, that is, very cleverly programmed robots similar to a
genuine human subject like me. In philosophy departments, at least, there seem to be many more of
them than there are genuine human subjects. So, when I look at a random person who is not even a

300

The First Person

So what’s wrong with the argument that either each subject must be psychologically unique or, otherwise, any deﬁnite description of the subject must itself
use an egocentric term, and thus run into a circle? Well, again, the people who
argue this way are thinking of a language spoken by no one, the so-called
scientiﬁc language. Since Dr. Lauben is the one speaking the language, by
‘the subject’ he of course means himself. If Rudolph Lingens22 speaks of ‘the
subject’, he means himself. There is no difﬁculty for Frege (nor indeed for
Descartes), once we rid ourselves of the idea of a ‘scientiﬁc language’ spoken
by no one, in supposing that the reference is determined in this way. Nor do we
have to worry about the supposed problem of Castor and Pollux. None of these
people speaks an impersonal ‘scientiﬁc language’ where the problem would arise.
So each of them could determine the referent in the Cartesian–Fregean way, by
his own acquaintance with himself.
But perhaps this is not the whole answer. Aren’t all these people speaking
German, a language in which ‘I’ (actually ‘ich’) should mean the same thing for
anyone? And isn’t Kaplan right to say that the whole use of the word ‘I’ can be
captured in a neutral way by saying that a sentence containing ‘I’ expresses a truth
if and only if the rest is actually true of the subject—the thinker, or the speaker?
Or if one doesn’t wish to restrict oneself to truth-conditional utterances, even
with respect to indices,23 at least that ‘I’ in any sentence refers to the speaker
(writer, thinker)? So, doesn’t Kaplan’s characterization (that is, the description of
the ‘character’ in his technical sense) sufﬁce for everything? And doesn’t it give
the ‘content’ in each particular case, which indeed is different depending on
whom is being referred to by ‘I’?
At ﬁrst this may seem quite conclusive. Doesn’t Kaplan’s rule give a complete
description of the matter? What else could be needed? Well, recall my remarks
that the ‘description from above’ ought to be usable as an instruction manual for
someone wishing to learn the language. Though Kaplan’s explanation is all very
well for some sort of descriptive anthropologist who may in fact have the concept
of ‘I’, it would be very difﬁcult to get it across to Frege (or anyone else who is
presumed to lack this concept). So, for example, let Kaplan say to Frege or to
anyone else (but if it is Frege, one should use German): ‘If any person S speaking
German attributes a property using the word “ich,” then what S says or thinks is
philosopher, the chances seem much greater that that person is one of these cleverly programmed
robots, since from the only sample I have I can be sure of only one genuine human subject (with a
mind). So, the robots are right in saying that most of the humanlike people are robots—and I must
be a very rare case with genuine inner states!
22
In Frege’s paper ‘Der Gedanke’, some characters with various interrelations are discussed. In
addition to Dr. Gustav Lauben, one person discussed is Rudolph Lingens. Frege considers
alternative cases in which Lingens knows Dr. Lauben personally or has only heard of him.
23
Such philosophers as Donald Davidson and David Lewis have attempted to reduce the
semantics of non-indicative utterances (or sentences) to cases where truth-conditional semantics
do apply. In stark contrast to this picture, see Wittgenstein (1953: }23). In his later paper ‘Meaning
as Use’, Kaplan intends no particular reduction.

The First Person

301

true if and only if S has that property.’ But how can Frege use the word ‘ich’ on
the basis of these instructions? Should he think, ‘Hmm, so how am I going to use
the word “ich” on the basis of this general statement? Well, any German should
attribute, say, being in pain or being a logician to himself if and only if the
German is in pain or is a logician, as Kaplan says. So I should do this.’
Alternatively, Frege might remark, ‘So Frege, or Dr. Gustav Lauben, should
attribute a property to Frege, or respectively to Dr. Lauben, using “ich” if and
only if Frege (or Dr. Lauben) has the property. But I am Frege, so I suppose that
I should use the word “ich” if and only if Frege has the property.’ Either
formulation would presuppose that Frege already has the concept of himself,
the concept he expresses using ‘ich,’ so here we really are going in a circle.
The point is that each one of us speaks a language that he himself has learned.
Each one of us can ﬁx the reference of the word ‘I’ by means of acquaintance with
oneself, self-acquaintance. There is no requirement that this type of acquaintance
is given to us by a qualitative description expressible in a ‘scientiﬁc language’
spoken by no one. This is so even if the language each of us uses is a common
one—English, German, and so on. No one can grasp the rule for ‘I’ stated in the
common language except by means of one’s own self-acquaintance. Otherwise,
there would be no way of learning how that rule tells us to refer. This is what
Frege means when he says that Dr. Lauben uses the word ‘I’, thinking to himself,
‘he will probably be basing it on this primitive way in which he is presented to
himself’ (Frege 1918–19:333). Frege also says, a bit before that, ‘The same
utterance containing the word “I” in the mouths of different men will express
different thoughts of which some may be true, others false’ (332). To put this
matter in Kaplanian terms, the utterance24 has the same character in the mouths
of all speakers of the language but has different contents in the mouths of
different speakers. I have explained in some detail in my paper on Frege how
to put the matter in Frege’s own terms (chapter 9, pages 284ff). Put either way,
this is possible because of one’s own self-awareness when one is speaking.
However, Frege’s discussion, as quoted above (298–99), of how Dr. Lauben
communicates to others using ‘I’ (or ‘ich’) does confuse the issue. Frege says that
when he wishes to communicate, he can hardly use ‘I’ in a sense he alone can
grasp. But if that is so, it is easy to see how someone would respond that this
alleged special and incommunicable sense of ‘I’ must be a chimera. Why should
the primary sense of ‘I’ be something that one never uses in interpersonal
communication? One might after all doubt that ordinary language is used in
thought at all. Surely, its primary purpose is for communication.
Matters become even more problematic when Frege discusses what
Dr. Lauben means by ‘I’ when he wishes to communicate with others. He
conjectures that it is in the sense of ‘he who is speaking to you at this moment’
24
Notice that by ‘utterance’ Frege here means a type, not a token. He is not following current
technical philosophical terminology.

302

The First Person

(Frege 1918–19:333). This can be understood by the hearer in a way that the
primary sense of ‘I’ cannot. Kaplan, as I have already quoted him, wittily ridicules
those (such as the writers of the deﬁnition in Webster’s Third ) who wish to analyze
the ordinary use of ‘I’ in such a way. Moreover, as I wrote in chapter 9
(pp. 288–98), the proffered deﬁnition of ‘I’ may not work. For example, perhaps
the person I am addressing is at the same time being addressed by someone else.
Then the description will not uniquely determine its object. In the same chapter
I gave other objections of a similar kind. I add some objections that I had not
thought of in the earlier paper (nor in the original version of this talk).
Suppose that the deﬁnition does correctly determine its object, and we don’t
entertain Kaplan’s worries about its artiﬁciality. There is yet another problem.
What, after all, is the Fregean sense of ‘you’ in the proffered deﬁnition? Shouldn’t
it be ‘the person I am addressing at the present moment’? But then the proffered
sense of ‘I’ plainly goes in a circle.
Moreover, Dr. Lauben may think to himself, ‘Leo Peter realizes that I am
wounded’, or, alternatively, ‘Is Leo Peter aware that I am wounded?’25 Since
Dr. Lauben is thinking to himself, surely (following Frege) he uses ‘I’ in the
special sense that only he can understand. But how can he wonder whether
Leo Peter has a thought that Peter cannot understand? Something is going
wrong here.26
Surely, one must give an analysis of ﬁrst person sentences where ‘I’ is univocal,
whether used in talking to oneself (discouraged in our society, anyway), or in
25
Remember that, for Frege, asking a question is a paradigmatic way of entertaining a thought
without asserting it.
26
See also my discussion soon below of Frege’s remarks on ‘yesterday’ and ‘today’, and my more
elaborate discussion in chapter 9 (pages 277ff ), and especially my remarks in note 74 on the
objection of Gunnar Björnsson, and related objections by John Perry, concerning indirect discourse.
Björnsson phrased his objection in terms of tense, but it could just as well have been phrased in
terms of persons, as indeed has been emphasized by Castañeda (and others, see below). (Perry does
mention the interpersonal case.)
The present problem is a sort of converse form of the same problem. Someone can use ‘I’ in an
indirect discourse attribution to someone else’s thought about herself, even though the other person
would not use ‘I’ or an equivalent expression, nor could she understand the expression as used by the
subject in question—in this case Dr. Lauben. The paragraph following in the present paper is only a
partial answer to the problem. Applying the principles of that paragraph to the present version, one
must recognize that it is legitimate for the subject (say, Dr. Lauben) to attribute a thought using ‘I’
to someone else (say, Leo Peter), provided that the other person has the appropriate belief about the
subject.
However, there is a reason speciﬁc to Frege that makes me say that for him these principles give
only a partial answer to the problem. Frege’s theories, with or without the ‘I’ problem form of them,
are in danger of running into a problem related to my own problem about exportation (chapter 11,
this volume). The problem is with Frege’s apparent view that it is sufﬁcient for a name (or pronoun)
to designate a given person (and for its user to have a thought about that person) that it be deﬁned
for its user by a deﬁnite description designating the person (similarly for entities that are not
persons). Frege (1892:153) appears to express this view in his well-known footnote on Aristotle and
in his later discussion of the way various people may think of Dr Lauben (1918–19). Something
must be done to ﬁx the matter up, and if this can be done, the objection raised here could also be
addressed.

The First Person

303

diary entries (not so discouraged), or in communicating with others. If it is the
sense determined by its subject’s ﬁrst person acquaintance with herself, how can
it be used to communicate to someone else? Here is one possibility. The hearer is
aware that each person, including the hearer herself, uses ‘I’ to refer to herself by
direct self-acquaintance. Hence, knowing what this is in one’s own case and
taking it to be the same way for others, one understands what the ﬁrst person
statement is, even though it has a sense that is, strictly speaking, incommunicable
to the hearer.27
Similarly, according to my own understanding of Frege, at no later time can
I have the thought I expressed with ‘now’, and at no later date can I have the
thought that I express with ‘today’. Nevertheless, I can understand a piece of
writing written in the past using ‘now’ or ‘today’, similarly to the way I can
understand someone else’s utterance of ‘I’.28 Therefore, on my view, Frege was
wrong on his own theory to say that one could express the same thought using
‘yesterday’ as one previously expressed using ‘today’. Ironically, Kaplan, who is
critical of Frege’s discussion of ‘I’, commends his remarks on ‘yesterday’ and
‘today’. My own view is that, from a Fregean standpoint, Frege’s remarks on
‘yesterday’ and ‘today’ cannot be defended, while his remarks on the ﬁrst person
and the present are correct from a Fregean standpoint (with the exception of his
discussion of the ambiguity of ‘I’, which I have criticized above).
In fact, however, when I discussed these issues with Kaplan, he said that he had
come to accept my point that someone must have a concept of the self to follow
the general direction for the use of ‘I’, and attributes his stronger original
statements to ‘irrational exuberance’. And probably Kaplan did not really

27
The reader should be warned that I have not given a full presentation of my exegesis of Frege’s
view, in particular, of the fact that the verbal expression does not express a complete thought. For a
more complete account, see my discussion in chapter 9. An important conclusion from the Fregean
point of view not mentioned in the present discussion is that ‘I’, ‘now’, ‘today’, and the like have to
be viewed as unsaturated expressions according to Frege, strictly speaking standing for functions.
This has been omitted, and perhaps even distorted, in the present version, where one would think, as
Kaplan says, of ‘I’ as a singular term denoting its user. The reason is, as I said, that I am only
marginally concerned with Frege and Fregean exegesis in this sense in the present paper.
As I mentioned in chapter 9, the later Wittgenstein, and those following him, might object to any
idea that one understands ‘I’ in the mouth of someone else by analogy to one’s own case, but I am
scouting this issue here (actually, in the earlier paper I had the excuse that Frege was unlikely to have
been worried about such an objection; here I don’t have it).
28
Perry (1977:491) in fact objects that Frege would have to be committed by analogy to what he
says about ‘I’ to the view that a thought containing ‘now’ is inexpressible at any later time. I think
that this is indeed the correct consequence of Frege’s theory, and say so in chapter 9. However, in
my more complete Fregean exegesis, I take the verbally expressed part (in English) to be the same at
all times. However, this does not express a complete thought. What does so in the case of ‘now’ is
the verbally expressed part together with the supplementation whose sense is given by autonymous
reference and acquaintance with time of utterance. It is this that is unrepeatable, since the
acquaintance is preserved at no later time. See chapter 9 for the details.

304

The First Person

mean, when he commended Frege for his treatment of ‘yesterday’ and ‘today’,
that this treatment is correct on a Fregean approach.29

II
Enough about Frege—what about according to me? Well, according to me, the
ﬁrst person use of ‘I’ of course does not have a Fregean sense, at least if this means
that it has a deﬁnition. But it might be a paradigmatic case, one that I did not
mention in Naming and Necessity (1980), of ﬁxing a reference by means of a
description: it is a rule of the common language that each of us ﬁxes the reference
of ‘I’ by the description ‘the subject’. However, since each of us speaks a natural
language, and not an imaginary ‘scientiﬁc language’ spoken by no one, for each
of us the referent can be different. This is the moral that I wish to stress.
A long time ago, in conversation, Harry Frankfurt suggested to me that the
Cartesian cogito might be an example of the contingent a priori.30 At the time
I thought that whatever may be said about this case, it has a very different ﬂavor
from the examples in Naming and Necessity. It is certainly contingent because
I (or whichever subject is involved in the relevant cogito) might never have been
born, and it is a priori at least in the sense of not requiring any speciﬁc experience
for its veriﬁcation. But it now seems to me that it does indeed have some of the
ﬂavor of my own examples, and perhaps lacks some of their more problematic
features. For it follows from the way I ﬁx the reference, as the subject of my own
thought, that I must exist. (I will discuss the famous Humean objection to this
conclusion later, but here I am assuming that Descartes is right.) In both the cases
of the meter stick (‘stick S’) and Neptune, I must grant that the object might not
exist. In the meter stick case, the stick I think I am looking at might be illusory
(I was tacitly assuming in Naming and Necessity that the reference is being ﬁxed
29

See chapter 9 (page 284, note 81). Kaplan himself mentions one of the objections to the
‘yesterday’ and ‘today’ case from a Fregean point of view, and as I said, probably thinks of them as
directly referential demonstratives, yielding a single ‘content’ (in Kaplan’s terminology). See also my
own distinction between ﬁxing a reference and giving a meaning, as spelled out immediately below.
In fairness to Kaplan, I should add that his original theory in Kaplan (1989) was not simply that ‘I’
is a term that, when used by any speaker, directly refers to that speaker, but also that it is directly
referential.
I might mention that Buber’s Ich und Du (1923) (translated as I and Thou, or I and You) may be
thought of, as among other things, giving an alternative account of the semantics of ‘you’ to the one
I have, in my discussion above, claimed that Frege must give. I am familiar with this work only in part.
30
I don’t remember when I had this conversation with Frankfurt. I am now uncertain about the
history of my own thoughts on this matter. Such examples of the contingent a priori have been
widely accepted even by those who doubt my own examples of Neptune and the meter stick.
Kaplan’s example ‘I am here now’, with ‘I exist’ as an obvious corollary, is well known as an example
of the contingent a priori (see Kaplan 1989, pp. 508-509). Even ‘I exist’ (or strictly speaking, its
negation) is explicitly mentioned by Kaplan on p. 495. Plantinga also suggests that ‘I exist’ is
contingent a priori (see Plantinga 1974, p. 8).

The First Person

305

by someone who has the stick in front of her), and in the Neptune case the
astronomical deduction might have been wrong, with no such planet existing, as
turned out to be the case with Vulcan. Thus, if I wish to express a priori truths,
I must say ‘if there is a stick before me as I see it, then . . . ’ (In the Neptune case
I must say ‘if some planet causes the perturbations in Uranus in the appropriate
way, then . . . ).31 The whole point of the cogito is that no such existence problem
arises, epistemically speaking. Yet another difference with the meter stick and
Neptune cases is this: in both cases there is a closely related statement that is
necessary and trivial given the way the reference is ﬁxed, such as ‘the planet, if
any, that causes this perturbations, does cause them’, and ‘stick S, if there is such
a stick, has as its length the length of stick S’. Thus someone might argue (but see
my accompanying note here) that these examples of the contingent a priori are
really cases where one has no information beyond that provided by the related
and trivially analytic necessary truth.32 The cogito does not seem to be involved
in this problem.
I remember when I was very young, about twelve or thirteen, reading Descartes and ﬁnding the cogito very convincing. Some time later, reading Hume,
I found this:
There are some philosophers, who imagine we are every moment intimately conscious of
what we call our SELF; that we feel its existence and its continuance in existence; and are
certain, beyond the evidence of a demonstration, both of its perfect identity and
simplicity. The strongest sensation, the most violent passion, say they, instead of distracting us from this view, only ﬁx it the more intensely, and make us consider their
inﬂuence on self either by their pain or pleasure. To attempt a farther proof of this were to
weaken its evidence; since no proof can be deriv’d from any fact, of which we are so
intimately conscious; nor is there any thing, of which we can be certain, if we doubt
of this.
Unluckily all these positive assertions are contrary to that very experience, which is
pleaded for them, nor have we any idea of self, after the manner it is here explain’d. . . .
For my part, when I enter most intimately into what I call myself, I always stumble on
some particular impression or other, of heat or cold, light or shade, love or hatred, pain or
pleasure. I never can catch myself at any time without a perception. . . . If any one, upon
serious and unprejudic’d reﬂexion, thinks he has a different notion of himself, I must
confess I can reason no longer with him.33 All I can allow him is, that he may be in the
right as well as I, and that we are essentially different in this particular. He may, perhaps,
31

I discuss these cases from Naming and Necessity in an unpublished manuscript ‘Rigid
Designation and the Contingent A Priori: The Meter Stick Revisited’ (Kripke 1986). For the
examples in question see Kripke (1980:54–57; 79, note 33; 96, note 42).
32
See my note on this matter in Kripke (1980:63, note 26). I now have more to say about the
issue and think that some such stipulations may signiﬁcantly affect the way one thinks about the
world, in particular, in the case of the meter. I have discussed these issues in two unpublished
manuscripts, the one mentioned in the previous note, and ‘Logicism, Wittgenstein, and De Re
Beliefs about Natural Numbers’ (Kripke 1992).
33
That’s just how I feel about the robot philosophers. See note 21.

306

The First Person

perceive something simple and continu’d, which he calls himself; tho’ I am certain there is
no such principle in me. (2000:164-65 [Book I, Part IV, Section VI])

The concluding sentences are, of course, a sarcasm. Now, after I had read this
passage with shock, I thought that philosophy was a very confusing subject. One
philosopher is very convincing, and then another one comes along and gives a
very decisive refutation. Who knows what will happen if I read a third one?
Some years later, when I was in my twenties, I talked about it to a nonphilosopher, a friend of mine at the time (my attempt when I ﬁrst read it to talk
about it to a classmate was completely unsuccessful). She said, ‘Well, Hume must
never have looked in a mirror’. At that time I probably thought that her remark
simply showed how uncomprehending non-philosophers could be. For of course
Hume was objecting to the notion of a Cartesian ego, a pure mind that is the
subject of thoughts and impressions. But at the present time I see some justice in
her remark, since the idea of a subject, one that I am aware of through selfawareness, as described above, need not in itself imply that the reference is
sometimes other than a person, the same person one is aware of, with or without
the help of a mirror, or even a sense of sight.34
Moreover, the last sentences of the quoted paragraph, witty and effective as
they may be, are strangely near to contradictory: ‘If any one, upon serious and
unprejudic’d reﬂexion, thinks he has a different notion of himself, I must confess
I can reason no longer with him. All I can allow him is, that he may well be in the
right as well as I, and we are essentially different in this particular. He may,
perhaps, perceive something simple and continu’d, which he calls himself; tho’
I am certain there is no such principle in me’. Me? He? I? The beginning of the
paragraph is similarly confusing. It appears to presuppose entirely the very
notions it attempts to deny.
As is well known, Hume regarded the self as a notion constructed by relating
various impressions through resemblance, contiguity, or causation.35 All we
really have is a bundle of perceptions, uniﬁed by these relations. Many problems
beset this idea. Why should my own impression not equally resemble that of
someone else, or be equally contiguous with that of someone else?36 And
similarly, couldn’t an impression of mine have a causal relation to that of
34
Of course, recognizing yourself in a mirror presupposes some concept of self-awareness
already. Also, I have been warned that my reference to a mirror in the conversation I reported
might suggest something about the use by psychologists of mirror self-recognition tests to see
whether a subject has a concept of her/himself. Nothing like that was in my interlocutor’s mind (nor
mine), and the example could have been given without a mirror (though Hume would have seen less
of himself). I believe the test had not yet been developed when the conversation took place.
35
Since he is in this section relating the notion of the self to that of a pure Cartesian ego,
completely independent of a body, the question of bodily identity is not discussed. But what Hume
has to say about physical bodies elsewhere shows that he thought that, for similar reasons, they
would be of no help.
36
By ‘contiguity’ Hume is referring to the succession of impressions in time, rapidly after each
other.

The First Person

307

someone else? In fact, all these things do happen.37 It is not fair to say that only
the impressions that I am aware of count. And, as I have already emphasized,
Hume says that we confusedly form the notion of a single, persisting entity
because of the close relations between the various impressions. But who is this
‘we’ who do this?38 (The discussion here and following might be compared with
my discussion of the issues in the last chapter of my book on Wittgenstein,
Kripke 1982).
A more basic problem for Hume is that he seems to think that there could be
impressions, mental acts, and so on with no bearer.39 They can simply ‘ﬂoat’—
that is, each impression could simply exist in and of itself, and it is only an
accident that they are connected by the relations that he mentions. I myself ﬁnd
the notion of an impression or idea without any subject who has it hard to
understand. I must admit that even more recently there are those who seem to
agree with the Humean picture. In Kripke (1982:123), I quote Moore’s account
of Wittgenstein’s Cambridge lectures in 1930–33:
[Wittgenstein said that] ‘a [physical] eye doesn’t enter into the description of what is
seen . . . ;’40 and he said that similarly ‘the idea of a person’ doesn’t enter into the
description of ‘having [a] toothache’. . . . And he quoted, with apparent approval,
Lichtenberg’s saying ‘Instead of “I think” we ought to say “It thinks”’ (‘it’ being used,
as he said, as ‘Es’ is used in ‘Es blitzet’).41

As I’ve indicated, there are others, even more recently, who appear to agree. For
example, Peter Geach argues that if Descartes is merely solipsistically thinking to
himself, instead of saying ‘I am getting into a muddle’, he might as well simply
37
Given Hume’s well-known skepticism concerning the notion of causation, it is interesting
how he invokes it here and elsewhere. But this is probably no inconsistency and is rather a statement
of how one dubious notion depends on another.
38
I ﬁnd that Chisholm (1976:39–41) has a discussion of Hume closely related to this one. He
himself mentions some similar comments by Price.
39
I emphasize this problem in Kripke (1982:130–31, note 12).
40
Probably Moore’s quotation is somewhat inaccurate here. Of course an eye is involved in
seeing, but what Wittgenstein points out is that it is not part of the visual ﬁeld, that we do not see the
eye. See Tractatus 5.633, which also states the analogy to the nonexistence of the subject. See also
Tractatus 5.631: ‘There is no such thing as the subject that thinks or entertains ideas.’ He adds that
no such subject could be found if I wrote a report on ‘the world as I found it’. The remainder of the
paragraph elaborates on the point. Moore’s quotation shows that Wittgenstein still holds this view
in his lectures in the 30s.
Apropos of my friend’s comment on Hume: if Wittgenstein looked in a mirror, wouldn’t he see
his eye? Or should one argue that all he sees is a mirror image? If so, the same would apply to Hume
in a mirror, even if the self in question were not some pure Cartesian ego, but rather a person with a
body. However, Hume can look at some of himself without a mirror. One thing he cannot see
without one is his own eye, so perhaps the issue of the eye is directly related.
41
Moore(1954/1955). The quotation is on page 309 in the (1959) reprint. As to Lichtenberg,
‘Es regnet’ in German would mean ‘It is raining’ in English. ‘Es blitzet’ correspondingly would
mean ‘It is lightning,’ used in an analogous sense to ‘It is raining’. But for lightning there is no
analogous usage in English. The point is that the ‘It’ (or ‘Es’) in the subject does not refer to any
entity.

308

The First Person

have said ‘that is a muddle’.42 But what would a muddle be with no one to be in
the muddle?43
In spite of Wittgenstein (in the periods in question, anyway), Lichtenberg, and
so on, Hume’s view, for the reasons that I have given, seems to me to be quite
unintelligible. He must have gone wrong somewhere. (Though Descartes might
have gone wrong somewhere, too.) I mean, what would a ﬂoating impression not
belonging to anyone be? Yet, according to Hume, the supposed self is simply
constructed from a bundle of such impressions that in principle could each ‘ﬂoat’
independently of any other impressions, let alone a bearer.
So, basically, I think my friend had a point. So far there is nothing in the
notion of a subject, as I have defended it above and as Frege presupposed it, that
in and of itself excludes the ﬁrst person pronoun as referring to the whole person
in the ordinary sense.44
Thomas Nagel once delivered a paper, unpublished as far as I know,45 in
which he proposed that a person be identiﬁed with her brain. Rogers Albritton
was the commentator, and remarked that if that were so, he shouldn’t have been
so worried about his weight—it is much less than he had thought.46
What did Nagel have in mind when he proposed to identify each of us with
her or his brain? What he meant was that if I lose my arm, this is very
unfortunate, but I have remained. As a matter of practical medicine, not too
much could be stripped away if I am to remain alive, but assuming medicine to
have conquered the problem, I could survive the loss of a great deal more. But my
brain, from a point of view that is not immaterialist in this respect, is essential as
the seat of my thought. As long as it is still functioning, I have not disappeared;
but if it goes, I have gone. While this is so, Albritton’s comment means that it is
still true that my arm is a part of me, as long as it is there. And if I lose it, I have
lost one of my parts.

Geach (1957b:117–21, }26 [‘The Fallacy of “Cogito Ergo Sum” ’]).
In fairness to Geach, what he is arguing is that the cogito does not directly give us the idea of an
immaterial subject. Perhaps not, but not because there might be no subject at all. There is also, in the
passage in question, some discussion of how ‘I’ is used in ordinary communication, supposedly
distinct from the Cartesian case.
44
I don’t know why John Perry, in talking about this, wanted to emphasize someone who
erroneously thought he was Hume, rather than a more standard example like Napoleon or Christ.
A while ago, I was having dinner, and someone who wanted to criticize philosophers said:
‘Philosophers think one is not certain of anything, that you are not certain whether you are
Napoleon or not’. I replied: ‘Napoleon must have been the greatest philosopher of all time,
because only he was right when he thought he was Napoleon’.
45
Someone looked it up and reported that it was not in his bibliography, so maybe it hasn’t seen
the light of day, though I’m pretty sure it was read before an audience.
46
I was not present at the exchange between Nagel and Albritton, but when I delivered this talk
someone who heard the exchange told me afterward that he remembered it vividly.
Nagel has, of course, written important material on the nature of the self, which I do not discuss
here.
42
43

The First Person

309

Descartes held that my essence is thinking. The only thing that is really
indubitable, and therefore constitutes me, is the thinker—what I am aware of
whenever I think and feel. It is easy to conclude that he holds that I really am
simply the Cartesian ego that Hume (and others following him) have found hard
to comprehend, or to locate in their own self-consciousness. And perhaps he is
usually read in this way. But, of course, there is a well-known passage that
appears to be to the contrary. Once Descartes has proved to his own satisfaction
(what initially he doubted) that his own body is real, he states:
Now there is no more explicit lesson of nature than that I have a body; that it is being
injured when I feel pain; that it needs food, or drink, when I suffer from hunger, or thirst,
and so on. So I must not doubt that there is some truth in this. Nature also teaches by
these sensations of pain, hunger, thirst, etc., that I am not present in my body merely as a
pilot is present in a ship; I am most tightly bound to it, and as it were mixed up with it, so
that I and it form a unit. (1971:117, translated by Anscombe and Geach)47

Descartes goes on to argue in the same vein that the way I feel sensation shows
that I am a unity, including my body. The case involved in the Nagel–Albritton
exchange is similar, though more materialistically expressed. Am I my brain
alone, directing my body like a pilot in a vessel? Or am I a unity, including all of
my physical body, even though the brain could be the only part that remains, and
as long as it is functioning, I have not disappeared? For Descartes, although I may
still exist if my body were stripped away and I were still thinking, as long as that
has not occurred, I am a unity including my whole body.
It would be very far from my competence or intent to be giving a historical talk
on Cartesian exegesis, though I am drawing attention to a suggestive and wellknown passage from Descartes. But the philosophical point is that though I might
believe that I can doubt the existence of my left hand (and it might be only a
contingent fact that I have it), that does not mean that the left hand is not, in fact, a
part of me. The commonsense view (and there is no reason to think that Frege, for
one, is opposed to it) is that when Lauben says ‘I’, he means to refer to the person
himself, including all bodily parts as genuine parts of himself. Yet he could also
think that such parts are subject to Cartesian doubt, that they are only perceived by
him as subject, and so on. One could certainly agree with Frege that each of us is
aware of himself in a special way. And we have seen that even Descartes ultimately
concludes that he is an entity including his own body, even if he believes that he
might survive without a body, as long as there is a subject for the cogito.
One notable instance of those who refuse to identify Descartes with the
reference of ‘I’ is Elizabeth Anscombe. In the following passage I am her direct
target:
47
Though Cottingham may have become the standard translation (Descartes 1996), the
Anscombe and Geach translation was better suited to my purposes—namely, discussing
Anscombe’s interpretation of Descartes (see below).

310

The First Person

Saul Kripke has tried to reinstate Descartes’ argument for his dualism. But he neglects its
essentially ﬁrst-person character, making it an argument about the nonidentity of Descartes with his own body. Whatever else is said, it seems clear that the argument in
Descartes depends on results of applying the method of doubt. (Anscombe 1975:45;
emphasis in text)

I certainly don’t think Descartes is identical to his body. This point in itself
I don’t regard as particularly deep, or even incompatible with views that are,
broadly speaking, materialist. For Descartes, I say, was not his body when the body
was a corpse. ‘Descartes had a serious accident, did he survive?’ ‘Yes, of course—
take a look in this cofﬁn.’ The response is absurd; rather, we have to say, ‘I am
afraid Descartes is no longer with us’.48 But in and of itself that simply might
mean that mere nonidentity is not so important. Perhaps a person is nothing ‘over
and above’ her body, even if they are, strictly speaking, not identical.49
However, this hardly touches the main points that Anscombe wishes to make,
either substantively or as criticism of my own version of the Cartesian argument
in Naming and Necessity, that it neglected the ﬁrst person character of what
Descartes says. She mentions Castañeda’s well-known discussion (Castañeda
1967; see also his 1966 and 1968) as noting the existence of the indirect reﬂexive
in English, which is grammatically a special form in Greek (the form is exempliﬁed by ‘Betty believes that she herself . . . ’; see my note 12 above). However,
she regards Castañeda’s discussion as excessively complicated, a point that
Castañeda himself appears to concede. Castañeda does not, as far as I know,
mention the technical grammatical term from Greek, but the very simple
and clear presentation in Geach (1957b), cited in Lewis (1983:139), does so
(see my note 12 again). One would think she would have been aware of this
particular author.
Although Castañeda’s papers are indeed complicated, Anscombe’s is itself
none too easy. (I wish I had had the opportunity to talk with her about the
paper.) She makes various claims. One is that ‘I am not Descartes’ follows from
the logic of Descartes’s argument. She also even argues, from a historical
perspective, that Descartes would have accepted this conclusion (see 1975:
55–56). In so arguing, she holds that Descartes uses ‘I’ to designate the pure
Cartesian ego whose nature Hume and others claim not to understand. The idea
is supposed to be that, by his very nature, Descartes is a human being, a member
48

But don’t we say, when asked ‘Who is that?’ (pointing to a tomb), ‘That’s Napoleon’? Isn’t it
even better if the corpse is embalmed? For example, ‘That’s Lenin’. But we could say the same kind
of thing at Madame Tussauds, pointing to a wax ﬁgure. I have something to say about related
examples (see my discussion of the toy duck fallacy in chapter 11, this volume), but no more detail
need be given here.
I am aware that some people will reject the simple argument for nonidentity on various grounds.
I don’t wish to deal with them, but feel obligated to mention such things when I am writing about
Anscombe, since, after all, there is Peter Geach and the notion of relative identity.
49
See my discussion of this point in Kripke (1980:145, note 74).

The First Person

311

of an animal species, with a body, and so on, whereas ‘I’ as used in the
Meditations does not designate such an entity.50
Now, we have seen that Descartes’s ultimate conclusion—‘I’ and my body
form a unit—is not so simple. There is nothing here to distinguish ‘I’ from
‘Descartes’ in the sense Anscombe is talking about. (Of the several translations of
Descartes, I have used the one she is most likely to endorse; but everyone agrees
that Descartes makes this point.) However, perhaps Descartes believes in an
incorporeal entity whose essence is thinking and is the most indubitable part of
this unity, one that would remain if everything else were stripped away. But even
granting that this is so, I do not see that he would say that such an entity would
not be Descartes—nothing I am aware of supports such a dramatic and paradoxical conclusion.51 Had he accepted it, I would have expected some explicit
assertion of such a claim.
Anscombe believes, however, that ‘if “I” is a “referring expression”, then
Descartes was right about what the referent was’ (59). And this is her Descartes,
where the relevant use of ‘I’ refers to a Cartesian ego that must be distinct from
the man, Descartes. She performs certain thought experiments, involving a person
being anesthetized, to support her conclusion. Although I am not exactly certain
what the argument from these thought experiments is, the conclusion is at least
clear: ‘ “I” is neither a name nor another kind of expression whose logical role is
to make a reference, at all ’ (60).52 She also states, ‘ “I am E. A.” is not an identity
proposition’(63).
Very likely Anscombe is writing under the inﬂuence of passages in the
Investigations,53 where Wittgenstein says that ‘I’ is not the name of a person,
and distinguishes between ‘I’ and ‘L. W.’ The inﬂuence goes down to the use of
initials to make the contrast—‘E. A.’ in the one case and ‘L. W.’ in the other.54
50

Very likely she is also inﬂuenced by the view, advocated by both Peter Geach and Noam
Chomsky, that a proper name such as ‘Descartes’ has a semantical requirement that it name a
human being. This might or might not already imply the possession of a body, depending on other
views. For my own discussion of Geach’s view (in Geach 1957a: }16), see Kripke (1980:115,
note 58).
51
Part of Anscombe’s argument, also to be found in other authors (see below), is that the
indirect reﬂexive allows someone to be mistaken about who he is, so the conclusion is not selfcontradictory. But Descartes is not in this sense mistaken about who he is.
52
Her discussion has an elaborate contrast of the use in an imaginary society of some name that
everyone uses for him/herself (‘A’-users) with our use of the ﬁrst person pronoun, which is not
entirely clear to me. She also remarks that calling it a personal pronoun, and the like, is simply a
trivial restatement of ﬁrst person usage and, in and of itself, gives no information.
However, her general conclusion is clearly stated in what I have just quoted.
I confess that in both the sentence I am footnoting and the present note, I would be willing to
replace ‘I’ by ‘Saul Kripke’—only the resulting awkwardness and pomposity would stand in the way.
And I have noted the usage of ‘the present writer’ above (see note 7). Surely ‘the present writer’ does
make a reference, or at any rate, is a deﬁnite description.
53
Wittgenstein (1953: }}405–6).
54
Geach (1957a: }26), in the anti-Cartesian passage referred to above, similarly contrasts the
Cartesian ‘I’ with ‘P. T. G.’, probably under the same inﬂuence. At least, so I conjecture. In my own
discussion, I probably would not be inclined to use initials. See note 52.

312

The First Person

No doubt when Wittgenstein makes the relevant distinction in the Investigations, his thought is continuous with his earlier worries about the metaphysical
subject, as quoted above (see note 40 and related discussion). The Investigations
passages are about many things, most of which can’t be discussed here, such as
the difference between ﬁrst and third person attributions of sensations, the
alleged connection of ﬁrst person ‘avowals’ of sensations with more primitive
expressions such as groaning or crying, and so on. Obviously, we can’t talk about
all these things here (they are to some extent in Anscombe’s paper too).55
I won’t attempt to give an exegesis of Wittgenstein on these topics. But one
should note the following. Remember that in }410 he says: ‘ “I” is not the name
of a person, nor “here” of a place, and “this” is not a name’ (see note 4). In one
sense this is obvious, because ‘I’ is not a name at all, but maybe something deeper
is meant. See }405, where he says:
‘But at any rate when you say “I am in pain”, you want to draw the attention of others to a
particular person.’—The answer might be: No, I want to draw their attention to myself.—
(}405; emphasis in original)

It is unfortunate that in }405 and the following paragraphs there is a concentration on the case of ‘I am in pain’. Perhaps one might wish to be thinking of a
‘Cartesian’ case of describing one’s own inner states. Obviously, however, this is
not the general case of ﬁrst person usage (see what I say in note 55).
A common criticism of Anscombe’s position is that if ‘I’ is not a referring
expression, why should we be conﬁdent in the inference pattern from, say, ‘I live
in North Carolina’ to ‘Someone lives in North Carolina’ (in other words,
existential generalization), or in the fact that any inference pattern where ‘I’ is
treated as if it refers is valid. Indeed, such an objection is only a technical
expression of one’s natural reaction that Anscombe’s thesis is in and of itself
incredible, difﬁcult to understand at all.56
As I said, I was never able to talk to Anscombe about these matters, but I do
recall a report from someone else as to what she said when queried as to why ‘I’
behaves as if it refers in inference patterns. Her answer as reported was ‘I don’t
know’.
55
See Wittgenstein (1953), }398, passim. In }406 there is Wittgenstein’s well-known derivation
of ‘avowals’ from more primitive expressions. He says: ‘ “But surely what you want to do with the
words ‘I am . . . .’ is to distinguish between yourself and other people.”—Can this be said in every
case? Even when I merely groan?’ Of course, the one who groans does not use the word ‘I’ or any
equivalent at all; and even if one somehow regards ‘I am in pain’ as simply derived from a groan, this
is hardly an obvious illumination of the general case of all ﬁrst person usage. But I don’t say that
Wittgenstein thinks that it is.
56
See, for example, Peacocke (2008:80). He calls Anscombe’s conclusion ‘barely credible’, and
makes the criticism about inference patterns. He also uses the argument about inference patterns to
show that ‘I’ cannot be compared with ‘it’ in ‘it is raining’, where the grammatical pattern
superﬁcially suggests a subject of reference but there is none. (There are plenty of such cases;
‘nobody’ is a famous one.) Peacocke’s comments are a common reaction to Anscombe’s view.

The First Person

313

One might here remark that Anscombe is a very special case, coming from a
special background, that of Wittgenstein. And though, clearly, some of the
argumentation is her own, as is the formulation of her thesis, and though
Castañeda’s well-known discussions of the matter are plainly an inﬂuence, the
predominant inﬂuence may be the special background.

III
Let me turn to a philosopher with quite a different background and orientation.
David Lewis was worried about the problem of belief de se (Lewis 1979).
According to Lewis, there is general agreement that the objects of all the socalled propositional attitudes are propositions, though he acknowledges that not
all authors agree as to what propositions are. For him, propositions are sets of
possible worlds. But though sometimes I have heard Lewis say that here he
simply is giving a stipulative deﬁnition—and remember, in addition, that Lewis
has his own very special sense of the term ‘possible worlds’—presumably, in one
sense, it is supposed to represent a thesis or discovery having something to do
with traditional uses of the term ‘proposition’. I myself am one of the originators
of this proposal (in connection with modal logic, anyway), though I wasn’t
thinking of possible worlds in Lewis’s sense, and now might modify it. Today,
I even feel some reservations about the idea that all the phrases traditionally
called propositional attitude constructions have the same sort of entities as
objects, though this issue is not for the present paper.57 Lewis also correctly
remarks that the general agreement that the objects are propositions is ”to some
extent phony” (1983:134), since some authors take propositions to be more
highly structured entities, more like an abstract, nonlinguistic, analogue of
sentences.
In any event, Lewis proposes a theory that was formulated independently by
Roderick Chisholm (1981),58 and actually was anticipated by Quine (1968).59
57
In the ﬁrst section of Lewis (1979), he gives some reasons for hoping for uniform objects. As
far as the arguments of this section go, I agree.
58
I am familiar with Chisholm’s version only superﬁcially. Like Lewis, he proposes that
self-ascription be taken as primitive. However, he doesn’t put matters in terms of Lewis’s special
apparatus of possible worlds. In fact, at the end of his book, he states his own view on the nature of
possible worlds, which he thinks is the traditional one.
59
My thanks to Gilbert Harman for emphasizing that Quine’s paper anticipates Lewis’s theory.
However, as Lewis says, Quine uses a different notion of possible world. Other than that, the
theories, though in my own opinion somewhat differently motivated, can be interpreted as the
same. Perhaps I should add that Quine’s paper somewhat surprised the present writer, given what he
had said about possible worlds elsewhere. There is even a paper entitled ‘Worlds Away’ (Quine
1976) expressing his repudiation of the notion, and not mentioning that he had written his own
version of a kind of possible world semantics earlier. One might also add that the original journal
version in Quine (1976) and the one printed in Quine (1981) are signiﬁcantly different,
representing an unacknowledged change of argument.

314

The First Person

Also, Lewis acknowledges Brian Loar (1976) as making the same proposal (Lewis
1983:519, note 4).60 He also makes a comparison of his views with a proposal by
John Perry (1977) (Lewis 1983:150),61 and plainly Lewis is considerably inﬂuenced by Perry’s paper, as Lewis himself says (139).
Neither Lewis nor Chisholm actually gives an analysis of statements with ‘I’.
Rather, as Chisholm says explicitly (1979), what is explained is the indirect
reﬂexive. For example, one takes as primitive ‘A self-ascribes such and such a
property’, where self-ascription is a primitive notion, corresponding to ‘A believes that he himself has such and such a property’. Since self-ascription, like any
reﬂexive property ºx (xRx), is derived from a relation R, Lewis rightly concludes
his paper (sections XIII and XIV) with a brief discussion of belief de re. He
regards beliefs de re as beliefs based on acquaintance, and adds that belief de se is a
par excellence case of belief de re, based on the highest form of acquaintance,
namely, one’s acquaintance with oneself.62
I should mention that Lewis also wishes to account for ‘now’ and the present
tense, and for this reason regards it as a person stage that has an attitude de se. But
this is a separable part of the view, drawn from the rest of Lewis’s philosophy. As
far as the present issue is concerned, he could just as well say that a person (not a
stage, but an enduring object) self-ascribes not a property (corresponding to a set
of worlds), but a two-place relation between a person (himself) and a time (the
time of the ascription, corresponding to the same set).
Note also that Lewis, in contrast with some of those to whom he compares
himself, regards all attitudes as de se, even those that seem to make no reference to
the subject (say, ‘lightning is an electrical discharge’, or ‘Australia is a large
island’, etc.). For this Lewis cites the advantages of uniformity, so that there
Lewis himself (1983:147–48) discusses some of the differences in motivation that he sees between
himself and Quine. He remarks (147) that Quine differs from him in considering a divided theory:
the objects of some primitive attitudes may be stimulation patterns rather than sets of worlds,
making his theory highly nonuniform, something Lewis wishes to avoid. Moreover, Quine is
concerned with attitudes and desires of animals too, an issue that Lewis does not consider (nor
shall I). Lewis mentions other differences in motivation, and Quine does not share Lewis’s modal
realism (as Lewis calls it).
I myself would treat possible worlds differently, even given Quine’s project. In particular, I do not
agree that either classical or relativistic physics has shown the notion of a (physical) geometrical
point to be absurd, as Quine thinks, even though he informally uses this notion to motivate his
deﬁnitions. The important thing for the present purposes is that to explain de se attitudes, Quine
introduces the notion of ‘centered possible worlds’, where the centering is on the subject (or its
physical location). In and of itself a possible world is not centered, so that a centered possible world
might be thought of as an ordered pair of a world and a center.
60
Lewis states that Loar formulates his view for ‘certain exceptional beliefs’.
61
I have discussed Perry’s paper above and in chapter 9.
62
Elsewhere, Chisholm advocates the theory, rightly (in my opinion) rejected by Lewis in his
paper, that one has a belief de re about an object as long as one has any description designating the
object under which one has the appropriate belief (what I have called ‘universal exportation’, chapter
11, this volume). So he cannot regard belief de se as a special case of belief de re. I have not researched
whether Chisholm says anything about the issue.

The First Person

315

are not two kinds of objects of beliefs, and so on, sometimes propositions, and
sometimes properties, but only one. But really, other reasons can be given in
Lewis’s own framework. First, in the old theory, the object of a propositional
attitude is the same for logically equivalent sentences, so that, for any p, ‘p’ and ‘p
and David Lewis is self-identical’ express the same attitudinal object (set of
possible worlds), even where p makes no reference to David Lewis. It would be
natural to preserve this feature with ‘I’ in place of ‘David Lewis’.63 Second, and
most important, for Lewis the actual world is distinguished as the one the subject
inhabits, and hence any ordinary belief is really a belief that I inhabit a world with
certain properties; the uniformity is not really artiﬁcial at all, given Lewis’s view
of the nature of possible worlds as vast concrete worlds and his theory of
actuality. For example, my belief that actually Australia has kangaroos is a belief
that I inhabit a world where Australia has kangaroos.
All this, however, seems to me to be an odd reversal of matters.64 As I say in
Naming and Necessity, ‘a possible world is given by the descriptive conditions we
associate with it ’ (1980:44; emphasis in original). By this I did not mean to
identify possible worlds with sets of descriptive conditions, for example, as
Carnapian state descriptions (probably impossible in a countable language
anyway). But I wish to emphasize the legitimacy of setting up possible worlds
by any description we understand, and in particular that it need not be purely
qualitative. For example, I emphasize, as against those who worry about a
problem of ‘transworld identiﬁcation’, that a counterfactual possibility could
be stipulated as being about Nixon, using the name ‘Nixon’, and not worrying
about any reduction to a qualitative description.
Now, what language does a person use when describing counterfactual possibilities? Not a ‘scientiﬁc’, indexical-free language—one that none of us speaks.
Each of us has a notion of the self and often a word for it (in English, ‘I’). Why
can we not use such a language to describe a counterfactual situation, and hence a
possible world (even if we normally do so only in part)? I use the word ‘I’ to
designate myself, and to designate myself in a particular way, as has been

63
Pardon the abuse of quotation here. I suppose I should have used Quine’s corners. Everyone
knows what I mean, and I wish to be excused.
64
Evans (1977) suggests that perhaps the indirect reﬂexive could be thought of as deriving from
the oratio recta construction with the ﬁrst person pronoun (98). For example, he sees ‘John thinks
that he is under suspicion’ as ‘somehow derived from’ ‘John thinks “I am under suspicion” ’ in oratio
recta, and refers to Anscombe’s paper. I am sympathetic with something Evans is trying to say,
namely, that the form with the ﬁrst person pronoun is primary. However, one cannot make this
point by deriving the indirect reﬂexive from an oratio recta construction. Nothing in the indirect
reﬂexive form implies that John is speaking or thinking in English. The trouble is that if we wish to
ascribe to John an ‘I’-thought using a ‘that-clause’, we use the indirect reﬂexive itself, and thus get
into a tangle expressing the derivation, which I do think goes in the direction indicated by Evans.
I confess that I have not taken Evans’s other writings on de se attitudes into account.

316

The First Person

discussed above. Quine speaks of ‘centered possible worlds’.65 I would rather
speak of possible worlds simpliciter; the ‘centering’ comes when a particular
person describes a counterfactual situation.
Lewis himself rightly (as I have said) describes de se belief as a special case of de
re belief, and bases the latter on a notion of acquaintance. Self-acquaintance is
such acquaintance in the highest degree. Why then can someone not use such
acquaintance to formulate a word ‘I’, and use it to designate an object in a special
way? It will follow from this means of designation that it is rigid, or more
strongly, as Kaplan puts it, ‘directly referential’ (if we are putting the matter
that way, ‘directly referential in a special way’).
One should not think that any situation, actual or counterfactual, really
should be described in a ‘scientiﬁc’ language (see note 4), one free of person
and tense, and so on, and then tack on an identiﬁcation of the people and times
in it, as ‘I’, ‘now’, and so on. Lewis makes much of a situation with two gods
(1983:139), one of whom does one thing and one of whom does another. The
gods, he says, could be omniscient, as far as propositional knowledge is
concerned, without either one knowing which one of the gods he is. Robert
Stalnaker has observed that it is difﬁcult to imagine such a situation as intelligible. How can someone be doing something without realizing that it is he himself
that is doing it? (Stalnaker 2008:56ff).66
My own view is that to describe a possible world is to give a ‘possible history of
the world’ (Kripke 1980:48, note 15). Such a history, or a portion of it, might
well be describable in an indexical free (or ‘scientiﬁc’) language, but nothing says
that it need be so described. In particular, when I am speaking the language, I am
entitled to use the ﬁrst person singular in describing such a history. Thus, both in
an informal, intuitive sense, as well as in the technical sense of determining a set
of possible worlds, statements about myself do express propositions, only they
determine them in a special way.
Let me speak of possibilities in the way that I spoke of ‘metaphysical possibility’ in Naming and Necessity. I can wonder what will happen to me, and how
things might have come out otherwise, even in the past, had only I done suchand-such. Here the picture should not be as if I might be thinking about possible

65
See note 59 above. Stalnaker (2008:49) ascribes the notion of ‘centered possible worlds’ to
David Lewis. In fact, the terminology, and the associated picture, is due to Quine, even though
Lewis’s view can be considered equivalent.
66
Can two people get into an argument without each participant knowing which side she is
taking? I won’t discuss Stalnaker’s analysis, and some of his other objections to Lewis’s version,
further. It appeared subsequent to the original version of this paper. Nor do I discuss some
possibilities for reinstating Lewis’s example.

The First Person

317

worlds and then ‘tacking on’ which person is me. The situation is the opposite;
I am determining possibilities by reference to myself.67, 68
One might also consider Lewis’s earlier paper ‘Anselm and Actuality’ (1970)
in relation to this one (i.e., Lewis 1979). In one sense, which both Lewis and
I would acknowledge, each world is the unique one that is actual with respect to
itself. However, we think of one world as the actual one. For me, that is the
unique world w such that a proposition p is true with respect to w if and only if p,
for all p.69 For Lewis, it is the unique world that I inhabit. Then for Lewis the
proponent of the ontological argument has little plausibility in arguing that God
must have actuality in this sense in order to have every perfection. Why is this a

67
Lewis (see his 1983:135), aside from other differences in the conception of possible worlds, is
not concerned with metaphysical necessity and possibility in my sense, but rather in connection
with propositional attitudes, predominantly doxastic attitudes. He discusses the problem of whether
attitudes can be attitudes toward sets of possible worlds, since one can apparently have different
attitudes toward propositions that hold in the same sets. He says that ‘believing that 2+2=4 is clearly
not the same as believing that 123+456=579’, because the latter calculation is not as trivial as the
ﬁrst. He goes on, ‘I know perfectly well that there is such a thing as ignorance of noncontingent
matters’. Wishing to leave this issue aside, he says that, if one wishes, one could imagine that we are
talking about ‘the attitudes of imaginary hyper-rational creatures’. So, clearly, examples of
metaphysical but not epistemic necessity that I have advocated, such as ‘water is H2O’, are not
contemplated. One can suppose that another notion of epistemically possible worlds, or of what
I called ‘epistemic counterparts’ of metaphysically possible worlds, is involved. However, from my
own perspective, as stated in this very paragraph, real metaphysical possibilities are an important
notion when considering ‘I’-sentences, and indeed this is an important reason that they should be
considered in and of themselves, not simply in terms of indirect reﬂexive constructions. And it is
what I call metaphysical possibility that is relevant to counterfactuals as Lewis and Stalnaker analyze
them (see Lewis 1973).
68
In fairness to Lewis, he certainly considers that situation (by reference to an amnesiac,
Rudolph Lingens, lost in the Stanford Library, an example discussed by Perry). (For Lingens, see
note 22. Evidently, Perry has transported Frege’s character from Germany to the Stanford Library.
No wonder he has become confused. He is supposed to be reading things in the library, but no
matter how much he reads, he won’t know where he is. I hope his English is good. Otherwise, it is
not surprising the library is not so helpful.)
But the real points are these. First, of course my conception of possibility is different from
Lewis’s. Second, I don’t see why Lingens isn’t expressing deﬁnite propositional knowledge using the
word ‘ich’, or fails to be contemplating genuine possibilities using it. This is true even in the unusual
case of amnesia, where although in some sense the subject doesn’t know who he is, there would
appear to be another sense in which even he could be said to know this, and in which it would be
impossible not to.
Suppose someone wonders what time it is now (a case Lewis considers [1983:143–44]). So, in
some sense, he is wondering what time it is, and the answer is given by the clock. Or he may be
wondering when it will be noon, and the answer may be ‘now’, or ‘two minutes from now’. ‘When
did she die?’ ‘Just now’. Both forms of question are legitimate, and equally so. In the ﬁrst case, the
very same situation is regarded in two ways. In my own opinion, the relativity and indeterminacy of
‘wh-questions’ like this is exaggerated in the philosophical literature, but it exists and the present
instance is a strong case.
69
And p is true with respect to w could be deﬁned as: if w were the case, then p (where in spite of
the linguistic form we might as well interpret the conditional as strict). (I won’t go into
complications for someone who doesn’t believe in S5 or even S4.)

318

The First Person

perfection, inhabiting the same world that I do?70 Here, of course, much depends
on our different conceptions of what a world is. I don’t think of myself as
inhabiting a world in Lewis’s sense, nor do I think much of his answer as a
solution to the ‘problem’ of how we know that we are inhabiting the actual
world, rather than a merely possible one. But note that, given Lewis’s later view,
to say that the world is actual is not to state any proposition about it, it is to
attribute a special sort of property to the speaker.
What then are the differences between me and Lewis? First, there is the wellknown difference in our conception of possible worlds. For Lewis, if I wonder
what possible world I am in, it is as if I am wondering whether I am in
Pennsylvania or West Virginia, as if I were traveling by car (though, of course,
according to Lewis, at least in his ultimate view, such a trip between worlds is
impossible). But second, I do not think that genuine propositions must be
described in some neutral scientiﬁc language. Anyone can describe them in any
language he himself speaks. In some sense, one might call this a merely terminological difference, since (and in spite of the considerable inﬂuence on him of
Perry’s paper) Lewis agrees with me that everyone has a special de se acquaintanceship with himself. And, of course, he does not deny that special contents
using the ﬁrst person and involving tense are asserted, entertained, and the like.
But he does think that these are not genuine propositions, in some intuitive
sense. How can a proposition depend on who expresses it? The room around me
(and this would be valid for worlds even if one had Lewis’s conception of them) is
not dependent on who looks at it, but everyone is permitted to describe it using
person and tense.71, 72
70
Doesn’t this depend on what I think of myself? The argument could have a plausible premise
for Anselm, and not for me.
71
In the original version of this talk, I was worried that Lewis might face the same difﬁculty as
Anscombe about logical inferences containing the word ‘I’. In the sense of classical logical inference,
I still think this might be true, since in this classical sense such an inference is valid simply in virtue
of its form. (The Quinean notion of a logical truth has a similar motivation.) It is indeed true that an
inference involving ‘I’ in the premise does not, for Lewis, even express a genuine premise
(proposition), let alone one involving ‘I’ as a singular term. But Gilbert Harman and Robert
Stalnaker have pointed out to me that Lewis can easily explain in his apparatus why we can
validly infer from a self-ascription p to a self-ascription entailed by it: it is simply a matter that
one who self-ascribes the property of being in a set of possible worlds is thereby committed to selfascribing to himself the property of being in any larger set of possible worlds. I haven’t really
thought about whether such problems arise on Chisholm’s version. Note that in the crudest sense
the Lewis–Chisholm theory could be regarded as one that solves the supposed self-ascription
problem simply by taking self-ascription as a special primitive; then, questions as to the logic
of this predicate would obviously arise.
72
From this point of view, ‘I am Saul Kripke’ is little different in principle from ‘Hesperus is
Phosphorus’, or ‘Cicero is Tully’, and the like, though ‘I’ determines its referent in a very special
way. Similarly, ‘I am Jesus Christ’, said falsely, misdescribes an actual or possible situation, as would
‘Hesperus is Mars’. A better analogy might be ‘that man is Jesus Christ’, which could be uttered by a
believer, or denied by a disbeliever (and might even be expressed by a proper name for ‘that man’),
but it is no longer ﬁrst person. On my view, the statement would also misdescribe every possible
world.

The First Person

319

Well, what I have been arguing? Not anything really so special, on a topic that
has a considerable literature. But each of us does have a special acquaintanceship
with himself or herself, as philosophers from Descartes to Frege have held. This
self-acquaintance is more fundamental than anything purely linguistic, and is the
basis of our use of ﬁrst person locutions. And each of us can use them to make
genuine claims, to express genuine propositions.73

R E F E R EN C E S
Almog, J., J. Perry, and H. Wettstein, eds. (1989). Themes from Kaplan. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Anscombe, G. E. M. (1975). ‘The First Person’. In Mind and Language, ed.
S. Guttenplan. Oxford: Clarendon, 45–65.
Beaney, M. (1997). The Frege Reader. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Brouwer, L. E. J. (1948). ‘Consciousness, Philosophy and Mathematics’. In Brouwer
(1975), 480–94.
———. (1975). L. E. J. Brouwer, Collected Works. Volume 1. Ed. A. Heyting. Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
Buber, M. (1923). Ich und Du. Leipzig, Germany: Insel-Verlag.
Castañeda, H. N. (1966). ‘“He”: A Study in the Logic of Self-Consciousness’. Ratio
8:130–57.
———. (1967). ‘The Logic of Self-Knowledge’. Noûs 1:9–22.
———. (1968). ‘On the Logic of Attributions of Self-Knowledge to Others’. Journal of
Philosophy 65:439–56.
Chisholm, R. M. (1976). Person and Object. London: George Allen & Unwin.
———. (1979). ‘The Indirect Reﬂexive’. In Diamond and Teichman (1979).
———. (1981). The First Person: An Essay on Reference and Intentionality. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Descartes, R. (1971). Descartes: Philosophical Writings. 2nd ed.. Ed. and trans.
G. E. M. Anscombe and P. T. Geach. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.
———. (1996). Meditations on First Philosophy, with Selections from the Objections and
Replies. Ed. and trans. J. Cottingham. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Diamond, C., and J. Teichman, eds. (1979). Intention and Intentionality. Sussex, UK:
Harvester.
One could also use tense in describing counterfactual as well as actual situations. However, there
could be special problems in using ‘now’ in the description of a hypothetical total world history. For
one thing, the description would necessarily be very ﬂeeting. For another, there could be relativistic
histories for which its referent is problematic. Also, one might be accused of smuggling in views
about ‘A-series/B-series’ problems, if these are problems. A tenseless version of such a total world
description could be thought of as not taking a stand on these issues.
73
I would like to thank Romina Padró for transcribing the original lecture and for helpful
suggestions and discussions. I also want to thank Jeff Buechner, Gary Ostertag, and Harold
Teichman for editorial assistance. This paper has been completed with support from the Saul
A. Kripke Center at the City University of New York, Graduate Center.

320

The First Person

Evans, G. (1985). ‘Pronouns, Quantiﬁers, and Relative Clauses (I)’. In Evans (1985),
pp. 76–152.
———. (1981). ‘Understanding Demonstratives’. In Meaning and Understanding, ed.
H. Parret and J. Bouveresse. Berlin: W. de Gruyter. Reprinted in Evans (1985),
pp. 291–321.
———. (1985). Collected Papers. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Frege, G. (1892). ‘Über Sinn und Bedeutung’. Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik. 100:25–50. Translated by Max Black, in Beaney (1997), pp. 151–71.
———. (1918–19). ‘Der Gedanke’. Beiträge zur Philosophie des deutschen Idealismus
I:58–77. Translated as ‘Thoughts’ by Peter Geach and R. H. Stoothoff, in Gottlob
Frege, Logical Investigations (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1977), and
included in Beaney (1997), pp. 325–45, under the title ‘Thought’. Also translated
by A. M. and M. Quinton, as ‘The Thought: A Logical Inquiry,’ in Mind 65
(1956):289–311.
Geach, P. (1957a). Mental Acts: Their Content and Their Objects. London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul.
———. (1957b). ‘On Beliefs about Oneself ’. Analysis 18:23–24.
Hempel, C. G. (1942). ‘The Function of General Laws in History’. Journal of Philosophy
39:35–48.
Hume, D. (2000). A Treatise of Human Nature. Eds. David Fate Norton and Mary
Norton. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Irving, D. J. C. (1977). Hitler’s War. New York: Viking.
Kaplan, D. (1968). ‘Quantifying In’. Synthese 19:178–214.
———. (1989). ‘Demonstratives’. In Themes from Kaplan, ed. Joseph Almog, John
Perry, and Howard Wettstein. New York: Oxford University Press.
———. (n.d.). ‘What Is Meaning? Explorations in the Theory of Meaning as Use’.
Unpublished manuscript.
Kripke, S. (1961). ‘History and Idealism: The Theory of R. G. Collingwood’. Unpublished manuscript.
———. (1977). ‘Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference’. Midwest Studies in
Philosophy 2:255–76. Reprinted in this volume as Chapter 5.
———. (1979). ‘A Puzzle about Belief’. In Meaning and Use, ed. A. Margalit. Dordrecht, Netherlands: D. Reidel. Reprinted in this volume as Chapter 6.
———. (1980). Naming and Necessity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. First
published in Semantics of Natural Language, ed. D. Davidson and G. Harman.
Dordrecht, Netherlands: D. Reidel, 1972, 253–355, 763–69.
———. (1982). Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
———. (1986). ‘Rigid Designation and the Contingent A Priori: The Meter Stick
Revisited.’ Unpublished manuscript.
———. (1992). ‘Logicism, Wittgenstein, and De Re Beliefs about Natural Numbers’.
Unpublished manuscript.
———. (2008). ‘Frege’s Theory of Sense and Reference: Some Exegetical Notes’.
Theoria 74:181–218. Reprinted in this volume as Chapter 9.
———. (2010). ‘Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy of
Language’. Reprinted in this volume as Chapter 11.

The First Person

321

Lewis, D. (1970). ‘Anselm and Actuality’. Noûs 4:175–88. Reprinted in Lewis (1983).
———. (1973). Counterfactuals. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. (1979). ‘Attitudes De Dicto and De Se’. Philosophical Review 88:513–43.
Reprinted in Lewis (1983); page references are to the reprint.
———. (1983). Philosophical Papers, Volume I. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Loar, B. (1976). ‘The Semantics of Singular Terms’. Philosophical Studies 30:353–77.
Ludlow, P., and S. Neale (1991). ‘Indeﬁnite Descriptions: In Defense of Russell’,
Linguistics and Philosophy 14:171–202.
Ludlow, P., and G. Segal (2004). ‘On a Unitary Semantical Analysis for Deﬁnite and
Indeﬁnite Descriptions’. In Descriptions and Beyond, ed. M. Reimer and
A. Bezuidenhout. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Moore, G. E. (1954/1955). ‘Wittgenstein’s Lectures in 1930–33’. Mind 63 (1954), and
64 (1955). Reprinted in Moore (1959), 252–324.
———. (1959). Philosophical Papers. London: George Allen & Unwin.
Peacocke, C. (2008). Truly Understood. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Perry, J. (1977). ‘Frege on Demonstratives’, Philosophical Review 86:474–97. Reprinted
with a postscript in Perry (1993).
———. (1993). The Problem of the Essential Indexical and Other Essays. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
———. (1997). ‘Indexicals and Demonstratives’. In A Companion to the Philosophy of
Language, ed. Bob Hale and Crispin Wright. Oxford: Blackwell.
Plantinga, A. (1974). The Nature of Necessity, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Prior, A. N. (1967). ‘On Spurious Egocentricity’. Philosophy 42:326–35.
Quine, W. V. O. (1968). ‘Propositional Objects’. Crı́tica: Revista Latinoamericana de
Filosofı́a 2:3–29. Reprinted in Quine (1969).
———. (1969). Ontological Relativity and Other Essays. New York: Columbia University
Press.
———. (1976). ‘Worlds Away’. Journal of Philosophy 73:859–63. Reprinted in Quine
(1981).
———. (1981). Theories and Things. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Sider, T. (2001). Four Dimensionalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stalnaker, R. (2008). Our Knowledge of the Internal World. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical Investigations. Ed. and trans. G. E. M. Anscombe.
Oxford: Blackwell.
———. (1961). Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. Trans. David Pears and Brian McGuinness. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

11
Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals
for the Philosophy of Language*

I am going to discuss a distinction that has a fairly long history in philosophy.1 In
the contemporary discussion of intensional discourse it really should be attributed
to Bertrand Russell in “On Denoting,” (1905) but got much more attention when
it was revived by Quine in his paper “Quantiﬁers and Propositional Attitudes”
(1956) and in his book Word and Object (1960). Russell and Quine gave different
accounts of the matter. But the problem was the same.2 As Quine pointed out,
there appears to be an important distinction between (1) and the weaker (2):
(1) There is someone I believe to be a spy.
(2) I believe that there are spies.
While (2) expresses a triviality, (1) expresses important information that might
be communicated to, say, the CIA. Now, (1) is, of course, a quantiﬁed sentence.
A semiformal version is obtained by preﬁxing an existential quantiﬁer to (3):
(3) I believe of y that he is a spy.
Or, in conformity with (1), preﬁxing an existential quantiﬁer to (3a):
(3a) I believe y to be a spy.
Using standard terminology, (1) and (3) are examples of de re belief and (2) of
de dicto belief. On Russell’s theory, it is not really as if there are two kinds of
belief; but the way Quine puts the matter suggests that there are (“notional” and
“relational” belief ), and his version seems to carry over to the discussions given
by others. (However, most of these authors attempt to reduce the de re sense to
* The present paper was delivered at the opening conference of the Saul Kripke Center, held at
the City University of New York, Graduate Center on May 21–23, 2008.
1
For this history, see the brief remarks at the beginning of Sosa (1970) and references given
there.
2
For more on my view of Russell’s account, and on the relation of his views to Quine’s, see
Chapter 8, especially 228ff (229ff 228ff.).

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

323

the de dicto sense somehow, or at least to relate them; we shall discuss this
momentarily.) One thing that made Dan Dennett incredulous about the theory
is this feature of it (Dennett 1987). Are there really two kinds of belief?
When does the de dicto formulation imply the de re formulation? Suppose Æ is
a term (though proper names could be included here, the main case is that of a
deﬁnite description).3 Then suppose we have:
(4) E(Æ)
to be read as “Æ exists,” which in the case of a deﬁnite description simply means
that the relevant existence and uniqueness conditions are satisﬁed. And suppose
we have:
(5) S believes that Æ is F
(where we assume that (5) reports S ’s de dicto belief ).
When can we deduce the existential statement that “there exists a y which S
believes to have F”? Or, to use the example under discussion, when—taking F to
be the predicate “is a spy”—can we deduce “there is someone S believes to be a
spy”? This, in turn, depends on when we can deduce (6) from (4) and (5):
(6) S believes of Æ that it is F
Unrestricted exportation is the doctrine that the implication always holds.
And, in fact, if things are so simple, one is on the way to a very straightforward
analysis of de re belief in terms of de dicto belief.4
This doctrine has a very strange history. When Quine originally discussed the
distinction in his paper (1956), as its title indicates, he applied it to propositional
attitudes in general. One particularly amusing example he gave shows the
systematic ambiguities generated by combining notional or relational attitudes
with existential quantiﬁcation. For example, “I want a sloop” is ambiguous: it
may mean that there is a particular sloop that I want, or simply that I seek “mere
relief from slooplessness” (Quine 1956:177).5 The notional, and more likely
sense, where there is no particular sloop that I want, is expressed as:
3
For Russell, of course, deﬁnite descriptions, like other “denoting phrases,” are not really terms
at all, but rather quantiﬁers. See Chapter 8 for my own discussion. (But for the purposes of the
formulation of the problem of exportation, we must pretend, anyway, that deﬁnite descriptions are
terms.)
4
To get such an analysis one must assume that, conversely, whenever one has a de re belief, one
must have a de dicto belief referring to the object of the de re belief. Then the analysis will be that (6)
holds if and only if there are some true statements (40 ) and (50 ) that hold when Æ is replaced by some
term b coreferential with Æ. See also the discussion of the matter in connection with Sosa below.
5
I once heard a story (from a third party) about a man who reported that he was spending the
summer in Germany because he wanted to marry a German woman. The person relating the story
had assumed that there was a particular German woman he wanted to marry (Quine’s relational
sense). Actually, my informant came to realize that what he meant was that he was so enamored of
Germany and Germans that he was trying to ﬁnd an appropriate German woman to marry (Quine’s
notional sense). True story.

324

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

(7) I want it to be the case that (∃x)(x is a sloop and I have x)
whereas the relational sense, where there is a particular sloop that I want, is
expressed as:
(8) (∃x)(x is a sloop and I want that I have x)
Similarly, he mentions a corresponding ambiguity for “hunts.” For belief, the
two forms would be symbolically expressed as:
(9) (∃x)(I believe that x is a spy)
and
(10) I believe that (∃x)(x is a spy)
Quine stresses that, for most of us, (2) and its representation (10), are true, while
(1) and equivalently (9), are false.6
In his initial formulation, Quine did assume the principle of unrestricted
exportation (1956:182, ﬁrst sentence).7 Various people8 pointed out that this
threatens to trivialize the difference between (1) and (2) (and the corresponding
symbolic expressions, (9) and (10)), because if someone believes (2)—that there
are spies—then the same person will presumably believe (11):
(11) The tallest spy is a spy.
(Here one assumes that no two spies are of exactly equal height, and that they are
ﬁnite in number, so that the description is not vacuous.)9 This will imply
by exportation and existential generalization that there is someone S believes to
be a spy. So, the distinction will, in effect, be obliterated.
The same argument clearly would apply if belief were replaced by knowledge. For
anyone who knows that there are spies, together with a few other obvious things,
6
For Quine’s views as of this period, Quine (1956) seems to me to be far superior to the parallel
discussion in his famous philosophical work Word and Object (1960:145–51). The latter discussion
seems to favor a treatment similar to what is brieﬂy stated at the end of section 1 of Quine (1956)
and rejected in favor of a “more suggestive treatment” (Quine 1956:180). The difference leads me to
conjecture that in spite of the publication dates, Quine had ﬁnished the Word and Object treatment
before Quine (1956) was written, and did not revise it afterward. (The last two pages of the Word
and Object discussion get closer to Quine 1956.)
Incidentally, it always seemed to me to be obvious that if Quine (1956) and the idea of “notional
belief” were formally correct, then there would be a parallel way of treating quantiﬁed modal logic,
free of formal objection, regardless of whether the latter is philosophically objectionable. I regarded
Quine’s apparent failure to see this in Word and Object as odd. Kaplan (1968) made the point in a
footnote, and it was recognized by Quine himself in Quine (1981:116).
7
See Quine (1956:82, ﬁrst paragraph). Russell (1905) would never have been tempted to
postulate unrestricted exportation for deﬁnite descriptions, since it amounts to saying that a small
scope formulation always implies the corresponding large scope formulation, which he clearly does
not believe.
8
For references, see Sosa (1970:887, note 11).
9
See also note 23 below.

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

325

there is someone she knows to be a spy. The same holds for certainty and many other
propositional attitudes.10 However, the trivialization would not as clearly follow for
“wants,” as in the amusing example quoted from Quine.11 Even if unrestricted
exportation held for “wants that,” it would not follow quite so obviously that anyone
who wants a sloop wants a particular one, nor would it follow that anyone who wants
to marry a German woman already has one picked out, and so on.12
One might think that the objection would simply have been accepted for the
cases where it works, and otherwise sent people back to the drawing board.
Quine himself initially accepted the objection (Quine 1968). Ernest Sosa was
one of the people who made the criticism of Quine (Sosa 1969). Yet he later
wrote a contrasting classic and inﬂuential paper on the subject (Sosa 1970).13 In
this later paper, it would appear at ﬁrst that Sosa accepts the objection, and
indeed states an alternative formulation of the reduction of de re to de dicto, using
a restriction on exportability. However, he thinks—citing examples where the
apparent restrictions on exportation depend on either context or the interest of
the discussants—that arguments using the Gricean distinction between what is
literally true and what it is appropriate to say can be given to show that Quine’s
original unrestricted exportation principle is the correct account of literal English
and can be used to give a simple account of de re belief.14
Quine himself, apparently writing independently of Sosa, has an even more
dialectical approach in a later paper (Quine 1981). But although in the later
10
I should add that in this talk I am treating all propositional attitudes as if they were on a par as
to their object, though, in fact, I am not sure that this is so. I do so because nothing turns on such an
assumption here.
11
Although the example is expressed with “wants that” or “wants it to be the case that,” and
Quine expresses another with “strives to ﬁnd,” his main concern is with belief.
12
See note 5. Though anyone who believes that there are sloops may believe that there is a
longest sloop, a sloop more expensive than any other, etc., it does not follow that he wants the
longest sloop, or the most expensive sloop, etc., so there is nothing to export. One might try a
suggestion such as “the best sloop his budget will allow.” However, such a description may not pick
out a unique sloop, and even if it does, it is not necessarily the case that he wants that.
13
Since I will necessarily be highly critical of much of Sosa’s paper in my discussion, I wish to
emphasize my view of it as a classic. To my knowledge, after all these years it remains the best
formulation of its point of view and an enduring inﬂuence.
14
In one sense, I have not reported Sosa carefully. Sosa bases his entire discussion on a special
locution, using Quine’s corners, “S believes ┌a is F ┐ deﬁned as “S has a belief (in a proposition) that,
given normal circumstances, he could correctly express in our language by asserting the sentence
composed of ‘a’ followed by ‘is’ followed by ‘F ’ ” (Sosa 1970: 885). At the end of his paper, Sosa
says, “Note that I have never supposed that ‘S believes ┌a is F ┐’ is equivalent to ‘S believes that a is
F.’ This is a separate question that cannot be treated here” (896, note 20). In the same footnote he
adds that regardless of this question, his formulation in either of its forms I or III (for an
explanation, see below) gives a reduction of de re to de dicto belief.
I wish I had a better idea why Sosa formulates the problems in terms of his special notion rather
than in terms of “believes that” (a notion whose meaningfulness he does not deny). Quine and
Dennett, and some of the speakers in Sosa’s examples, simply use “believes that” and related
locutions, and I am following them. However, if I am being careless about Sosa here, and should
have used the notion he emphasizes, as far as I can see my discussion of his paper would not be
materially affected.

326

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

paper he initially writes “evidently we must ﬁnd against exportation” (120),
using the same “tallest spy” argument given above,15 he, like Sosa, later reverses
himself, but this time the reversal takes place in a single paper, retracting the
categorical statement just quoted. Much more quickly than Sosa and with fewer
examples,16 he concludes that a restriction on exportability must depend wholly
on contextual features. From this he concludes (though I ﬁnd the conclusion far
from obvious myself, even given the premises) that the only true rule for
exportability must be his original unrestricted one, obliterating the distinction
between (1) and (2), the very distinction he has himself emphasized. He says, “At
ﬁrst this seems intolerable, but it grows on one” (121).17
Although both Quine (writing, as we have seen, apparently independently of
Sosa) and Daniel Dennett (1987) (writing later in agreement with both) really
agree with Sosa, they express themselves very differently. While Sosa, defending
unrestricted exportation, says “a simpler reduction of de re to de dicto attitudes is
hard to imagine” (1970:896), both Quine (brieﬂy) and Dennett (very vigorously), state that they reject the notion of de re belief. Quine writes, “We end up
rejecting de re or quantiﬁed propositional attitudes generally, on a par with de re
or quantiﬁed modal logic” (1981:122). Yet it is Quine himself, who in his earlier
(1956) paper, sparked the contemporary interest in the notion!
Dennett, too, states in many places in his paper that there is no such thing as
de re belief.18 However, his actual position is not really a rejection of de re belief
15
Actually, in Quine it is “the shortest spy.” There appear to be two different sources. If some
philosopher ﬁnds a subtle difference depending on which is used, that person will deserve some
extraordinary praise.
16
Using Kaplan’s term “vivid designator” for the restriction on exportability, he assumes that the
condition on exportability is given by the “knowing who the F is” restriction in Hintikka (1962). He
then states that this is obviously context relative, and concludes that restrictions on exportation must
be dropped.
17
Igal Kvart wrote that this collapse “did not grow on” him (1982:298). Me neither.
In fact, Kvart shows that Hintikka’s conditions for exportation (Hintikka 1962) are not
intuitively correct as stated. For belief, Hintikka apparently thinks that “having a belief who a is,”
or its supposed symbolic expression in his system, is sufﬁcient for exportation in belief contexts.
However, Gail Stine already showed that the condition is not sufﬁcient, given that the subject’s
belief who a is may be false (Stine 1969, 1972). Kvart (1982) rediscovers the objection. My own
example (12) in the present paper could be used for the same purpose.
For knowledge, Kvart correctly remarks that for a deﬁnite description a, “knowing who a is” has
both a de dicto reading (the more probable one) and a de re reading (for Russell this would be a scope
ambiguity). He also shows that “knowing who she/he is” is not always satisﬁed, even when a subject
has a de re belief about her/him. For example, one may know of a man in a lineup, or actually seen
committing a crime, that he committed the crime, but when asked “who is he?” properly reply
“I don’t know who he is.” (Dennett’s example, quoted below, also shows this, though that was not
his primary intention.) However, I should add that even in such a case, I know who robbed me (the
de dicto reading), namely, that man over there. I also know which man in the lineup robbed me, and
I can identify the robber.
Kvart has told me that, in correspondence, Quine conceded that “knowing who he is” is not
always the relevant premise, even in context. However, to my knowledge he never retracted the
point in print.
18
Dennett seems to have various things in mind when he states that he rejects the notion.
Sometimes he is rejecting theories of causal connections to the object a belief is about, or “direct” as

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

327

but rather a defense of unrestricted exportation. This is at most a trivialization, in
some sense, of de re belief, but not really a rejection of the notion.19 Really,
Dennett in no way disagrees with Sosa, whose formulation (that he has a simple
theory of de re belief) I would myself use if I accepted their views. Dennett even
implicitly admits that some terms of ordinary language involve the notion of
belief about an object. When he says he rejects de re belief, it appears that he
means that he rejects various views that make it a less trivial notion.
His position is stated as follows (“Hoover” is J. Edgar Hoover, who is
investigating Smith’s murder):
One is a (minimal) suspect if one satisﬁes any deﬁnite description Hoover takes to
pick out Smith’s murderer. It follows trivially that Smith’s murderer is a minimal
suspect (because he satisﬁes the description “Smith’s murderer”) even in the situation
when Hoover is utterly bafﬂed, but merely believes the crime has been committed by
a single culprit. This would be an objectionable consequence only if there were some
principled way of distinguishing minimal suspects from genuine, or true or de re
suspects, but there is not. Thus, as Quine suggests, the apparently sharp psychological
distinction between
(48) Hoover believes that someone (some one) murdered Smith
and
(49) Someone is believed by Hoover to have murdered Smith

collapses (the logical difference in the ontological commitment of the speaker
remains). It remains true that in the case in which Hoover is bafﬂed he would
naturally deny to the press that there was anyone he believed to be the murderer.
What he would actually be denying is that he knows more than anyone who
knows only that the crime has been committed. (Dennett 1987:197–98)
Why do I say that Dennett actually acknowledges that de re notions appear in
ordinary language? This follows from his use of the term “suspect” and his
statement that the murderer is a minimal suspect. The term “suspect,” of course,
is a de re notion, having to do with the relation of the police’s beliefs to various
people. The term “de re” simply means that it is a belief (or whatever other
attitude) of or about a particular person or object. Dennett does not reject such a
opposed to indirect (i.e., merely descriptive) reference to it. But these are theories of de re belief, and
if one wishes to formulate one’s rejection of these theories as a rejection of de re belief, one can do so.
But, in my opinion, for the reasons given in my text, this would be a misleading way to express
oneself.
19
In contrast to Dennett, perhaps Quine really does intend to reject the notion of de re belief.
Apparently, he wishes to exclude it even from the level of canonical notation that allows doxastic and
epistemic notions. (See Quine 1960:221 for the two levels of canonical notation.) But at the end of
his paper he talks about some problems even in the notion of belief de dicto. Presumably, however,
he does not deny that ordinary language has the locutions that gave rise to his original discussion in
Quine (1956). But they are of relatively little concern to him. Quine states that in context, notions
like these may be helpful, but everything depends on what one wishes to know.

328

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

concept; he simply claims that in the case of “suspect,” the term must really
always apply to the real murderer.20
Let me brieﬂy state my own position. First, the doctrine of unrestricted
exportation, for belief and even for knowledge, has far more sweeping consequences than its advocates have ever hinted. These consequences are the main
point of this talk.
Second, along the way, some of the advocates of the doctrine presuppose or
even state various supposed Gricean principles, allegedly based on the distinction
between the literal truth and when it can be misleading to say it (owing to
conversational implicature). These principles were never defended by Grice or
anyone else, and in fact are devoid of plausibility. They are not similar to the
more plausible examples given by Grice himself. Furthermore, some of the
examples that supposedly support the context relativity of when a term is
exportable seem to me to be mistaken.
Finally, and most importantly for the philosophy of language, the advocates of
unrestricted exportation commit what I shall call “the pragmatic wastebasket fallacy,” assuming that one can ignore intuitive distinctions simply by calling them
“pragmatic” and giving them a Gricean explanation. This fallacy ignores important
semantic considerations for the projectability of predicates in all sentences of the
language. Moreover, it dismisses as “merely psychological” or “merely pragmatic”
distinctions that are important for mathematics and for the criminal law.
Another fallacy I shall mention is the “toy duck fallacy.” It is an important case
of citing features, supposedly of ordinary language, that, looked at carefully, may
not be real.

1. UNNOTICED CONSEQUENCES
OF UNRESTRICTED EXPORTATION
Let me get to the ﬁrst and main point. For the case of belief, the unrestricted
exportation view has a rather sweeping consequence. Everyone, except perhaps
the Deity, has a false belief. For S, let the false belief in question be p. Consider
the following:
20
I am not sure that his linguistic intuitions about “suspect” are right. I might have thought that
someone is a suspect if the police have reason to think he committed the crime (or think that they
have such reasons) but are not certain. However, if the police are certain that there was a murder
committed by one person, then surely they are certain that the murderer committed it. But then the
murderer would not be a suspect!
Another linguistic criterion would be: someone is a suspect if the police have reasons (possibly
even reasons they regard as conclusive) to believe he committed the crime, and so on. Nothing really
hangs on this question, so I will not dwell on it. In fact, I will accept the broader use of the term
“suspect.” But the term actually has legal deﬁnitions in relevant jurisdictions. My impression is that
they tend to agree with the narrower usage.

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

329

(12) S believes that the y that is Philby if p, and is the Eiffel Tower if not p, is a spy.
(12) can be written symbolically as follows:
(13) S believes that: Is-a-spy(℩y [(y = Philby ∧ p) ∨ (y = the Eiffel Tower ∨p)])
(Note that in the verbal form I found it natural to use a conjunction of conditionals, though in the symbolic form I used a disjunction of conjunctions.)21
Now, we know that (12) and (13) are true because S believes that p and
believes that Philby is a spy. From the doctrine of unrestricted exportation, we
get:
(14) S believes of the Eiffel Tower that it is a spy
because that is what is denoted by the deﬁnite description in question!
On the views that I have been discussing, we are unable to say what we would
say intuitively. Intuitively, because of S’s misconception that p is true, the belief
ascribed in (12) is actually a belief about Philby, not a belief about the Eiffel
Tower. For it is Philby whom S thinks satisﬁes the description in (12). This,
however, is precisely what we cannot say on the views we have been considering.
We cannot say that a subject’s belief using a description Æ is about the object he
thinks satisﬁes the description, since such a criterion uses the very notion we are
trying to deﬁne (and to undermine). Instead, it is supposed to be the object that
actually satisﬁes the description.22
Moreover, we need not suppose that S knows about any particular spy, such as
Philby. As long as S believes that there are spies, the term “Philby” can be
replaced by “the tallest spy.”23
What about the Eiffel Tower? Plainly this object can be replaced by any object
that S can identify, such that there is some term, name, or deﬁnite description
denoting it in S ’s language. This, in turn, can be any object that occupies space
and time. Material objects of an ordinary kind are included, as are persons (where
we need not be materialists to say this as long as persons have bodies). For we can
enumerate all the rational points of space-time. For any ordinary object, there
will be a ﬁrst rational point in the enumeration that is occupied by that object.
Actually, I could have used the conditional form, since: ℩y ((p  y = Philby) ∧ (p  y = Eiffel
Tower)) = ℩y ((y = Philby ∧ p) ∨ (y = Eiffel Tower ∧p)).
22
Sosa states his theory at the end of his paper: “Indeed, in general, to believe about x that it is F
is to have a belief that is about x, one to the effect that it is F; which is to believe a proposition that is
about x, and according to which x is F. A simpler reduction of de re to de dicto attitudes is hard to
imagine” (1970: 896). But this makes Sosa’s account closer to intuition than it is (though still not
close enough to intuition). Is the belief in question in the present case about Philby or about the
Eiffel Tower? Intuitively, I would say “about Philby.” (Then Sosa’s general declaration would not in
this instance have any conﬂict with intuition.) Presumably, however, on Sosa’s account it is about
the Eiffel Tower. For a more detailed discussion of Sosa’s views, see below.
23
On my view, if there is no one S believes to be the tallest spy, then the resulting new belief is
not clearly a belief of or about a particular person. This is not the view of the authors I am criticizing,
but nothing hangs on it in this case.
21

330

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

Then, assuming that we can specify a kind K (in S ’s vocabulary), such that there
is only one object of that kind that includes the region occupied by it, we can
then specify the object as the one of kind K occupying a region containing the
ﬁrst rational point in the enumeration.24
The mention of rational coordinates leads to another remarkable consequence
of unrestricted exportation. The subject S will believe of each natural number,
each rational number, and each real number speciﬁable in S ’s vocabulary that it
is a spy.
Thus, for a normal subject S, a normal predicate F, and a normal object y:
(15) S believes of y that it is F
reduces to:
(16) S believes that there are F ’s.
Note that here the object y drops out of the picture altogether. The apparent
logical form of (15) is tremendously misleading. Even without the argument
about rational points, (15) reduces to:
(17) S believes that there are F’s, and y is identiﬁable by S.
Even in version (17), let alone version (16), the statement only apparently
expresses a relation between S, F, and y. In version (17) there are really two
independent conjuncts and no relation between F and y at all. And, as
I mentioned, in version (16) the object y drops out of the picture altogether. It
is strange that our language should contain locutions of such misleading surface
form and of such a trivial character.
I do not know whether the defenders of unrestricted exportation would accept
even this awful consequence.25 I would hope not. From reading them one might
24
I am not going to worry about elementary particles, or other such exotica, about which we
normally would not be thought to have de re beliefs. I am also not going to worry about whether
restrictions should be placed in the enumeration on whether entities can be located arbitrarily in the
future, past, and so on.
Occasionally, someone has objected to the tallest spy example because of the assumption that no
two spies are of exactly the same height. Maybe the two tallest spies are exactly tied (identical
twins?)! If one is really worried about this problem, one can use the same device, about occupying
the ﬁrst rational point, to pick out a unique spy. In any case, I doubt that any serious issue could
hang on such an objection. One who maintains unrestricted exportation would be very lucky indeed
if “the tallest spy” were actually a vacuous description.
David Kaplan (1968) proposed a similar device somewhere and called it “the least spy.”
25
One philosopher I admire, who was an advocate (in part) of the view I am criticizing,
reportedly reacted as follows: only a few people will be clever enough to think of the tricky sort
of deﬁnite description in (12) and (13). So, for most people, unrestricted exportation will not imply
that they have the weird de re beliefs I am mentioning, though a few very clever ones will. Were one
to take such a reply seriously, it might even have been used against the “shortest spy” example
(Dennett does express somewhat similar reservations even for this example; see his 1987:202). I am
not sure what standard of cleverness is involved, especially since a belief need not be explicitly
expressed or thought of to be properly ascribed to a person. For example, don’t most of my readers

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

331

think that only a few extra cases, like the tallest spy, or the shortest, need be
accepted, though a little thought even about these examples would add quite a bit
to the list. But the present case shows the list is much longer still. Even just the
one example about the Eiffel Tower is rather weird.
Others have advocated this view as well. I have discussed this consequence of
the view in seminars and have wanted to make it public for some time. In the case
of knowledge, we could not draw such a strikingly awful consequence, because
the argument depends on there being a false belief in the deﬁnite description.
And, of course, if it is knowledge, we can’t do it that way, since false knowledge,
unlike false belief, is impossible.26 So, the consequence won’t be quite so awful.
Igal Kvart, who heard me talk about this once, remarked—rightly, it seems to
me: “Well, even if your argument doesn’t go through for knowledge, one’s
conﬁdence in unrestricted exportation will be greatly weakened even for the
case of knowledge because of the consequence about belief.”
However, it is interesting to see what follows if we assume that unrestricted
exportation holds for knowledge. The appropriate consequence in this case will
be:
(18) The CIA knows, of y, that y is a spy iff y is a spy.
We assume that the CIA knows that there are spies. Otherwise, no assumption
need be made about the CIA, so that the argument follows with “the CIA”
replaced by any term that refers to one of us. The CIA certainly will know that
the tallest spy is a spy, and therefore, according to the unrestricted exportation
principle, will know of the tallest spy that he or she is a spy. However, the CIA
will also know of the second-tallest spy that he or she is a spy, and so on down the
rank. To avoid running into a vacuous description, we should add a clause: “or if
there is none that short, back to the tallest spy.” In this way one always gets a
deﬁnite description denoting a spy, and every spy will be denoted by some
appropriate description.27 So, the CIA will know precisely of all and only the
spies, that they are spies. I don’t know why they have so much work to do. In fact,
all of us are in the same position. Any subject S who knows that there are spies
will do.

believe that Paris is not in China, even though they may have never thought of the question before?
Similarly, S may not have to be so clever to respond properly to (12) and (13) if they are put to her
or him, and then the belief may properly be ascribed to S all along. (The distinction in question has
been discussed in the literature.)
In any event, which of the following sounds truer to the reader?
(a) Anyone who is sufﬁciently intelligent believes of each tree in this forest that it is a spy.
(b) Only a psychotic person believes of any tree in this forest that it is a spy.
26
Or so almost all philosophers agree, though perhaps not absolutely all.
27
This is given the usual assumptions mentioned before, that no two spies are of the same
height, and that there are only ﬁnitely many. We have seen above how such assumptions could be
avoided if one wished. (See note 24.)

332

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

Moreover, the predicate “is a spy” could be replaced by a wide variety of
predicates “is F.” The assumptions needed are that the subject S knows that there
is an F, and that an appropriate deﬁnite description will denote each F for S. We
have seen already what assumptions about F may guarantee this. We need not
repeat them. They apply to a wide variety of predicates.28
However, there do appear to be predicates where unrestricted exportation for
belief will not lead to any kind of striking collapse, not even the type of problem
of which all our authors are aware (the tallest/shortest spy). We have seen above
that the assumption of unrestricted exportation does not obviously collapse
Quine’s distinction between the two readings of “I want a sloop” (see note 12).
This propositional attitude (“wants that”) is not belief. However, there is a
related, though not equivalent, attitude involving belief, namely, “I believe that
I should have a sloop.”29, 30 As before in the case of “wants that,” nothing follows
to the effect that “I believe that I should have the longest sloop that I should
have.” Nor do the other ideas mentioned in note 12 work here either. So even
unrestricted exportation will not collapse the relevant distinction in this case.

2 . SOME REMARKS, METHODOLOGICAL
AND OTHERWISE
I have said that I wish to draw a few morals in the philosophy of language. Let me
mention some summarily, though all of them have applications other than the
problem at hand and deserve further discussion elsewhere.31 These are, ﬁrst, the
overuse (misuse) of Gricean methodology and the related “pragmatic wastebasket
fallacy” and, second, what I call the “toy duck fallacy.”
But before reaching the methodological morals, I must return to some of the
authors I have been discussing. Sosa and Dennett, especially, give a wide variety
of cases and arguments, and I hope I may be pardoned if I don’t discuss them all.
I should ﬁrst mention Sosa, since he states and considers various theories of
reductions of de re to de dicto belief (and presumably applying to analogous
propositional attitudes as well). After ﬁrst stating the unrestricted exportation
idea, and stating the “tallest spy” objection to it, he then considers alternative
28
Once again, (18) and analogous cases show that the apparent logical form of de re
knowledge, like de re belief, is highly misleading. Typically, both knowledge and the subject of
the knowledge drop out on the right-hand side.
29
The special case discussed in this paragraph is one that I had not noticed when I gave
the original version of this talk.
30
I could want to have a cigarette, even though I don’t believe that I should have one.
Conversely, I could believe that I should have something without wanting to have it. When one
considers other forms in the same family, the difference is even more pronounced.
31
In fact, even if someone were to doubt a particular application of the morals in question to one
of the arguments I give below, they ought to be recognized as being of general signiﬁcance for the
philosophy of language.

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

333

theories. One is that of Kaplan (1968), which he regards as requiring for
exportability that Æ, the term to be exported, be a name (or “vivid” name) of
the object it refers to. Little else is said in Sosa’s statement of the principle, but in
side remarks he states that Kaplan requires that Æ be at the end of a causal chain
leading up to it. He then rejects Kaplan’s view on intuitive grounds, since it does
not allow de re beliefs about anything existing only in the future, which Sosa
thinks is contrary to the intuitive data.32
Sosa’s own ﬁrst approach to an appropriate account, stated as “my own view,” is:
III. S believes about x that it is F (believes x to be F) if and only if there is a singular term
Æ such that S believes ┌Æ is F ┐, where Æ both denotes x and is a distinguished term.
(1970:890)

This account is a theory only because Sosa states the problem in terms of possible
reductions of de re to de dicto beliefs. Conceivably, these might not be conditions
on exportability. However, as I have presented the matter, assuming we are
asking when a term is exportable (and all the alternatives Sosa discusses ﬁt this
pattern), III no longer becomes a theory of exportability but simply a restatement
of the issue. Since, as is clear from Sosa’s discussion, there is nothing in III that
precludes a term’s being distinguished for one sentence and not another, or even
for a given sentence in one context and not in another, it is hard to see how III
even counts as a “theory” or “view” regarding exportability. “Distinguished” is
little more than a synonym for “exportable,” so that I certainly believe III, at least
in the direction of the sufﬁciency of the condition, which is simply a tautology.
Perhaps the converse, essentially that a de re belief requires a de dicto belief with
an exportable term, is not tautological, but it is assumed by many writers on the
subject.33 Sosa’s “view” III is not really an alternative to Kaplan’s, but subsumes
it as a special case. The real point is simply that Sosa rejects Kaplan’s views on
when a term is exportable.
In fairness to Sosa, I should add that he does present intuitively plausible
special cases that he regards as always distinguished (exportable). One important
example is the ﬁrst person (he also introduces his subject with an interesting
discussion of Castañeda’s problem of self-knowledge). Moreover, he uses the
same principle to deny that certain other terms, which would otherwise be
exportable, are in fact exportable when the subject is unaware that the term is
describing him. Much of Sosa’s discussion, shorn of his references to cases that
32
Kaplan appears to be writing under the inﬂuence of discussions with me—prior to Naming
and Necessity—of my views on proper names, discussions with Charles Chastain, and of course ideas
of his own. See Kaplan (1968:211, note 1, and 213, note 24).
It is somewhat surprising to me that Sosa should argue against another theory on the basis of
intuitive data, when his own ultimate conclusion is that intuitive data should be thrown to the wind,
at least in regard to what is literally true.
33
Sosa commends Kaplan (1968) for giving “an excellent case in favor of such reduction” (Sosa
1970:884, note 6).

334

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

are alleged to show that exportation is an entirely pragmatic matter, is in fact an
illuminating treatment of our intuitions regarding exportability.34 I am not
going to do any better than Sosa at stating a criterion for exportability (at least
here). But, intuitively, when a speaker’s use of a term makes him sufﬁciently en
rapport with its object, it is exportable; this, however, does not say all that
much.35
Sosa then argues that whether a term is distinguished depends entirely on very
arbitrary contextual factors: “This, I fear, is a wholly pragmatic matter which can
change radically from one occasion to the next” (890). He gives examples to
convince us of this. It seems to me that some have more apparent force than
others. Quine, without Sosa’s detailed consideration of examples, draws a similar
conclusion, basing it on Hintikka’s “knowing who” criterion for exportability,
which he regards as highly contextual and pragmatic.
I think the signiﬁcance of contextual factors here is greatly exaggerated. But
assume for the moment that Sosa’s examples given to support it are all correct.
To make his argument (where I somewhat feel I have to ﬁll in the gaps), one must
argue that cases like these, where exportation is a “pragmatic” matter, are quite
typical, and Sosa does, in fact, seem to think that this is the case (894).
By the end of the paper Sosa reinstates what he calls “account I” (what I have
called “unrestricted exportation”), which he had apparently rejected previously
on the basis of the “tallest spy” objection.36 He writes:
An attractive reduction of de re belief to de dicto belief is the following:
I. S believes about x that it is F (or believes x to be F ) if and only if there is a singular term
Æ such that S believes ┌Æ is F ┐, where Æ denotes x.

His analysis of account III leads him to think that the simpler account I will do,
provided that in those cases in which account III would prohibit exportation,
account I would declare the exportation to be, although rhetorically misleading,
logically correct (Sosa 1970:896, note 20). As we have seen, Sosa says that “a

34
For example, Sosa carefully discusses when a “subjective curtain” (1970: 893) (that is, when
I am, perhaps unknowingly, talking about myself) is or is not a block to exportation. Regardless of
whether one entirely agrees with his intuitions, it is once again hard for me to reconcile his careful,
intuitive discussion here, including cases where exportation is blocked, with his ultimate advocacy of
universal exportation as the literal truth.
35
Kvart (1982) relies on the notion of the “intended reference” of a term and refers in this
connection to my own paper, Kripke (1977) (Chapter 5 of this volume). Thus, in my own example
(12), it is Philby, not the Eiffel Tower, that is the intended reference. Surely, this conclusion agrees
with intuition, as I have said. However, as I also remarked above (see the discussion immediately
after (14)), my opponents would think that this intuitive characterization appeals to the ideas that
they are questioning. But in my view this gets things the wrong way around. However, Kvart gives
an elaborate counterfactual causal analysis, meant to free the notion of intended referent from any
such objections. It would require much more work than I have done to evaluate his theory.
36
Not just “apparently” in Quine (1981). Recall, as we noted above, that he says categorically
“evidently we must ﬁnd against exportation” (1981:20), only to reinstate exportation later on.

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

335

simpler reduction of de re to de dicto attitudes is hard to imagine” (896). But why
does this move have any particular plausibility?
In the ﬁrst place, Sosa’s conclusion that exportation is always allowed (although sometimes rhetorically misleading) would be more plausible if every term
were exportable in some appropriate context. The more terms there are for which
there is no appropriate context that would license the exportation, the less
plausibility Sosa’s defense of unrestricted exportation, as stated immediately
below, has. (Much less does it follow [as Quine suggests] from the supposed
context relativity of “knowing who.”)37
In the second place, even if every term, or at least a signiﬁcant number of
terms, were exportable in some context, why depart from the general strategy
stated in account III to embrace account I? Sosa acknowledges that his own
paradigmatic example of a pragmatic explanation of “logically correct but
rhetorically incorrect (misleading)”—namely, that the statement made is too
weak (so that an impression is given that the stronger statement may not be
true)—is inapplicable here. We must glean an explanation from his discussion of
particular cases (such as the “Metropolis Pyromaniac” case, discussed below),
which are supposed to illuminate the principle, and from his statement of general
principles.
Sosa says:
If my train of thought has been right, then “S believes about x that it is F ” has much in
common with, say, “Jupiter is too far away,” or “The end of the century is sufﬁciently far
37
In the earlier part of the paper, I tried to point out that there is a wealth of such terms, and the
relevant de re notions are surprisingly trivialized.
In a rather surprising footnote, Sosa writes that the context-sensitivity of exportation is no greater
than that of demonstrative reference or ambiguities of predication (1970:895, note 19). But surely
various authors have proposed quite formal analyses of these. What Sosa is alleging appears to me to
be quite worse (and no one ever proposed any analogue of Sosa’s account I, unrestricted exportation,
for these).
Also puzzling is Quine’s dismissal of restrictions on exportation, which he assumes to be based on
a “knowing who he is” restriction (but see my note 17). He says that this notion “is utterly
dependent on context,” and adds, “Sometimes, when we ask who someone is, we see the face and
want the name; sometimes the reverse. Sometimes we want to know his role in the community. Of
itself the notion is empty” (Quine 1981:121). Strictly speaking, the argument as stated, even
assuming its premises, might be taken as compatible with completely determinate context-free
conditions for “knowing who” (maybe we need to know all three conditions, even if this is not in
fact the case). But presumably Quine means that one might say that one knows who someone is but
then, apprised of his role in the community or asking about it, say that one didn’t really know who
he was.
I am not sure how ubiquitous this contextuality is, but assume it to be so. Why does contextuality
imply that a notion is empty? Perhaps that the notion pretends not to be contextual when it is? Or
that contextuality makes it not amenable to formal treatment? (For the latter idea, see Kaplan’s
introduction to “What is Meaning?,” where he reports Strawson as telling him that he assumed on
the authority of Quine that even such context-sensitive phenomena as demonstratives were not
amenable to treatment on the basis of modern logic. Kaplan cites his own work, and could have
cited others, as contesting this claim.) The parameters of contextuality can be imagined to be kept
ﬁxed, for a given treatment, which is what Hintikka (1962) seems to imagine.

336

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

in the future.” Whether Jupiter is too far away depends on the context, and not just
because it depends on the physical position of the speaker or thinker, but also because it
depends on the question under consideration. (1970:894)

Now, I am not so sure that the examples Sosa gives for de re belief support this
comparison. But assume the comparison to be valid, and the conclusions about
the context-sensitivity of the expression cited to be correct. I assume that this is
not a special question about Jupiter (that in most ordinary contexts it happens to
be far away, and probably even too far away),38 but about the predicate “too far
away,” which is indeed highly relative not only to the resources and position of
the speaker, but also to the purposes envisaged. (Is London too far away?
Greenwich Village? Suppose the speaker is in upper mid-Manhattan.) But,
why should it follow that we can simplify the conclusion to “every entity is too
far away,” and delete the reference to context? The idea would be that whenever
we apply the expression “too far way,” we are logically correct though perhaps
rhetorically misleading. I am not even sure what that would mean. It does appear
to be the natural analogue of Sosa’s reversion to account I.39
It appears to me that the argument proceeds by leaps and bounds, and that the
conclusions drawn are hardly justiﬁed or plausible, even given the premises. But
I wonder whether Sosa or Dennett would have maintained their argument if they
knew what their position really entailed. Is it plausible that, strictly speaking,
though it may be rhetorically misleading, we all believe of the Eiffel Tower that it
is a spy? Or take the contextual account III that Sosa imagines can be simpliﬁed to
the unrestricted exportation theory: Are there really contexts in which any of us
believes of the Eiffel Tower that it is a spy? What are these contexts? Remember
that these examples, even on the basis of the weaker contextual theory, would have
to show that for any object identiﬁable by a speaker (and that means almost every
ordinary object), she believes of it that it is a spy in some context or other.
But for the moment let’s set examples of this kind aside. There is another point
to be made. As we have seen, Sosa distinguishes what is true from what it is
rhetorically appropriate to say and thinks that this will remove the intuitive
objection to unrestricted exportation. “Just as,” he says, “strictly speaking, those
who know also believe” (Sosa 1970:896).
38
Sosa does envisage special contexts in which Jupiter might or might not be too far away
for the purposes mentioned.
39
David Lewis proposed that whether one knows something can depend on the context in which
one is considering a question, and others have followed him with similar theories (see Lewis
1983:247, second paragraph, and Lewis 1996). If one is in an ordinary context, one knows a lot
of things that one would not know if a skeptical hypothesis had been raised. In the latter context,
one knows neither the negation of the skeptical hypothesis nor the usual cases of knowledge that
entail it. Suppose for the moment that Lewis was right. Should he have drawn the consequence, or
suggested the theory that really we know very little (or nothing subject to skeptical doubt), even
though it would be rhetorically misleading to say this? It would be very unlike Lewis to have drawn
such a conclusion, but it seems to me to be the analogous move to Sosa’s transition from his theory
III to theory I (unrestricted exportation).

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

337

There may indeed be cases where it is rhetorically misleading to make a
statement even when it is true. In the quoted example, Sosa has in mind cases
where what is asserted is too weak. Maybe a natural example can be found where
saying that someone believes something is misleading when the person in question actually knows it. Another somewhat different case, known because Grice
used it in the paper in which he originally set up his well-known methodology of
conventional meaning (including conventional implicature) versus conversational implicature (Grice 1961), is that of “looks red.” Although in appropriate
circumstances (though not really all) a speaker may imply that she doubts or
denies that an object really is red when she says that it looks red, nevertheless this
is a mere matter of “conversational implicature,” and really (of course) an object
that is red often, indeed usually, looks red too.40
However, as Dennett rightly notes (in the above quotation), the present case
is not merely one where it is rhetorically misleading to say something literally
true. When J. Edgar Hoover knows that a murder has been committed by just
one person, according to Dennett (and other unrestricted exporters), he actually
has a suspect, namely, the murderer.41 Nevertheless, Dennett rightly goes on to
observe, it isn’t just that J. Edgar Hoover would be misleading were he to assert
that he has a suspect; under these circumstances, “he would naturally deny to
the press that there was anyone he believed to be the murderer” (198, my
emphasis).
This is very different from the type of situation noted by Sosa. Maybe at some
point it might be rhetorically misleading for someone who knows something
merely to say that he believes it, even though, strictly speaking, it is true, and
similarly for other cases.42 It is something quite different to say that it is
40
It would seem from Grice’s paper that some “ordinary language” philosophers held that “looks
red” cannot be used except in the presence of the appropriate doubt or denial conditions. But I don’t
know who these people were. I know of nothing in print. I may have missed something. Arguments
of that type certainly were common in the era of “ordinary language” philosophy.
41
See the quotation from Dennett above and note 20 for the term “suspect.” Actually, the main
argument of the present paper, modulo any reservations about the term “suspect,” shows that
countless entities are suspects (or “minimal suspects”) if Dennett’s unrestricted exportation is
right. But the point remains even if we leave this aside (though I do not know how Dennett
would have reacted had he been aware of this consequence of his views.).
42
Actually, I am somewhat worried that Sosa chose a rather difﬁcult example. No doubt, as he
says, strictly speaking, those who know also believe. Nevertheless, the use of “I believe” presents
special problems. I have some inclination to think, for example, that if someone says “I believe she
has gone to the movies,” the speaker is sometimes not simply reporting a mental state but explicitly
expressing some degree of caution or hesitation, as opposed to the categorical statement without the
preﬁx. Moreover, as Quine notes, “x does not believe that p” usually means “x believes that not p,”
rather than “it is not the case that x believes that p” (1960:145–46). Such complications make
comparison of this case with others difﬁcult.
However, no doubt this does not affect the general point that a statement can be rhetorically
misleading, though logically true, for being too weak, though semantically true, as I have
acknowledged in the main text. Also, Sosa maintains that this explanation does not apply to the
de re case he is considering.

338

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

appropriate actually to deny the statement.43 For example, to use Grice’s original
case, is there any inclination to deny that a red object looks red (unless, of course,
there really is some special reason for such a denial)? So, though it may
sometimes be rhetorically misleading, though correct, to say that something
“looks red,” suggesting a reservation about its real color that is not there, that
does not mean that it would be appropriate in these circumstances to deny that it
does look red. And indeed the whole point of Grice’s example is that this is not
the case.44
Let me make a few additional remarks about Dennett’s characterization of
Hoover’s denial “that there was anyone he believed to be the murderer.” First,
Dennett says, “What he would actually be denying is that he knows more than
anyone knows who knows only that the crime has been committed” (198).45
Actually, Hoover may know much more than that and have many clues but still
have no belief as to the murderer. Let us amend Dennett’s statement: what
Hoover is denying is that he has nontrivial reasons to believe of anyone that he
committed the murder. Such a reformulation would be closer to what Dennett is
imagining but hardly expresses a genuine pragmatic principle. Someone might as
well say that her blood is not circulating, because she thinks that the only reasons
her blood is circulating are the usual trivial reasons, not some special pacemaker
or the like. Plainly, there is no such principle.46
Dennett goes on to say:

43
Actually, the very hypothetical case in connection with which Sosa cites the notion of what is
true but rhetorically misleading (that of a secret pyromaniac, as described in Sosa’s paper; see also
below) is one in which Sosa, too, recognizes that the pyromaniac would deny that he is suspected.
Sosa’s later, weaker characterization of the case is very misleading.
44
It is reasonably well known that what looks like a negation can sometimes be used to reject a
statement as too weak (the phenomenon was ﬁrst called to my attention by David Lewis). For
example, someone says, “The Iraq war has gone on at least a little bit longer than when Bush
pronounced it was over” (his “mission accomplished” statement in 2003). And then someone else
says, “Come on, it didn’t go on at least a little bit longer, it’s been going on for years” (this is
sometimes called metalinguistic negation).
A similar example derives from a Gricean example of “generalized conversational implicature.”
He writes, “Anyone who uses a sentence of the form ‘X is meeting a woman this evening’ would
normally implicate that the person to be met was someone other than X’s wife, mother, sister, or
perhaps even close platonic friend” (Grice 1989:37). The old jocular routine— “‘Who was that lady
I saw you with last night?’—‘That was no lady, that was my wife’”—trades on the ambiguity of a
genuine denial and a mere denial of the Gricean conversational implicature (as well as old-fashioned
connotations, ambiguous here, of “lady”).
But it is clear that the present cases are not like either of these; Hoover actually denies that there
was anyone he believed to be the murderer. Sosa’s pyromaniac denies that he is suspected.
45
Presumably, Dennett really intends an extra clause “that the crime has been committed
by a single culprit,” as he himself has said previously.
46
This is so even though it would be rhetorically odd for someone to say, “out of the blue” and
with no special context, that her blood is circulating. Why does she say that? Is something wrong or
something special going on? For it to be rhetorically odd or misleading for someone to say
something does not mean we have a license to deny it.

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

339

He is certainly not denying that he has a de re belief directly about some individual to the
effect that he is the murderer, a belief he has acquired by some intimate cognitive rapport
with that individual, for suppose Hoover wrestled with the murderer at the scene of the
crime, in broad daylight, but has no idea who the person was with whom he wrestled;
surely on anyone’s causal theory of de re belief, that person is believed by him to be the
murderer, but it would be most disingenuous for Hoover to claim to have a suspect.
(1987:198)

Two comments are relevant here. First, how can it be “most disingenuous for
Hoover to claim to have a suspect,” when according to Dennett he does have
one? I suppose Dennett means that it would be rhetorically misleading, for the
dubious reasons discussed above. More important for the present case concerns
why it is that writers so concerned with the hidden contextuality of a family of
statements ignore the most blatant contextual parameters. Statements about a
subject having or not having a belief (whether de re or de dicto) plainly vary over
time. All that is needed to handle Dennett’s case is to suppose that Hoover did
believe of his wrestling partner, at the time of the wrestling, that he was the
murderer but has not retained the de re belief later. (Maybe someone’s “causal”
theory is refuted by Dennett’s example, but I don’t know whose.)47
Let us mention another case emphasized by Sosa. He writes:
[A] spy and his accomplice see through a window how an investigator ﬁnds some
incriminating evidence in the spy’s footlocker. The accomplice could very naturally say
“He knows that you are a spy now.48 You must escape.” In fact, and so far as the
accomplice knows, the investigator does not know the spy, and knows practically nothing
about him: the footlocker had been searched only as part of a general investigation of
the base. What the investigator knows is ┌the owner of the footlocker is a spy┐. Since the
accomplice is right to export, ‘the owner of the footlocker’ is a distinguished term in the
circumstances. (1970:891)

47
Kvart (1982:300) gives a related example where someone S has a purse snatched, and where
the thief immediately disappears into the crowd. Kvart thinks that S has no opinion (either in the de
dicto or the de re sense) as to whom the purse snatcher is, but still, surely, has a de re belief about the
thief. Presumably Kvart thinks that the de re belief has been retained because the time is short and
the memory vivid. But then, there is no reason to suppose that the de dicto knowledge “who
snatched the purse,” namely, “that tall man over there,” should be lost either. However one rules in
either case, there is no reason to suppose that the de re belief and the de dicto “knowing-who”
locutions do not go together.
More elaborate treatments of Dennett’s case and Kvart’s might involve more than the vividness of
the memory, the time elapsed, and so on. Even when the police have identiﬁed the culprit in the
ordinary sense, the culprit may have disguised himself, and the police may have no idea how to ﬁnd
him. We need not go into all these subtleties here.
48
Here Sosa assumes that “knows you are a spy,” where a pronoun is used, implies that the
subject of knowledge has de re knowledge that the person referred to is a spy. I am not going to
contest this assumption, and indeed I am inclined to think it correct. In some sense, the assumption
is Russellian in character. Sosa does mention Russell’s views in his paper (1970:884) but does not
emphasize them. (In the present instance, the assumption would not be consistent with Russell’s
later very narrow characterization of acquaintance, which Sosa also mentions.)

340

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

Dennett echoes Sosa’s example, citing him as well (197). Suppose Hoover
knows many bits of evidence that will put him close on the trail of the murderer
(George). These are uniquely identifying. According to Dennett:
[S]ince George is the lone satisﬁer of Hoover’s description, Hoover believes of George
that he did it. “No, Gracie,” George says, “Hoover knows only that whoever ﬁts this
description is Smith’s murderer. He doesn’t know that I ﬁt this description, so he doesn’t
know that I am Smith’s murderer. Wake me up when you learn that I am suspected.
(1987:197)

Dennett clearly thinks George is being absurd. He gives what he regards as a
parallel case where Poirot gathers a number of people in a room and states that he
does not have a suspect but will know who the culprit is when he ﬁnds the person
with the pantry key on his person (197).
Sosa’s and Dennett’s intuitions are strange to me, because clearly there are two
distinct questions. One is whether a criminal has been identiﬁed; the other is
whether the criminal is in danger of being identiﬁed soon. To me, Sosa’s
accomplice obviously would not say, “he knows that you are a spy now,” though
he might say, “watch out, they may soon ﬁnd out that you are a spy, once they
ﬁnd out who owns the footlocker.” Similarly, maybe George should wake up. It
depends on how long Hoover has to pore over the evidence before he identiﬁes
George. If this might take some time and George will have some time to escape
even after he has been identiﬁed, his remarks will have been correct. Poirot’s
suspects are indeed in very imminent danger, but there is no reason to think that
Poirot’s remark that he does not yet have a suspect is literally incorrect. Dennett
immediately follows his remarks on Poirot with his material on a “minimal
suspect,” apparently drawing it as a moral of the examples just discussed.49 Recall
what he says:
It is not true that George is safe so long as Hoover’s beliefs are of the form whoever ﬁts
description D is Smith’s murderer, for if description D is something like “the only person in
Clancy’s bar with yellow mud on his shoes,” the jig may soon be up. One is a (minimal)
suspect if one satisﬁes any deﬁnite description Hoover takes to pick out Smith’s murderer. It
follows trivially that Smith’s murderer is a minimal suspect (because he satisﬁes the
description “Smith’s murderer”) even in the situation when Hoover is utterly bafﬂed, but
merely believes the crime has been committed by a single culprit. This would be an
objectionable consequence only if there were some principled way of distinguishing minimal
suspects from genuine, or true or de re suspects, but there is not. (Dennett 1987:198)

49
I should add, since it is unclear that these things are distinguished by Quine, Sosa, or Dennett,
that whether a criminal has been identiﬁed and whether he has been caught are two different things.
Escapes even of known culprits obviously occur. But this is not the main point.
Moreover, the remarks by Sosa and especially by Dennett on Poirot give the impression that they
realize that one might be inclined to deny, under the circumstances they consider, that the respective
culprits have been identiﬁed. Precisely this inclination seems to motivate the idea that these relevant
idioms are “interest relative” or “context dependent.”

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

341

Grice brought about a general attitude that one should try to keep the semantics
of the language simple and ascribe pragmatic explanations for various semantic
phenomena if at all possible.50 The view that this strategy should be followed in
this case is fairly explicit in Sosa, even though Grice is not mentioned by name. It is
not as clear in Dennett. However, both authors mistakenly take descriptions that
denote a culprit and make his capture imminent to be exportable descriptions.
Dennett goes further, concluding that the second half of the condition—that the
relevant term be “distinguished”—can be dropped, though he gives no argument.
He concludes that there is no “principled way of distinguishing” among various
descriptions Hoover may have to denote the suspect, including the minimal one,
even though the latter hardly puts the culprit in any danger of ultimate identiﬁcation. (Maybe sometimes the line is vague or difﬁcult to draw.)
It is unclear whether Dennett’s attitude is also Gricean (though this might be
used to make his position more plausible). His attitude can also depend on
various arguments that there cannot be such a principled distinction or that it is
difﬁcult for a theorist to see her way as to what it would be.51 There is also the
Quinean attitude of rejecting intuitive distinctions when certain theories exclude
them or ﬁnd them hard to explain.
Here, I am concerned with the attitude stemming from Grice. It seems to me
that this principle can be overused. As I’ve mentioned, an important moral
I want to talk about in the philosophy of language is that we should not think
of pragmatics as a wastebasket. This is well illustrated by Dennett’s “minimal
suspect” example, regardless of Dennett’s own motivations.
Suppose, as in Dennett’s example, that a crime has been committed by a unique
culprit. Such terms as “suspects” are predicates and there are corresponding
verbs.52 Consider, for example:
50
This is echoed, for example, by myself in Kripke (1977). (However, neither Kripke 1977 nor
Donnellan 1966 is compatible with unrestricted exportation since both acknowledge that
descriptions admit of a use in which the object spoken of by means of the description may not
satisfy it.)
51
Dennett gives his own reasons for doubting the distinction, some of which have been
mentioned above. I have said that it would be impossible to deal with all his numerous cases. But
I will mention brieﬂy as an example his case about people sitting around a table (1987:196–97).
According to Dennett, there appears to be a sharp contrast between thinking about “the youngest
person present,” and about “Bill.” If one has no idea as to the ages of the people present, the
description generates no de re belief, whereas it appears that “Bill” does so. But “Bill” generates no de
re belief either, if his twin brother has appeared in disguise, so the apparent difference is only
psychological. The case is somewhat underdescribed as presented. Probably Dennett assumes the
subject knows Bill. In this case, he has de re beliefs both about Bill and about “that man,” who may
or may not really be Bill. If, at another extreme, the subject has never heard of Bill, then the belief is
only about “that man,” who may or may not be Bill. Dennett’s earlier bizarre fantasy about the two
places called “Shakey’s Pizza Parlor” (167ff), which he acknowledges might be considered too
anomalous a case to destroy a theory, should be handled similarly, insofar as it is clear.
52
Logically, a transitive verb is a two-place predicate. “Suspect” is a verb, and can be reduced to
the one-place predicate, “a suspect.” (Actually, of course, there are other parameters in “a suspects
b,” namely, what b is suspected of, tense, etc.)

342

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

(19) For every two people the Chicago police suspect of the crime, the New
York police suspect three.
This is a ratio—it might be that there are four suspects that the Chicago police
have, and six that the New York police have. Since the police believe that there is
a unique culprit, they are well aware that many of the suspects are in fact
innocent.
Suppose that in fact all the suspects are innocent. Then, according to Dennett,
in the true semantics of the language, the ratio given in (19) will be wrong. The
true culprit must always be included in the extension of “suspect.” In fact,
according to the argument I gave in the previous section, the supposed “true”
extension of “suspect” (by the police force of any city) will be much larger—it
will include even the Eiffel Tower. However, even if what Dennett imagines is
correct and only the true culprit need be included, such a statement as (19) will
be wrong.
The point is this: such terms as “suspect” are predicates. They interact with
quantiﬁers and cardinality and such like, in the language, and we have to project
them to a wide variety of sentences. How can these predications and interactions
be explained? Ultimately, they depend on the notion of (15) (“S believes of y that
it is F”). They can only be explained by saying that, in addition to literal English,
in which statements such as (19) are trivially false and should not be made, there
is something else—“pragmatic English”—which confused speakers, not aware of
the literal extension of “suspect” that follows from universal exportation, do
accept and do use.53 In pragmatic English, “suspect” interacts with quantiﬁers
and cardinality in a way that matches the intuitions of ordinary, “confused”
speakers. There must be some principles of projection that will enable one to
evaluate the statements of confused English, or pragmatic English, over the entire
language. But then why shouldn’t pragmatic English simply be called “English”?
Its semantics, like that of other languages, must be given recursively, starting
from the extensions of terms like “suspect,” and their interactions with cardinality, and so on.54
That is the ﬁrst moral I want to draw from this discussion: under the inﬂuence
of Grice we have sometimes gone too far. Let’s make the semantics as simple as
possible, the rest is all pragmatics and we don’t have to think about it. But,
53
Presumably, Sosa would agree with Dennett about the term “suspect.” Indeed, in his
“pyromaniac” case, the question is whether anyone suspects the pyromaniac of the murder.
54
Compare the “suspect” case with the “woman” case as mentioned (see note 44). In spite of the
Gricean implicatures of “woman” (or “lady”) in the special contexts he mentions, the extension of
“woman” is not affected. Consider: “How many women are there on the board of directors?,”
“ . . . in this room?,” and so on. The extension of “woman” can be projected in the natural way
throughout the language, as spoken by ordinary speakers. Hence, the special implicatures
mentioned by Grice need not be brought into the semantics of the language.
This ought to be true of “suspect,” if only Gricean conversational implicature were contaminating
its apparent extension in some special cases; but it is not.

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

343

sometimes we do have to think about it, and then maybe the phenomenon should
be treated as part of the semantics of the language. Pragmatics is not a wastebasket.
Ordinary speakers seem to be able to handle these distinctions that supposedly
can’t be made or “shouldn’t” be made. Perhaps we should just take a better look
at what they are, and, if they are too hard, we may just have to admit that they
are too hard. If we cannot make out the distinctions, it is our fault and not that of
ordinary speakers, and in that respect our semantics is incomplete.
Perhaps these distinctions are indeed built into the language, as we have it, but
are not important from a genuine, truly philosophical point of view. Dennett
says,
[T]hus, as Quine suggests, the apparently sharp psychological distinction between
(48) Hoover believes that someone (some one) murdered Smith
and
(49) Someone is believed by Hoover to have murdered Smith,
collapses. (198)

Psychological? Psychological?55 I do not think that the criminal law, the very area
emphasized by Dennett and Sosa, regards the relevant de re notions as merely
psychological. I know less about the signiﬁcance of these things than I ought to,
but I know enough to believe that real legal issues are involved. First, the police
often make ofﬁcial announcements as to whether so-and-so is indeed a suspect.56
A grand jury, in this country, often will send someone a warning letter—and this
is de re: it is about the particular person; it is to a particular person—that he or
she is a target of the investigation, a so-called target letter. Of course, there is no
philosophical issue here about the recipient of the letter. But what raises the de re
belief question is the legal assumption that a person whom the grand jury
strongly suspects committed the crime, and whom it is investigating accordingly,
should receive such a letter. In appropriate jurisdictions, that someone is a target
of an investigation can have legal consequences.
A related claim, which I have sometimes heard made, is the following:
whatever may be the case for ordinary language, scientiﬁc language should not
admit such expressions as “there is someone I believe to be a spy,” and presumably related ones such as “the object has been identiﬁed,” “we know which F it

55
Dennett’s paper shows that he is quite serious in saying that psychology, once it is worked out,
will eliminate many of these notions about belief and reference and dissolve the associated puzzles.
See the concluding sentences of his paper (1987:200).
56
Apparently, in many jurisdictions, the term “suspect” has an ofﬁcial legal deﬁnition. Because
of the negative connotations of “suspect,” nowadays the police sometimes use the term “person of
interest,” but it appears not to have an ofﬁcial legal deﬁnition. In either case, the police are generally
cautious in accusing someone of being the perpetrator. Eventually, the police may be prepared
categorically to identify someone as the perpetrator or culprit.

344

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

is,” and so on. This comes, of course, from the Quinean view that all ways of
identifying an object are on a par, that “frankly inequalitarian” theories about
different ways of identifying an object are plainly unscientiﬁc. Just this idea
underlies the feeling for unrestricted exportation. Quine most famously applied
it to modal logic, and only later to belief and knowledge contexts. But this seems
to me to be plainly untenable. On this view, computability theory—that is,
recursion theory—would not be a serious science. What question does it seek to
answer? It seeks to answer the question, when is a function f such that, given an
argument n, we can eventually tell its value f (n) (with no limits on how long the
computation takes). But, on the strict Quinean idea, any number theoretic
function, once it is deﬁned, is automatically computable. For given any n, the
value is simply f (n). To suppose otherwise is to adopt, as Quine would put it, a
“frankly inequalitarian” attitude toward two ways of designating the same
number. But, I am afraid, that is just what computability theory does do. We
suppose the natural numbers given in a canonical notation (the simplest, for the
purposes of computability theory, is 0 followed by a ﬁnite number of successor
symbols), and ask that the computation be given in that notation. A computable
function is one where you always, by applying an appropriate process, can get
the answer. This does not hold for an arbitrary function.57 Complexity theory
also serves as an example.58
Anyone who says that these notions are not serious, either from the point of
view of science or from the point of view the law, is, I think, wrong. No one, just
to make philosophy of language simpler and avoid drawing too many distinctions, should think otherwise.
This is not the place to discuss all the special problems and ambiguities that in
unusual cases may arise for the “knowing who” locution. The concentration on
this locution, and thus on the case of people, seems to stem from its emphasis in
Hintikka (1962). In this case, not only might there be ambiguities in the
locution, there may in special cases be divergences from related locutions such
as “knowing which person” and “identiﬁying the person,” and there is a de
dicto–de re ambiguity. The conventional “interest relative” or “context
57

Of course, independently of any idea of intuitive computability, one can state the formal
deﬁnitions of the theory. (There were several, which were shown to be equivalent.) However,
without the idea of such intuitive computability, the entire motivation of the theory would be lost.
In this notion of computability, one ideally supposes that one who is performing the computation
has no limitations of time or space. (Strictly speaking, of course, the notion of computability is best
seen as one of having a procedure for knowing which number is the value of the function, and the
relation of this to knowing de re of a number that it is the value might be complex. In this instance,
I am inclined to think that the notions do coincide. In any event, in both cases hostility toward the
distinction stems from a Quinean opposition to “frankly inequalitarian” preferences for one way
of designating a number over another.) (I discuss this in Kripke 1992.)
58
Complexity theory adds a formal limitation on the length of the computation, which is
supposed to codify the idea that computations that go beyond a certain length cannot be carried out
in practice.

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

345

dependent” formulation does not seem to me always to bring out the essential
problems.59 The ambiguities are much more rare in the case of “knowing which”
as applied to objects in general, not necessarily people (as in the example of
numbers above).
Indeed, the ambiguities are rather unusual even when involving people and do
not in themselves generate a problem about whether or not a person has a de re
belief about a subject. I am speaking somewhat dogmatically, but I ask the reader
to think about her or his own reaction to a television report that the perpetrator
of a crime has now been identiﬁed, or that there is someone the police
now believe to be the culprit. Does someone who hears such a report, even
knowing little or nothing about the crime, think “What is the context? What
interests are involved?,” or anything related? I think one ﬁnds the report
perfectly clear, and should not listen to philosophers who tell one otherwise.
(Indeed, they themselves do not think otherwise, except when they write on the
problem.)
The second general problem in the philosophy of language is what I call the
“toy duck fallacy.” Let me give an example of this, because, on the one hand, the
people I’ve been criticizing have been talking about all kinds of examples that
they must take to be literally false or incorrect; but, on the other hand, there can
be a tendency to give examples as if they were correct that have got to be literally
false. Suppose a parent takes a child to a toy store. The toys are plastic models of
various animals. The child asks, “Is that a goose?” The parent says, “No, that’s a
duck.”
Some morals plainly should not be drawn from this type of example. First,
that there are two kinds of duck: some are living organisms, others are made of
plastic. (Wasn’t the parent correct to answer, “That’s a duck”?) Or, that the term
“duck” is ambiguous. It has a narrow sense in which the duck has to be an
organism, and a broader one in which it could be made of plastic. Nor could we
argue, for example, that the term “duck” has a unitary broad sense, including
both the plastic toys and the water fowl, but that in certain contexts there is a
pragmatic implication that the duck must be a biological animal. Nor should we
say that the example shows that the term “duck” is highly contextual or even
“interest relative,” so that if someone is primarily interested in biology, or eating
meat, or just seeing an animal moving gracefully in the water or at a zoo, ducks
59
For example, when I saw the classic ﬁlm “Charade,” I eventually realized (before it was
revealed in the ﬁlm) that a mysterious killer was really Carson Dyle, erroneously reported earlier in
the ﬁlm to have been killed long ago. But I did not realize that Dyle had pretended to be a CIA
agent, who was a character in the movie under another name. Did I realize who the killer was?
Possibly the answer is ambiguous. (However, “interest relative” or “context dependent” does not
seem to me to be the happiest characterization of the ambiguity.) Unambiguously, I did have a
correct belief about Dyle that he committed the murders. (But if asked to choose, I confess that
probably I would prefer to admit that I had not ﬁgured out “whodunit.”)
It would be beyond the scope of this paper to discuss all the issues involved in the “knowing who”
locution, or the issues raised by Boër and Lycan (1986).

346

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

have to be animals; but if one is interested in having a toy, then a duck can be
made of plastic. None of these conclusions is correct. No dictionary should
include an entry under “duck” with a sense in which ducks may be made of
plastic and not be living creatures at all.
The point here, independently of the correctness of the application I will
suggest in connection with the issues in the present paper, is that when giving any
example in the philosophy of language, one has to be careful that it is not a toy
duck example. One should not conclude that something is a legitimate use of
language, something that ought to be recognized by a dictionary or semantic
theory, even though there are appropriate circumstances in which one would
say it.
One sign of a toy duck example would be, in this kind of case, that the child
might ask, “But is this a real duck?,” and the parent might reply, “No, this is not a
real duck.” Or, as we would say, “A toy duck is not really a duck.” Unfortunately,
for the dialogue in the toy store, possibly situations can be set up in which the
“real” duck test won’t work. But, in general, it can help, and for us surely a toy
duck is not really a duck.
I should add that the problem in semantics I am mentioning here was
originally suggested to me by an example of John Austin. He mentions someone
who points to a picture and says, “That is a lion” (Austin 1962:91).60 However,
in this example, or a corresponding one, in which pointing to a picture one says,
“that is my grandfather,” it is not clear that one has not said something intended
to be literally true. For example, in the grandfather case, one is pointing out the
man in the picture, and in the case of the lion, the animal in the picture.61
I propose to replace Austin’s example of a picture with my own example of the
plastic toy duck as achieving the purpose that Austin intended.
One thing I don’t know quite how to explain is why usages like this are
allowed to arise, even though they do not accord with a proper dictionary of the
language. Austin says, in connection with his own example, that one is cutting
down on verbiage. But that does not seem to be the right explanation. Why
should it be so annoyingly prolix to say “that is a toy duck,” or “that is a plastic
duck”? I do not know a proper explanation of the contexts in which these
locutions are allowed.62 In the absence of such an explanation, until we ﬁgure
one out, one must simply recognize that these contexts occur. No doubt an
explanation would help us recognize when these locutions occur, but the point is
60
He writes, “Does this show that the word ‘lion’ has two senses—one meaning an animal, the
other a picture of an animal? Plainly not. In order (in this case) to cut down verbiage, I may use in
one situation words primarily appropriate to the other. No problem arises provided the
circumstances are known.”
61
I discuss this example in my John Locke Lectures (Kripke 1973). I think this applies even if
there isn’t a real lion depicted, though I don’t elaborate here.
62
Romina Padró has suggested to me that some such locutions might be viewed as introducing
special ﬁctional contexts or games, allowing the omission of “toy” or “plastic.”

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

347

that the philosopher of language must be careful to avoid drawing the wrong
conclusions from them.63
Some of the examples Sosa gives to show the extreme contextuality or interest
relativity of exportability seem to me to be toy duck examples. In fact, Sosa’s
argument for the extreme contextuality of exportability seems to me to indicate
that these are toy duck examples. In one case, Sosa mentions a multiple-choice
test asking “Which of these is a spy?,” where the correct answer is “the tallest spy.”
Most children taking the test get the right answer, and the tester says to the tallest
spy, whom he happens to know (and whom he also knows to be the tallest spy)—
yes, this is a tall story in more than one sense—“most of the children realized that
you are the spy on the list.” But, of course, the children have never heard of the
spy in question, let alone of the relevant facts about him. So do they really have a
belief about him? The correct analysis, I suggest, is that the tester is plainly being
somewhat humorous when he reports this to the spy. Hence, this is a toy duck
case.
Consider Sosa’s ﬁnal example, which he clearly takes to conﬁrm his main
point (1970 894–96). An apparently solid citizen of the city of Metropolis, well
known in the community, and in particular to the chief of police, has a secret
propensity for setting ﬁres. The police call the person who has set the ﬁres,
perhaps with some characteristic modus operandi, and so on, the “Metropolis
Pyromaniac.” Another ﬁre has just occurred and the police announce that they
believe, on the basis of the usual clues, that the Metropolis Pyromaniac did this
one, too. Then Sosa points out that the citizen can rightly assure his wife (who
does know about his crimes) that no one suspects him of setting any ﬁres. On the
other hand, the police chief is represented as announcing that he has a suspect on
the basis of their knowledge of the characteristic modus operandi of the Metropolis Pyromaniac. As Sosa puts it, “The chief . . . is pleased that they are not
completely in the dark, and he emphasizes this by reporting that someone is
suspected of having set the ﬁre. (They don’t just suspect that someone set the ﬁre;
at least they know ┌The Pyromaniac, and not any of his fellow arsonists, did
it.┐)” (895).
According to Sosa, this apparently paradoxical case is to be resolved by
appealing to the extreme context-sensitivity of the notion of a suspect. In one
sense (described as the “solid citizen”), he is not, and in the other sense (called the
“Metropolis Pyromaniac”), he is. Sosa initially describes this apparently paradoxical case using his account III, but quickly uses the case to support his
63
I should add that Austin, too, regards a philosophically signiﬁcant case as being based at least
in part on a toy duck usage, namely, Ayer’s suggestion that there are two conﬂicting senses of “see”
(see Ayer 1940).
I admit that in the absence of a clear criterion, not only is there the danger of a philosopher
drawing the wrong conclusion from a toy duck usage, but there is also the opposite danger of
dismissing a valid example as a toy duck usage. In the text I mention the question of whether it is a
“real” duck as one criterion, but I do not have a general criterion.

348

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

reversion to account I (permitting universal exportation). The citizen, who is also
the Metropolis Pyromaniac, is suspected, but it may be rhetorically misleading to
say so. However, as we have already seen, to put it that way is to misdescribe the
situation. For, as Sosa explicitly says, the solid citizen, who is also the Metropolis
Pyromaniac, rightly denies that anyone suspects him (Sosa 1970:894–95).
It is hard for me to share Sosa’s intuitions about this case. Could the London
police really announce, “We have a suspect; it is Jack the Ripper”? Both Sosa’s
police chief and the London police are speaking very strangely to my ear. Yes,
they may know or believe more than merely nothing as to who did it, but a
suspect they don’t have. I wonder whether Sosa’s intuitions are inﬂuenced by the
fact that the police had given both criminals a name (or a “name”). What if the
police had said, “We think that the same person committed this crime as
previous similar ones”? Would we have any inclination to think of them as
having a suspect?
Even if we shared Sosa’s intuitions, the police chief’s claim to have a suspect
would clearly be a toy duck case. Perhaps the case would be stronger if the
Pyromaniac’s wife, after hearing the police’s announcement, said, “They think
you did this one, too.” (The case would be more poignant if, in this instance, he
was innocent, and someone else had imitated his methods.) In this version, her
statement has a greater genuine air of being de re. Even so, I think it is plainly a
toy duck case. Once again, one should remember that “suspect” is a predicate,
interacting with quantiﬁers, cardinality, and the like, and one should bear in
mind how it would normally be projected. The Pyromaniac could appropriately
reply to his wife: “Oh, come on, I am not a suspect at all.” Only the husband’s
reassurances that he is not a suspect ﬁt the way we normally project the predicate.
The reply is correct, I think, and amounts to a rejection of this case as a toy
duck case.64
Independently of the particular application I have been discussing, I hope to
have convinced my readers that what I have called the “pragmatic wastebasket
fallacy” and the “toy duck fallacy” are indeed temptations to be avoided in the
philosophy of language. As to the speciﬁc issue under discussion, I hope to have
eliminated any temptation to fall back on unrestricted exportation.65

64

If one thinks of a genuine proper name as always licensing exportation, then one must
deny that the “Metropolis Pyromaniac” is a genuine proper name. One need not elaborate on the
issue here, but undoubtedly a toy duck–type feeling that the “Metropolis Pyromaniac” must
license exportation contributes to any illusion created by the example.
65
I would like to thank Monique Whitaker for her original transcription of the talk. My thanks
to Jeff Buechner and Gary Ostertag for their editorial help, and especially to Romina Padró for her
help in revising the original transcription as well as helpful suggestions and conversations. This
paper has been completed with support from the Saul A. Kripke Center at the City University of
New York, Graduate Center.

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

349

R E F E R EN C E S
Austin, J. L. (1962). Sense and Sensibilia. Oxford: Clarendon.
Ayer, A. J. (1940). The Foundations of Empirical Knowledge. London: Macmillan.
Boër , S. E., and W. G. Lycan (1986). Knowing Who. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dennett, D. (1982). “Beyond Belief.” In Thought and Object. Ed. A. Woodﬁeld. Oxford:
Clarendon. Reprinted in Dennett (1987); citations are to the reprint.
———. (1987). The Intentional Stance. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Donnellan, K. (1966). “Reference and Deﬁnite Descriptions.” Philosophical Review
75:281–304.
Grice, H. P. (1961). “The Causal Theory of Perception.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society 35:121–53.
———. (1989). Studies in the Way of Words. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hahn, L. E., and P. A. Schilpp, eds. (1986). The Philosophy of W. V. O. Quine. LaSalle,
IL: Open Court.
Hintikka, J. (1962). Knowledge and Belief: An Introduction to the Logic of the Two Notions.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Kaplan, D. (1968). “Quantifying In.” Synthese 19:178–214.
———. (1986). “Opacity.” In Hahn and Schilpp (1986).
———. (n.d.) “What Is Meaning? Explorations in the Theory of Meaning as Use.”
Unpublished manuscript.
Kripke, S. (1973). The John Locke Lectures: Reference and Existence. Unpublished manuscript.
———. (1977). “Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference.” Midwest Studies in
Philosophy 2:255–76. Reprinted in this volume as Chapter 5.
———. (1980). Naming and Necessity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. (1992). “Logicism, Wittgenstein, and De Re Beliefs about Natural Numbers.”
Unpublished manuscript.
———. (2005). “Russell’s Notion of Scope.” Mind 114:1005–37. Reprinted in this
volume as Chapter 8.
Kvart, I. (1982). “Quine and Modalities De Re: A Way Out?” Journal of Philosophy
79:295–328.
Lewis, D. (1979). “Scorekeeping in a Language Game.” Journal of Philosophical Logic
8:339–59. Reprinted in Lewis (1983); citations are to the reprint.
———. (1983). Philosophical Papers Volume I. New York: Oxford University Press.
———. (1996). “Elusive Knowledge.” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 74:549–67.
Quine, W. V. O. (1956). “Quantiﬁers and Propositional Attitudes.” Journal of Philosophy
53:177–87. Reprinted in Quine (1966), 185–96; citations are to the reprint.
———. (1960). Word and Object. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
———. (1961). “Reply to Professor Marcus.” Synthese 13:323–30. Reprinted in Quine
(1966).
———. (1966). The Ways of Paradox and Other Essays. New York: Random House.
———. (1968). “Replies.” Synthese 19:264–322.
———. (1979). “Intensions Revisited.” In Contemporary Perspectives in the Philosophy of
Language, ed. Peter French, Theodore Uehling Jr., and Howard K. Wettstein.

350

Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy

Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Reprinted in Quine (1981); citations are
to the reprint.
———. (1981). Theories and Things. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. (1986). “Reply to Kaplan.” In Hahn and Schlipp (1986), 290–94.
Russell, B. (1905). “On Denoting.” Mind 14:479–93.
Sosa, E. (1969). “Quantiﬁers, Beliefs, and Sellars.” In Philosophical Logic, ed. W. Davis,
D. J. Hockney, and W. K. Wilson. New York: Humanities Press, 1969.
———. (1970). “Propositional Attitudes De Dicto and De Re.” Journal of Philosophy
67:883–96.
Stine, G. (1969). Quantiﬁcation in Knowledge and Belief Contexts. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Harvard University.
———. (1972). “Two Women.” Philosophical Studies 23:84–90.

12
Presupposition and Anaphora: Remarks
on the Formulation of the
Projection Problem*

From the stock example “Have you stopped beating your wife?” we are all
familiar with the intuitive concept of presupposition. Though there have been
many conﬂicting attempts in the literature to capture what this concept means,
to some degree Justice Stewart’s comment about pornography holds here: we all
recognize it when we see it, even if we can’t say exactly what it is. In this paper,
I will be concerned with what is called in the linguistics literature “the projection problem for presuppositions.” That problem is simply this: if we have a
logically complex sentence whose clauses bear certain presuppositions, how do
we compute the presuppositions of the whole? The main thesis of this paper is
* This paper is an edited transcript of a talk delivered at the conference “Linguistic and
Philosophical Approaches to the Study of Anaphora,” held at Princeton University in October
1990. Thanks to Scott Soames and Stephen Neale for urging me to present this material. Also, in
another way, to Scott and to the tenure system since it was reading his papers on these matters as
part of his tenure review that got me interested in these issues in 1984. Had I not read Soames’s
papers, I might never have gotten interested in the problem.
I would like to thank Richard Holton, Michaelis Michaels, and Scott Soames for transcribing the
original lecture and for helpful comments. My thanks to Harold Teichman and especially to
Romina Padró for their help in producing the present version. This paper has been completed
with support from the Saul Kripke Center at The City University of New York, Graduate Center.
The fact that this is a transcript of a paper delivered orally (with a handout), rather than written,
accounts for a certain amount of conversational tone.
In a later seminar given at Princeton in the fall of 1994, I gave a more elaborate presentation of
the material in which some particular cases discussed were modiﬁed. However, I do not incorporate
these modiﬁcations in the present text, which is basically correct. The basic main points about
anaphora, active and passive context, and the like, were unaffected by any modiﬁcations.
The contents of this paper and/or its basic ideas have been in professional circulation for some
time. Nevertheless, I felt (and have been urged) that it ought ﬁnally to see formal print.
Some cases where the reference carried by a presuppositional word is to an unspoken element of
the active context (or called into the active context from the passive context) might best be thought
of as deixis rather than anaphora. Because of the title of the symposium, and the relation between
deixis and anaphora, I have used the term anaphora throughout, and do not worry about the
question.

352

Presupposition and Anaphora

that the usual literature on the projection problem for presupposition ignores an
anaphoric element that ought to have been taken into account. When this
element is put in, there is a considerable change in the formulation of the
problem.
Since I do not consider myself an expert in this area, I will begin by giving a
brief review of the portion of the literature that I know. Soames (1982:488) gives
a fairly standard list of different kinds of presupposition.
(1) Bill regrets lying to his parents.
P: Bill has lied to his parents.
(2) Ivan has stopped beating his wife.
P: Ivan has beaten his wife.
(3) Andy met with the PLO again today.
P: Andy met with the PLO before.
(4) It was in August that we left Connecticut.
P: We left Connecticut.
(5) What John destroyed was his typewriter.
P: John destroyed something.
(6) Billy is guilty, too.1
P: Someone other than Billy is guilty.
(7) All of John’s children are asleep.
P: John has children.
(8) The king of France is in hiding.
P: There is a king of France.

(Factive)
(Aspectual)
(Iterative)
(Cleft)
(Pseudocleft)
(Too)
(Certain quantiﬁers)
(Referential)

Frege, who was perhaps the ﬁrst philosopher to introduce the notion of
presupposition, described it in such a way that the last of these examples is
the paradigmatic case. It is not clear whether he thought that presuppositions
went beyond this sort of example. His theory was that the presupposition fails
precisely when there is a truth-value gap. For him, all such failure came from
failure of reference. This might be made to extend to some of the other cases as
well. Strawson, rather famously, reintroduced this notion into the philosophical
literature (see Strawson 1950, 1952). In Strawson’s case, there are two strains.
One is a Fregean strain, but the more important strain is that nothing
has been said—that is, no statement has been made—when the presupposition
fails.2

1

Throughout this paper, I have italicized the focus element in the too cases.
Evans (1982:12) has argued with some limited success that there is a Strawsonian strain in
Frege’s later manuscripts, though it is not in “Über Sinn und Bedeutung” (Frege 1892) to my
knowledge.
2

Presupposition and Anaphora

353

In addition to the Fregean and Strawsonian conceptions of presupposition,
there is the broader characterization of the presuppositions of a speaker, or of the
participants in a conversation, introduced by Stalnaker (1973, 1974) and discussed by Lewis (1979). The idea, roughly speaking, is that you shouldn’t make
an utterance involving a presupposition unless it is in the background assumptions of the participants in the conversation that the presupposition holds.
Stalnaker and Lewis recognize that there are cases in which this rule seems to
be violated. They recognize that you can introduce a presupposition into the
conversation even though it was not a prior background assumption, without
having to state the introduced presupposition explicitly. For example, you can
say that you are going to meet your sister, and the presupposition that you have a
sister is thereby introduced (Stalnaker calls this “accommodation”). It is argued
that in such cases, conversational participants recognize that the existing conversational context does not satisfy the presuppositional requirements of the utterance, but accommodate the speaker by adding the required information to bring
the context into harmony with the presuppositional rule. It is suggested that
speakers exploit this process when they think the required information will be
agreed upon as uncontroversial by all hands, or something like that.3
Another feature of presupposition that people have often noticed is that,
unlike the asserted contents of sentences, presuppositions survive when sentences
are embedded under negation, or as the antecedents of conditionals. The
simplest hypothesis about the projection problem is the cumulative one: if you
have a presupposition to a clause, it is also a presupposition to the whole complex
sentence.4 Although this is similar to certain aspects of Frege’s theory, even he
did not hold the cumulative hypothesis in its most general form. What would
follow from his theory is that truth functions5 have the cumulative property, but
3
I haven’t thought that this formulation as it is stated in print always works. A problem for me is
that a French monarchist might belligerently say to a republican, “No matter what you Republicans
say, I met the king of France last week.” Here it isn’t taken to be uncontroversial or expected to be
uncontroversial that there is a king of France. There are various things that can be said about such a
case; I don’t know if any are quite satisfactory. But I’m going to assume the general satisfactoriness
of this roughly sketched picture. It is pretty good; possibly it can be stretched to cover a case like this.
That’s enough for the present discussion.
Nevertheless, I think Richmond Thomason had a point when he said in the discussion of this
paper at the 1990 symposium that Stalnaker states conditions for the conversational notion of
presupposition that, even according to him, hold except insofar as they don’t. The dangers are
already present in the sister case mentioned by Stalnaker himself; they are more obvious in the
monarchist-republican exchange just given. Nothing in the present discussion really depends on
Stalnaker’s characterization of presupposition, which was mentioned because of its prominence in
Soames (1982). In fact, it is not so crucial even to Soames’s paper.
4
The cumulative hypothesis was introduced to the linguistic literature by Langendoen and Savin
(1971).
5
Karttunen and Peters (1979) seem willing to accept the truth functions as formalizations of
and , or, not (at least in its primary use), and if . . . then in English. Not too much hangs on the issue
as far as the present discussion is concerned. Probably it could be modiﬁed to ﬁt another account of
some or all of these particles in English.

354

Presupposition and Anaphora

indirect discourse, propositional attitudes, and so on, do not. The latter are what
are called plugs by Karttunen and Peters (1979): sentences that do not inherit the
presuppositions of their clauses.6 However, even for the truth functions, Russell
(1905) gave an example for the conditional that he thought refuted Frege’s
presupposition theory. He pointed out that in the case of a conditional sentence
where the presupposition of the consequent is asserted in the antecedent, the
participants need not assume that the presupposition is true.7 Russell’s point is
reﬂected in the algorithm proposed by Karttunen and Peters for computing the
presupposition of both a conditional sentence If A then B and a conjunction
A and B.
(9) (Ap & (AÆ  Bp))
In this notation, Sa stands for the assertive content of a sentence S and Sp stands
for the presupposed content of S. So, according to Karttunen and Peters,
conditionals and conjunctions presuppose both the presupposition of A and
the claim that if the assertive content of A is true, then the presupposed content
of B is true. It follows that if the assertive content of the antecedent, plus perhaps
certain background assumptions, entails Bp, then any necessity to assume or
presuppose Bp disappears, or is ﬁltered out. This is the feature they wanted to
capture.
I don’t want to suggest that this account of the presuppositions of conditionals
and conjunctions is a perfect theory. In fact, I don’t know of any account that is
free from descriptive problems or apparent counterexamples.8 For present purposes, however, the Karttunen and Peters algorithm will do. Similar remarks
apply to the algorithm for disjunction proposed by Karttunen and Peters, and
modiﬁed by Soames (1979) in the last clause.
(10) ( AÆ  Bp) & ( BÆ  Ap) & (Ap ∨ Bp)
Although Soames has shown that there are cases in which even this deﬁnitely
doesn’t work, it will be good enough for the moment. Only two examples, (49)
and (50), not crucial to the main discussion, involve disjunction. I do not discuss

6
This is not to say that Frege’s theory necessarily makes the correct predictions about what the
plugs should be. Frege also does not discuss the related Russellian question of scope ambiguities.
[One could now consult my own discussion of this topic in Kripke 2005, included here as
Chapter 8.]
7
Russell’s example is this:
The King in “The Tempest” might say, “If Ferdinand is not drowned, Ferdinand is my only
son.” . . . But the above statement would nevertheless have remained true if Ferdinand had been in
fact drowned. (Russell 1905:484)
Russell also gives a set-theoretic example involving a universally quantiﬁed conditional. (His
example strikes me as a bit artiﬁcial, but reasonable mathematical examples can be given.) [Once
again, one could now consult my own discussion of this topic in Chapter 8, pp. 237–38.]
8
I am familiar with only a small subset of the proposals in the literature covering such cases.

Presupposition and Anaphora

355

cases involving believes that, wants that, and the like, nor how my approach might
affect them.
An assumption underlying this whole project, as standardly conceived, is that
we assign presuppositions to separate clauses, independently of the environments
in which they occur, and then compute the presupposition of the whole. This is
very natural, for example, from Frege’s formulation of the problem, but it
survives outside the Fregean background as well. Certainly it is recognized that
if there is explicit pronominal anaphora or cross-reference in any of the clauses,
then the clauses will have to be interpreted in the light of this. More importantly,
if quantiﬁers are interacting with presuppositions, this simple picture clearly
doesn’t hold (Heim 1983). But in the absence of such elements, this seems to be
the picture that is presented in the literature.
The argument of this paper is that an important anaphoric element that is
carried by the presuppositional terms themselves is left out of the standard
picture. As a result, the appropriate presuppositions are misdescribed, for
example, in the list quoted from Soames 1982 above.9 I feel in retrospect that
this list doesn’t get our intuitions about the relevant presuppositions as we
would naturally think of them, and is even highly counterintuitive in many
cases. Although I will try to establish this point, I will not present an explicit
countertheory, partly because of the small amount of time I have had to devote
to this problem, and partly because of a feeling that some people will be more
expert in relevant considerations than I am at the moment (without having read
up in particular on a lot of the literature on standard anaphora in syntax).10
But I will sketch considerations relevant to the development of a theory of
presuppositional anaphora, and I will say some things about the form such a
theory should take.
Consider the following relatively complex case (more blatant and simpler
counterexamples to the usual picture will follow soon):
(11) If Herb comes to the party, the boss will come, too.
9
The only place I know of where this approach is questioned is the ﬁnal section of Soames
(1989). That section contains a footnote reporting a conversation with me about some of the
material in this paper. Also, some of the text of the relevant section appears to be inﬂuenced by my
approach, as I reported it to him.
[Since I gave this paper, I saw a circulated draft of Heim (1992) (not the ﬁnal version). Though
recognizing that the existential (nonanaphoric) accounts of presuppositions cited at the beginning of
this paper from Soames (1982) have been dominant, Heim cites Karttunen (1974:184) as
mentioning an analysis of too, said to be based on Green (1968), similar to that proposed here.
Indeed, Karttunen (incidentally) does appear to give such an analysis, but seems to follow it
immediately with the purely existential analysis that it is my main point to criticize, and
moreover maintains the existential analysis of too in Karttunen and Peters (1979) (see, e.g., page
35). I couldn’t ﬁnd the point in Green (1968), though I may have missed something. The points
made about inclusions and converse inclusions are indeed illustrated there. See, for example,
Green’s sentences (12) and (19), pages 24–25.]
10
There is probably material for the syntactician here as well as for the semanticist.

356

Presupposition and Anaphora

According to the usual view, the presupposition of the consequent is that
someone other than the boss will come to the party.11 In my own view, the
presupposition of the consequent is that Herb is not the boss. The important
thing to note here is that my own view gives a presupposition to the consequent
that cannot be understood in isolation from the antecedent.
It seems to me incontestable that we would normally think that this is what is
presupposed. However, there is an appropriate pragmatic explanation of why we
would think this, which is related to an explanation that Karttunen and Peters
have already given. Recall the Karttunen and Peters algorithm for the presupposition of conditionals.
(9) (Ap & (AÆ  Bp))
How can the standard algorithm explain the presuppositions here? Given the
Karttunen and Peters theory, the presupposition of the consequent in (11) is
“someone other than the boss will come” and the presupposition of the entire
conditional is “if Herb comes, someone other than the boss will come.” Then one
can try a “conversational implicature” explanation in the style of Grice (see Grice
1961, 1975, 1989) for any feeling that at least the entire conditional presupposes
that Herb is not the boss. For how would someone know the conditional “if
Herb comes to the party, someone other than the boss will come”? A natural
explanation would be that the speaker takes for granted that Herb is not the boss.
This might be a reasonable explanation for the “illusion” of the stronger presupposition that Herb is not the boss.
However, this explanation would not work for cases like (12).
(12) If Herb and his wife both come to the party, the boss will come, too.
The presupposition of the consequent according to the standard account is that
someone other than the boss will come to the party. But on my view the
presupposition of the consequent is that neither Herb nor his wife is the boss.
Notice that on the standard view the presupposition of the whole conditional is
(13) If Herb and his wife both come to the party, then there exists an x not equal
to the boss such that x comes to the party.
This conditional is trivial, and we need no extra information to assume it other
than that Herb and his wife are two people. Therefore, no feeling of its being
either implied or presupposed that neither Herb nor his wife is the boss can be

11
The inheritance condition for the conditional as a whole was given by Karttunen and Peters
(1979) as a primitive semantic notion (involving conventional implicature). Stalnaker (1974), and
following him Soames (1982), tried to give a pragmatic explanation of the inheritance conditions
that is sensitive to context. Heim (1983) offers a more semantical account that also involves changes
in the context associated with the clauses and predicts the inherited presuppositions in an
algorithmic way.

Presupposition and Anaphora

357

accounted for by a theory that assigns (13) as the presupposition of (12).12 The
simple suggestion is that in general, if I say so-and-so and so-and-so are coming,
and he’s coming too, the presupposition is that “he” is an extra person. This
presupposition is not in addition to, but actually replaces, the existential presupposition given by the usual account.13 How to extend this to other cases is
complicated but will emerge from later examples.
The general idea is that the presupposition arises from the anaphoric requirement that when one says too, one refers to some parallel information that is either
in another clause (that’s the interesting case for the projection problem) or in the
context. (Actually, in what I will later call the “active context” rather than the
“passive context.” One might wish to subsume the clause case under the context
case in some form of theory, but I won’t commit myself either way here.) When
the focused element is a singular term, it is presupposed to be noncoreferential
with the other corresponding elements in the parallel clauses or other bits of
information in the (active) context. Since what we have is a species of anaphora,
what we need is a theory, parallel to that for pronominal anaphora, of what types
of anaphora are permitted, and of how these new types of presuppositional
anaphora are related to other, more familiar types of anaphora, including
ordinary anaphoric pronouns.
The following example is simpler and very striking:
(14) Sam is having dinner in New York tonight, too.
Imagine (14) as uttered out of the blue; no context is being presupposed in which
we are concerned with anyone else having dinner in New York.14 On the usual

12
This could even be true of (11) if we assume a background in which no one comes to the party
unless accompanied by his or her spouse.
Even more so, it would probably be part of the background assumptions that many people are
expected to be coming to the party. It would hardly be a party otherwise. So of course someone other
than the boss is coming. Then the case would be closer to (14) below.
13
Since I think that even the consequent of (11) presupposes that Herb is not the boss, and of
(12) that neither Herb nor his wife is the boss, if one otherwise accepts the Karttunen and Peters
algorithm, the presupposition of (11) becomes “if Herb comes to the party, then Herb is not the
boss,” read as a material conditional, and analogously for (12). Soames (1979) and Gazdar (1979)
see a problem with cases where the consequent of a conditional seems to be presupposed. However,
one could give a Gricean reply as proposed by Karttunen and Peters and argue that since there is
already a unique boss (of the company or group), the only grounds for asserting the material
conditional can be truth-functional knowledge of the consequent. There is no connection between
Herb’s coming to the party and whether or not he is the boss. See Soames (1982) for a discussion of
the contrast between the earlier Soames and Gazdar approaches and the Karttunen and Peters
approach. For my own reason for thinking that the consequent of the conditional, rather than the
conditional as a whole, presupposes that Herb is not the boss, and that pragmatic Gricean reasons
must be used to explain the intuition attaching the same presupposition to the entire conditional
(assuming the Karttunen and Peters algorithm), see my discussion of (20) further on.
14
There is a related discussion of this example in the last section of Soames (1989). Very likely,
as I said in footnote 9, he was inﬂuenced by the discussion and examples he ascribes to me in a
footnote.

358

Presupposition and Anaphora

view, the presupposition of (14) is that someone other than Sam is having dinner
in New York tonight. But this is wrong. Since a sentence is appropriate as long as
its presuppositions are fulﬁlled, the usual view predicts that (14) is virtually
invariably appropriate without any special context. Surely many people are
having dinner in New York on a given night. But, contrary to the usual
prediction, it is obvious that the too here is particularly bizarre. The hearer will
say, “‘Too’? What do you mean, ‘too’? What person or persons do you have in
mind?”
Example (15) is similar.
(15) Priscilla is eating supper, again.
On the usual view, the presupposition is that Priscilla has eaten supper before.
Since if she is a grown woman this can easily be assumed, an utterance of (15)
should invariably be perfectly appropriate. But in the absence of any special
background, the natural reaction to such an utterance is “What do you mean,
‘again’? Maybe she had supper an hour ago, also? Are you suggesting that she is
bulimic? Or is she on a diet where she is supposed to skip supper and she has
broken it recently and now has broken it again? What is going on here?” It is
obvious that the usual prediction is not correct.
To take care of examples like (14) and (15), I propose a distinction between
two types of context.15 Let us call material that has been explicitly mentioned in
the conversation, or is on people’s minds and is known to be on people’s minds,
or is highly salient in some way, the salient or active context. The active context
could include a set of questions or topics as well as assertions. The active context
might be a complex sort of entity, but it will be the kind of thing that makes uses
of again and too appropriate. There is also a passive context, which consists of
general background information available to the speakers that is not taken as
relevant or on their minds. Too or again should refer to parallel elements, that is,
to something parallel to Priscilla’s eating supper, or Sam’s having dinner in New
York, or the boss’s coming to the party. These parallel elements must come from
the active context or from other clauses in the assertion in question. They cannot
come merely from the passive context: that they are merely very well known is
not sufﬁcient.16
Something is introduced into the active context merely by mentioning it.
Consider this example:

15
This can be seen as relevant to a couple of considerations mentioned in the last section of
Soames 1989.
16
Notice, as opposed to the impression given by Soames (1989), that this is not merely a matter
of whether we know various particular people who are having dinner in New York or that Priscilla
has had supper at various particular times. We may very well know many particular people who are
having dinner in New York, or particular times when Priscilla has had supper before, that are not
relevant here.

Presupposition and Anaphora

359

(16) Tonight many other people are having dinner in New York, and Sam is
having dinner there, too.
This is a pretty strange performance still. Why is the speaker putting things that
way? But once the speaker has done so—for example, in reply to a worried
mother who is saying, “Should Sam really be going out to New York in
the evening? Isn’t that a dangerous place?”—the too is entirely appropriate.17
The content of the sentence obtained by dropping too from (16) is the same
as the content of (17).
(17) Like many others, Sam is having dinner in New York tonight.
Except for those people whose information state is very poor, for whom a very
broad range of possible worlds are not excluded, (17) simply conveys the same
information as (18), since it is well known that many people are having dinner in
New York tonight.
(18) Sam is having dinner in New York tonight.
But as far as the appropriateness of adding too is concerned, (17) is not equivalent
to (18). If someone just says (14),
(14) Sam is having dinner in New York tonight, too,
without any suitable background, then the too is inappropriate and should not be
said, even to the worried mother. However, (19) is acceptable.
(19) Like many others, Sam is having dinner in New York tonight, too.
The presupposition (tautologous here) is that Sam is not one of the many others.
On the other hand, if the appropriate material is, for whatever reason, in the
active context, then (14) becomes all right. The active context need not consist of
a clause or even an immediately preceding discourse element. Examples have
already been suggested. The participants in the conversation may actively have in
mind particular people who are having dinner in New York. Similarly, as in some
of the suggestions about Priscilla mentioned in the discussion, (15) can be
appropriate if people have such suggestions in mind.
So the idea is that there is a back-reference to parallel information either in the
active context or in other clauses or discourse elements. Something gets into the
active context if it has been explicitly mentioned or if it is very much in mind.
The passive context, however, is sufﬁcient for the nonidentities; people do not
have to be desperately thinking or saying that Herb is not the boss as long as they

17
Although (16) is a conjunction, I could equally well have given two separate sentences and still
gotten the information that many people are having dinner in New York into the active context.
Nevertheless, too could be regarded as anaphoric in these cases. An explicit mention is a special way
of bringing something into the active context.

360

Presupposition and Anaphora

are aware of this. The required presupposition of nonidentity can be satisﬁed by
either the active or the passive context. Heim (1983), I believe, rolls the whole
context into one grand proposition that is a set of possible worlds. On my
account, it seems likely that not only will there have to be two contexts, the
active and the passive, but also the nature of the active context, at least, will have
to be more complicated than simply a set of worlds. First, the active context will
be a set containing propositions, which might better be thought of as structured.
Moreover, the set might be divided into questions and topics as well as assertions
and so on. Alternatively, we might even just have interpreted sentences instead of
propositions in the context. (Since they are already there, we may as well use
them.) None of these speculations are crucial. I certainly do not want the paper to
depend on any particular formal semantics.
At this point, an important question arises. In discussing (11), I identiﬁed the
presupposition that Herb is not the boss. Should this presupposition be attached
to the consequent clause—that is, to the clause that contains the presuppositional
element too—or should it be attached to the whole conditional, as we would
intuitively think in many of these cases? If we attach it merely to the consequent
clause, then we have to invoke the type of explanation given by Karttunen and
Peters for why it is that we intuitively think something stronger. I do, indeed,
favor attaching it to the consequent clause. The need for this is seen from
example (20).
(20) If Nancy does not win the contest and the winner comes to our party,
Nancy will come, too.
The presupposition according to my proposal is that Nancy will not be the
winner. According to Karttunen and Peters, if the presupposition is attached to
the consequent, it is “ﬁltered out” and need not be presupposed by the speaker
who utters the entire conditional. This result seems to me to be intuitively
correct. The entire conditional in no way presupposes that Nancy will not win.
Since this presupposition is explicitly stated in the antecedent, it need not be
presupposed by the speaker who utters the entire conditional. Thus, (20) is
acceptable without any presupposition in advance that Nancy will not be the
winner, and indeed is explicitly compatible with the idea that Nancy may
well win.
The corresponding case for again is introduced by example (21).
(21) If Kasparov defeats Karpov in the game in Tokyo, probably he will defeat
him again in the game in Berlin.
On the conventional account, the presupposition attached to the consequent is
that Kasparov has previously defeated Karpov. This may in fact be well known.
By contrast, I take the presupposition normally to be that the game in Berlin will
be played after the game in Tokyo. Once more, that the presupposition should

Presupposition and Anaphora

361

be attached to the consequent rather than to the entire conditional should be
argued for on the basis of the parallel example.
(22) If the game in Tokyo precedes the game in Berlin and Kasparov defeats
Karpov in Tokyo, probably he will defeat him again in the game in Berlin.
As before, (22) need not presuppose (in the entire conditional) that the game in
Tokyo will precede the game in Berlin, since this is explicitly stated in the
antecedent and is “ﬁltered out” in the entire conditional.
Now let us consider the case of stop (perhaps the most famous one).
(23) If Sam watches the opera, he will stop watching it when the Redskins game
comes on.
According to my view, a presupposition attached to stop is that the Redskins
game comes on during the opera, but not at the very beginning of it. The
traditional presupposition in the consequent, that Sam has watched the opera
before, is also, of course, valid, but in (23) it is ﬁltered out in the entire sentence
by being explicitly included in the antecedent. However, it can only be ﬁltered
out because of the presupposition that the Redskins game begins after the opera
does (and in fact, during the opera, though this is not needed for the ﬁltering).
However, there does appear to be a signiﬁcant difference between the stop case,
on the one hand, and the again and too cases, on the other. Whereas again and too
have obligatory anaphora to parallel statements in the active context or in other
clauses, that is not always true for stop. Consider:
(24) Jill has stopped smoking.
(24) is something that can be said even if there is no particular concern about Jill
smoking, so long as her smoking is well known to the conversational participants.
The assumption is not required to be in the active context or in other clauses.
Thus, in this respect stop contrasts with what I have said regarding too and again.
In the case where (24) is uttered out of the blue, as just envisaged, normally the
presupposition would not merely be that Jill has smoked before; it would also be
that she smoked until relatively recently. There may be other cases where the
presupposition is weaker, but I do not intend to go into detail here.18 But in
some cases in which there is another clause or an element of the active context
that gives a time or date, as in (23), there is an intended anaphoric reference to
that clause or element. In such a case, the presupposition is that the stopping
takes place after that time, or after a continuous period starting with that time, or
after a period ending when the stopping occurs and the thing mentioned in the
clause containing the anaphoric element takes place.

18

Since I gave the original paper, some such cases have been suggested to me by Romina Padró.

362

Presupposition and Anaphora

Thus, in many cases the presupposition carried by stop refers to a time or time
period. In the case of (24) uttered out of the blue, the reference is simply to the
time of utterance, whereas in other cases such as (23), the reference is carried by
other clauses or elements of the passive context. The usual account of the
presupposition, perhaps inﬂuenced by the stock interrogative example with
which this paper begins (and where the weak presupposition may indeed be all
that is carried by stop), has been too inﬂuential and it is not the general case.19
Consider a case that is unlike stop.
(25) It was John who solved the projection problem.
Here there is a compulsory reference, I think, to another clause or to the active
context. Or at least, usually there is; sometimes there is some accommodation (in
Stalnaker’s sense) that occurs when the sentence is introduced.
Soames (1989:605) mentions something relevant to this. Suppose someone
says, out of the blue, “It was Mary who broke the typewriter,” where there is no
background knowledge that the typewriter was broken. The presupposition is
that someone broke the typewriter (very soon I will argue that this account of the
presupposition is too weak; let us accept it for the moment). Accommodation
might take place; but there is, Soames suggests, something odd about this—there
is a kind of pretense that a topic of conversation prior to the remark was that of
determining who broke the typewriter. I agree with that.
In some contexts, however, it is not so bad. It is a fairly familiar rhetorical
trope in academic writing, and so should be very familiar to us (that is, to
academics). I have frequently seen sentences like “It was Mary Smith who should
be given the credit for ﬁrst observing that _____,” where the information that
_____ is really supposed to be unknown to the reader. The writer is trying to give
the information that _____ and at the same time give Mary Smith the credit. But
the main thing is to convey the information that _____. The writer might just as
well have said, “That _____ is true is an important observation. Mary Smith gets
the credit for noting it ﬁrst,” using straight assertions. (Possibly the trope is most
common when the supposed fact Smith discovered is reasonably well known, but
not necessarily to the reader.)
However, something is really very bad, in fact quite terrible, about the usual
picture of what is presupposed. It is illustrated by this example:
(26) If John Smith walked on the beach last night, then it was Betty Smith who
walked on the beach last night.
The usual presupposition for the consequent is this:
(27) Someone walked on the beach last night.
19
Richard Holton and Michaelis Michael found my original discussion of stop unclear in certain
respects. I hope my revisions answer their queries about my intent.

Presupposition and Anaphora

363

According to the Karttunen and Peters ﬁltering rule, the presupposition for the
whole conditional is (28).
(28) If John Smith walked on the beach last night, then someone walked on the
beach last night.
Since (28) is incontestably true, (26) should always be okay. But (26) is obviously
very bizarre. Similarly with the following cases:
(29) a. If Sally opposed his tenure, it was Susan who opposed it.
b. Sally opposed his tenure, and it was Susan who opposed it.
These are also pretty bizarre. Like (26), (29a) and (29b) should be perfectly
acceptable on the usual account, but out of the blue they are very bizarre indeed.
The Karttunen and Peters ﬁltering rule, taken with the usual account of the
presupposition carried by clefts, gives as the presupposition carried by both (29a)
and (29b) the conditional “if Sally opposed his tenure, someone opposed it,”
which is trivially true. So nothing should be wrong with (29a) and (29b).
In fact, (29b) especially provokes the reaction, “Wait a minute! You said it was
Sally who opposed his tenure! Why do you continue by saying it was Susan?” You
could try to modify the standard proposal in light of these examples by saying
that the real presupposition involves a uniqueness condition. According to this
proposal, the real presupposition of (26) is that someone uniquely walked on the
beach last night, and of (29a–b) that someone uniquely opposed tenure. That
would account for the bizarreness of the two statements. The presupposition of
(26) would then be that if John Smith walked on the beach last night, then
someone uniquely walked on the beach last night, directly contradicting the
claim of the consequent. Similarly for (29a–b). But this proposal does not work
because such a uniqueness presupposition does not always hold, as the usual
proposal correctly asserts. For example, in the tenure case the statement “If
anyone opposed his tenure, I bet it was Sally and Susan who did so” is ﬁne,
contrary to any uniqueness presupposition in the cleft.
What seems to me to be going on is this: a cleft requires an explicit reference to
the active context or to another clause (sometimes the presupposition can be
introduced into the active context by a rhetorical trope with accommodation, as
mentioned above). The active context or another clause does indeed entail that
someone has some property P or did something. It must also suggest a question,
“Who has the property?” or “Who did it?” The answer given in the cleft, as is
suggested by its surface form It was so and so who did it, is supposed to be a
complete answer to the relevant question, “Who did it?”
On this account, (26) is normally bizarre because, if the antecedent is assumed,
then the consequent does not give a complete answer to the relevant question,
“Who walked on the beach last night?” Similarly, (29a) and (29b) are bizarre. For
example, (29b) suggests that a complete answer to the question “Who opposed

364

Presupposition and Anaphora

his tenure?” is given by it was Susan who opposed it, even though the previous
clause says that Sally opposed the tenure.
However, sometimes the complete answer will not be a complete list of all the
satisﬁers of the condition. The list can be restricted by a relevant condition in the
active context. For example, someone may have asked, “Which woman walked
on the beach last night?” Someone might suggest that John Smith is always
accompanied by his wife, and that there is reason to suppose that he walked on
the beach last night. In such a situation, (26) is unobjectionable, though in a
normal context it would be bizarre.
In all these cases, I am assuming the nonidentity of the people referred to—as,
for example, John Smith and Betty Smith, Sally and Susan, and so on. This is a
cause of the bizarreness of the examples. When we have two ways of referring to
the same person, then a similar cleft construction can be perfectly appropriate.
I could use the stock case of Cicero and Tully, but let me try some other
examples.
(30) If Viscount Amberley is giving the lecture, it is Bertrand Russell who is
giving the lecture.
In (30), the question in the active context might be “Who is giving the lecture?,”
as before, but it could also be “Who is Viscount Amberley?” or “Should I go to
this lecture which is being given by one Viscount Amberley? Who is that?”
Someone might answer, “Yes, you should go,” and continue with (30).20
Similarly, in appropriate contexts we could have these sentences:
(31) If the author of “On Denoting” is giving the lecture, it is Bertrand Russell
who is giving the lecture.
(32) If Bertrand Russell is giving the lecture, it is the author of “On Denoting”
who is giving the lecture.21
It should be clear without running through the examples again that the case of
pseudoclefts is like that of clefts.
Next consider (33).
(33) If Kasparov doesn’t defeat Karpov in the next game, probably he won’t
defeat him in the Berlin game, either.
Either behaves like too except that it goes with a negative element. In (33), the
presupposition is that the Berlin game is not the next game. Similarly:
20
Russell’s father was Viscount Amberley (as was his grandfather). Russell eventually inherited
the title himself (and later inherited the title “Earl Russell”). One might imagine (30) uttered at a
time when Russell had inherited the Amberley title but not yet the other one. (Actually, Bertrand
Russell’s father used “Amberley” as a surname and made use of the title “Viscount Amberley,” but
I don’t know of any instance where Russell himself did—say, when giving a lecture. In that sense,
the example is probably somewhat ﬁctive.)
21
Examples (30)–(32) were added in response to a question by Scott Soames.

Presupposition and Anaphora

365

(34) Sam is not having dinner in New York tonight, either.
The presupposition is not merely that someone other than Sam is not having
dinner in New York tonight, which as in (14) is trivial. Rather, something in the
active context must mention some particular person, persons, class of people, or
the like, who are not having dinner in New York tonight.
An example similar to (33) is (35).
(35) If Karpov checkmates Kasparov in the next game, probably the challenger
will defeat the champion in the Berlin game, too.
In such cases, the focused element is supposed to be different from the
corresponding element in the anaphoric parallel. Thus, the ﬁrst presupposition
of the conditional is that the next game is not the game in Berlin. But here some
identities and one inclusion are presupposed that have been left tacit in previous
examples because they have been exhibited by mere repetition of the terms, or by
pronouns. Here they became explicit. The presuppositions are that Kasparov is
the champion, that Karpov is the challenger, and that anyone who checkmates an
opponent defeats him or her (the last case is an inclusion).22 So, in addition to
presupposed nonidentities, there are also presupposed identities and inclusions.
These are needed to support the back-reference to parallel information and can
come from either the passive or the active context. They can also be ﬁltered out
by appropriate information in other clauses. Similar remarks apply to again, as
illustrated by (36).
(36) If Kasparov checkmates Karpov in the next game, probably the champion
will defeat the challenger in the Berlin game, again.
The presuppositions are as follows:
The next game will be before the one to be held in Berlin.
Kasparov is the champion.
Karpov is the challenger.
Anyone who checkmates a player defeats him or her.

Example (37) illustrates another point about this.
(37) The Republicans supported the bill, and Senator Blank supported it, too.

22
The examples about chess have been modiﬁed in the light of comments by Richard Holton
and Michaelis Michael. One of their remarks about checkmates was politely understated; they said,
“Resignations are common.” In fact, resignations are the norm in tournaments; playing to explicit
checkmate is very rare. Strictly, nothing is wrong with (35) as now stated, but there is some sort of
implicature that games are played to checkmate, which is ﬁctive (perhaps there is also some
suggestion that this is a championship series, which in my impression is rarely played in a
number of different places). Rather than changing the example, I suggest that the reader just
assume the appropriate things, even if they are contrary to normal fact.

366

Presupposition and Anaphora

The relevant presupposition here is not a nonidentity between singular terms,
but a nonmembership statement: Senator Blank is not a Republican. In (37), all
the Republicans are supposed to have supported the bill, but this does not seem
to be necessary. This is illustrated by (38).
(38) A few Republicans supported the bill, and Senator Blank supported it, too.
Here again, the relevant presupposition is that Senator Blank is not a Republican.
Consider now the following pair of examples:
(39) The chemists are coming to the party, and Harry will come, too.
(40) If some other chemists come to the party, Harry will come, too.
The presupposition in (39) is that Harry is not one of the chemists. The
presupposition in (40) is directly opposite. Here, it is obviously presupposed
that Harry is a chemist, and the presupposition is carried by other rather than by
too. There is no more obvious case of presuppositional anaphora than the
presupposition carried by other. The presupposition attached to too, that Harry
is not one of the chemists other than Harry, is tautologous.
Clearly, a converse to (40) is also acceptable, as in (41).
(41) If Harry comes to the party, some other chemists will come, too.
The presupposition carried by other is the same, though the anaphoric order has
been reversed. Also, though it is natural to include too, the sentences (40) and
(41) would be acceptable without it.
So clear it is that other is a presuppositional element, that I cannot imagine that
it has not been mentioned in the linguistic literature on presupposition. However,
it doesn’t appear to have been, although I haven’t made a systematic search.23
Another case arises where other refers to the active context, or previous
discourse elements—for example, in (42).
(42) Smith will come. Some other chemists are coming, too.
Then the presupposition carried by other is clearly that Smith is a chemist.
A more complicated case is (43).
(43) Smith will come. Harry doesn’t like Smith. Nevertheless, if some other
chemists come, Harry will come, too.
Depending on what is known, the presupposition in (43) carried by other can be
either that Smith is a chemist or that Harry is (or possibly that both are). Suppose
23

At least, I had not seen other as an example in the linguistics literature on presupposition I had
read in 1990. In 1957, I had heard the example given by Max Black (in another context), in
comments, unpublished as far as I know, on a paper by Arthur Pap. However, I now ﬁnd that a later
version of Pap’s paper was posthumously published and mentions Black’s example. See Pap
(1960:50).

Presupposition and Anaphora

367

it is just the ﬁrst of these cases. Then in that case the presuppositions in the last
sentence of (43) are that Smith is a chemist, carried by other, while the presuppositions carried by too are that Harry is not Smith (perhaps vacuous because
it is implied by the preceding sentence) and that Harry is not one of the some
other chemists (i.e., other than Smith) hypothesized in the antecedent. In this
instance, Harry himself may or may not be a chemist. In (40), I had of course
supposed it uttered with no previous context, or at least that it is clear that other is
meant to refer to Harry, and to no one else.24
The other case can be used to illustrate what may be a source of the usual view
that too has the weak presupposition given in the list initially quoted from
Soames 1982. This can be seen by considering the following example:
(44) If someone other than Harry volunteers, Harry will volunteer, too.
What is the presupposition carried by too on the present model? It is that Harry is
not someone other than Harry. No doubt that is (very trivially) true. However,
one might be tempted to look at the situation in (44) in the following way: In
(44), the presupposition carried by too is ﬁltered out in the conditional; (44) itself
carries no presupposition. But this can only mean that the presupposition carried
by too in the consequent is entailed by the antecedent. This antecedent is that
someone other than Harry volunteers. Applying this argument uniformly, the
standard account of the presuppositions of too cited at the beginning of this paper
from Soames 1982 would appear to follow. However, although this argument
might seem very convincing, it does not in fact follow. The present model
handles it in a very different way. And I hope I have convinced the reader that
the standard account cannot be correct.25
There are certainly idiolects, dialects, and contexts in which other is not
explicitly said but nevertheless is meant. We were told in school not to leave
other implicit in this way—for example, not to say “I can lick any man in the
house” if we do not mean to include ourselves. Similarly, “In his country, Harry
24
Richard Holton and Michaelis Michael have inﬂuenced this discussion. The examples in (42)
and (43) respond to a query of theirs. Also, some material in the original talk was deleted, since their
queries made me unsure of the correct position.
25
Actually, the other case was unknown to the literature on presupposition of which I was aware
(see footnote 23), but similar ﬁltering arguments can be given for many of the other presuppositions
in Soames (1982), and they are fallacious in every case.
(i) If Priscilla has had supper before, then she is having supper again (now).
(ii) Priscilla has had supper before, and she is having supper again (now).
(iii) If someone voted against his tenure, it is Susan who voted against his tenure.
In every case, the antecedent states the presupposition in Soames (1982). Since it is ﬁltered out in
the conditionals (or conjunctions), it might seem to follow that the antecedent must state the
entire presupposition required. Such ﬁltering arguments, however, are never correct. In the tenure
case, the antecedent raises the question “If so, who voted against his tenure?,” which requires a
complete answer. In the supper case, vague and obvious (in the case of a normal grown woman) as
the antecedent or the ﬁrst conjunct may be, it gives enough context for again to have a proper
anaphora.

Presupposition and Anaphora

368

is better than any chemist around” might mean any other chemist around.
Perhaps there are even dialects in which some chemist can be used in this way.
The school insistence on any other can be ascribed to the devotion of schoolteachers to standard quantiﬁcation theory. In fact, if we follow the school
prohibition, our language is certainly more precise and unambiguous.
Another issue is illustrated by (45) and (46).26
(45) If the Nebraskans come to dinner, the Cornhuskers will stay for drinks, too.
(46) If the Poles defeat the Russians, (then) the Hungarians will defeat the
Russians, too.
Obviously, general terms and verbs can be involved as the focused elements and
also as the identity elements. This is illustrated in (45), where coming to dinner is
contrasted with staying for drinks. I have chosen a case where Nebraskans and
Cornhuskers are synonyms. Sentence (46) is an example from Soames
(1982:497). Here, Russians is repeated but according to me, the presupposition
is that the Poles and the Hungarians are different groups.
More important are the following examples:
(47) The people from the Midwest are coming to dinner, and the Nebraskans
will stay for drinks, too.
(48) All of John’s friends are from Nebraska, and Bill’s friends are all from the
Midwest, too.
Apart from the distinction between coming to dinner and staying for drinks, the
important presupposition in (47) is that Nebraskans are people from the Midwest. Nebraskans is the element ﬁguring in an identity or inclusion statement as a
result of anaphoric reference by too to parallel information. Of course, the
Nebraskans are not identical with the people in the Midwest; rather, they
are included in that set. So the sentence means that a bunch of people from
the Midwest are coming to dinner, and a certain subset of them—namely, the
Nebraskans—are going to stay for drinks. (There is also a supposition that the
group of people from the Midwest includes some Nebraskans—in other words,
that the subset is nonempty.) We know, of course, that if the people from the
Midwest are coming, they include the Nebraskans, because the Nebraskans are
from the Midwest. However, the inclusion can go the other way, as in (48). Here,
the element from the Midwest in the second conjunct, which carries the presupposition, has an extension that contains (rather than is contained in) the extension of the parallel element from Nebraska. In (48), then, we have the same
inclusion as in (47), but the order of the terms, and their association with the
presuppositional word, are reversed. An inclusion was already mentioned above

26

This issue partly was introduced above in the examples from chess.

Presupposition and Anaphora

369

in connection with the chess matches, where there was a presupposition that
checkmating implies defeating.
Barbara Partee mentioned a similar example,27 which people who worked on
the syntax of too were concerned with years ago. It was something like If John will
leave at ten o’clock, Jill will leave the party early, too. The presupposition in this
case is that those who leave at ten o’clock will leave the party early. The relation
here and in (48) is what I call a converse inclusion or superset.
There doesn’t always have to be a strict inclusion or converse inclusion.
Sometimes the sets that are presupposed to stand in the inclusion relation do
not come directly from the antecedent and the consequent, but from the
antecedent and the consequent together with other relevant background information.28 Semantically, though, the general picture ought to be clear. The
inclusions and converse inclusions are calculated from the requirement that
anaphoric elements like too, again, and so on, refer to parallel information. It
remains a project to characterize syntactically when we have inclusions and when
converse inclusions. In the examples above, antecedents with a predicate or group
characterization in subject position require inclusions in the consequents, while
predicates correspondingly require converse inclusions.29
With or there is yet another consideration. Take the following example:
(49) Either the Waring number is odd, or the Waring number plus six is even,
too.30
The predicate is odd can be regarded as parallel to is even. In this case, it is
presupposed that the Waring number, like all whole numbers, is even if it is not
odd. The focused element is the Waring number plus six, which is supposed to be
distinct from the Waring number, to justify the too.
27

In a previous paper in the symposium where the present paper was given.
In fact, the background information (probably in the active context) may be such that no
inclusions are required. Suppose we know that the people from New York have been coming to
events only when accompanied by their friends from California. Then one might say this:
(i) If the people from New York come, their friends from California will stay for drinks, too.
The presupposition is that if the people from New York come, their friends from California will
come. But this is plainly no inclusion—say, that the friends from California are from New York.
29
If the relevant antecedent is put in the form all As are Bs, and the latter is expressed as a
universally quantiﬁed conditional, then the subject will be logically in negative position, while the
consequent is in positive position. I tentatively conjecture that this has something to do with the
phenomenon and might lead to a generalization. (In quantiﬁcation theory, every atomic formula is
in positive position as a part of itself. In the antecedent of a conditional, positive and negative
positions are reversed as part of the whole conditional, while they are retained in the consequent.
Negation reverses positive and negative positions. Conjunction, disjunction, and universal and
existential quantiﬁcation leave positive and negative occurrences unreversed.)
30
The Waring number of a given number q is the least number such that every positive integer
can be represented as the sum of that many q th powers. (For example, every positive integer is the
sum of four squares.) Here I am supposing that the parameter q was mentioned in the previous
explicit context.
28

370

Presupposition and Anaphora

A parallel example is (50).
(50) Either the boss will not come to the party, or John will come, too.
I assume that this is acceptable, with the presupposition that John is not the boss.
Another issue concerns the rules for when this type of anaphora is allowed.
This parallels the corresponding questions for explicit pronominal and quantiﬁcational anaphora. Let me give a couple of examples.
(51) Perhaps Sam will come to the party. If there isn’t a board meeting, the boss
will come, too.
Obviously, the anaphora doesn’t have to be within the same sentence, but can
refer back to a previous sentence, at least if the sentence is at a reasonable distance
back in the discourse in question. In (51), the presupposition carried by too is
that Sam is not the boss. Examples for other were already given above, and the
general point has really already been made in this paper. In fact, the presupposition may be unspoken in the immediately preceding discourse, as long as it is in
the active context.
Look now at (52), based on examples from Soames (1982:525–526).
(52) a.
b.
c.
d.

If Haldeman is guilty, (then) Nixon is (guilty), too.
Nixon is guilty, too, if Haldeman is (guilty).
If Haldeman is guilty, too, (then) Nixon is (guilty).
Nixon is guilty, if Haldeman is (guilty), too.

In (52b), the parallel element occurs in the antecedent of the conditional, but
after the consequent clause has been uttered. For me, this is a problem of
anaphora that is analogous to one for pronominalization. Notice the obvious
analogy of this problem to the stock elementary pronominal examples.
(53) a.
b.
c.
d.

If John is free, he will come to the party.
He will come to the party, if John is free.
If he is free, John will come to the party.
John will come to the party, if he is free.

In (53a-d), he is analogous to too in (52a–d). Moreover, in each of (52a–d), too is
in a position in the conditional analogous to the position of he in each of
(53a–d), respectively. However, the restrictions on anaphora are different. In
(53), as is well known, he and John can be anaphorically related in all cases except
(53b). In that case, he must be anaphoric to some (fairly immediately) previously
mentioned person in the discourse, or must be deictic to some person in the
context of utterance, not anaphoric to John.
In (52a–d), the anaphoric rules are different. Here, it is (52c) rather than (52b)
where too cannot carry anaphora, in this case from Nixon to Haldeman. In (52c),

Presupposition and Anaphora

371

as in (53b), there must be an anaphora or deixis to some previously mentioned or
contextual ﬁgure (say, John Mitchell).31
An important question on the present account is this: what are the rules of
anaphora for presuppositions, analogously to those for pronominalization?
I discussed the case of too in part just now. The rules need not be the same for
all the presuppositional elements discussed in this paper.
Normally the presuppositions are the ones predicted by my theory. There may
well be cases that appear to be counterexamples and that may even require
weakening of the presuppositions predicted, but every such case I have considered seems to require a corresponding weakening of the standard view, too. Such
cases often seem to involve some special kind of trope and should not be seen as
typical.32

R E F E R EN C E S
Evans, Gareth. 1982. The varieties of reference. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Frege, Gottlob. 1892. Über Sinn und Bedeutung. Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik 100: 25–50. Trans. by Max Black, reprinted in The Frege reader, ed. by
Michael Beaney, 151–171. Oxford: Blackwell (1997).
Gazdar, Gerald. 1979. A solution to the projection problem. In Syntax and semantics
11: Presupposition, ed. by Choon-Kyu Oh and David Dineen, 57–89. New York:
Academic Press.
Green, Georgia. 1968. On too and either, and not just on too and either, either. In Papers
from the Fourth Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society, ed. by Bill J. Darden,
Charles-James N. Bailey, and Alice Davison, 22–39. Chicago: University of Chicago,
Chicago Linguistic Society.
Grice, H. P. 1961. The causal theory of perception. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,
Supplementary Volume 35:121–152. Reprinted in part in Grice 1989, 224–247.
——— 1975. Logic and conversation. In The logic of grammar, ed. by Donald Davidson
and Gilbert Harman, 64–75. Encino, CA: Dickenson.
——— 1989. Studies in the way of words. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
31
In the original version of this paper, I expressed some hesitation about the acceptability of
(52d), which was endorsed by Soames, and said that sometimes I hear it his way, but not always. At
the present time, I don’t see why I was hesitant. Also in the original version, there was some contrast
with Soames’s own discussion of the Haldeman-Nixon examples. Soames pointed out that without
too, the statements are all equivalent, since conditionals are equivalent whether the antecedent is
stated before or after the consequent. He then concluded that neither semantics nor Gricean
conversational implicature can be used to explain the exceptional status of (52c). My own
explanation is in terms of anaphoric rules for too analogous to the well-known rules for he in
(53). The interested reader can compare it with Soames’s discussion in (1982:525–526). At the end
of my original remarks on Soames’s discussion, I raised and did not answer the question of whether
the morals he draws disappear in the present analysis or can be supported by some examples other
than the one he gave.
32
See the opening footnote, where I mention a later seminar in which I indeed discussed such
cases.

372

Presupposition and Anaphora

Heim, Irene. 1983. On the projection problem for presuppositions. In Proceedings of the
Second West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics, ed. by Michael Barlow, Daniel
P. Flickinger, and Michael T. Wescoat, 114–125. Stanford, CA: Stanford University,
Stanford Linguistics Association.
——— 1992. Presupposition projection and the semantics of attitude verbs. Journal of
Semantics 9:183–221.
Karttunen, Lauri. 1974. Presupposition and linguistic context. Theoretical Linguistics
1:181–194.
———, and Stanley Peters. 1979. Conventional implicature. In Syntax and semantics 11:
Presupposition, ed. by Choon-Kyu Oh and David Dineen, 1–56. New York: Academic
Press.
Kripke, Saul. 2005. Russell’s notion of scope. Mind 114:1005–1037. Reprinted in this
volume as Chapter 8.
Langendoen, D. Terence, and Harris B. Savin. 1971. The projection problem for
presupposition. In Studies in linguistic semantics, ed. by Charles J. Fillmore and
D. Terence Langendoen, 55–60. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Lewis, David. 1979. Scorekeeping in a language game. Journal of Philosophical Logic
8:339–359. Reprinted in Philosophical papers, vol. 1, 233–249. Oxford: Oxford
University Press (1983).
Pap, Arthur. 1960. Types and meaninglessness. Mind 69:41–54.
Russell, Bertrand. 1905. On denoting. Mind 14:479–493.
Soames, Scott. 1979. A projection problem for speaker presupposition. Linguistic Inquiry
10:623–666.
——— 1982. How presuppositions are inherited: A solution to the projection problem.
Linguistic Inquiry 13:483–545.
——— 1989. Presupposition. In Handbook of philosophical logic, vol. 4, ed. by Dov
Gabbay and Franz Guenthner, 553–616. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Stalnaker, Robert. 1973. Presuppositions. Journal of Philosophical Logic 2:447–457.
——— 1974. Pragmatic presuppositions. In Semantics and philosophy, ed. by Milton
K. Munitz and Peter K. Unger, 197–214. New York: New York University Press.
Strawson, P. F. 1950. On referring. Mind 59:320–344.
——— 1952. Introduction to logical theory. London: Methuen.

13
A Puzzle about Time and Thought

Suppose at a given moment I think of a set S of instants of time (call these
instants “times”). For example, I may think of the set of all times when television
was unknown, the set of all times when interplanetary travel will be routine, and
the like. Notice that I need not know whether the set in question is empty or
not—I can think of it by a deﬁning property.
However, there is a problem: suppose I think, at a certain time t0, of the set S0,
where S0 contains all times t at which I’m thinking of a given set St of times, and
St does not include t itself. In conventional notation:
S0 ¼ ft jSt exists & t ˇSt g
Now, I am thinking of S0 at a certain time t0. Is t0 a member of S0 or not? The
reader can ﬁll in the resulting paradox for herself.
The problem, quite similar to Russell’s paradox, is clear. But in contrast to
Russell’s paradox, given that the predicate “I think of a set S (of times)” is
meaningful, there is nothing in it incompatible with conventional Zermelo set
theory, or stronger theories such as ZF. We are simply dealing with a subset of
the set of all times, deﬁned by the axiom of separation.1
I originally thought of this problem some time in the ’60s. Like many other of
my works, publication has been long delayed. However, I always thought that it
was an interesting problem that deserved to be published.
David Kaplan subsequently discovered another puzzle. His puzzle questions
the notions of possible world and of proposition (identiﬁed with sets of worlds)
as follows: if the set of all worlds has a cardinality Œ, the set of all propositions,
taken to be sets of worlds, must have cardinality 2Œ. Kaplan adds the additional
1
In the usual axiomatic formulation of Zermelo set theory, the axiom of separation is a schema
restricted to properties that are ﬁrst-order deﬁnable in the language of set theory. Zermelo himself
intended separation to say that any “deﬁnite property” can be used to deﬁne a subset of a given set.
Hence, if the language is extended so that the predicates involved in the argument are meaningful,
we can formalize the problem in a separation axiom for the extended language. (Incidentally, the set
of times could be identiﬁed with the real numbers—and these with one of their conventional set
theoretic deﬁnitions—reducing the need for one extra primitive, though this is not necessary.)

374

A Puzzle about Time and Thought

assumption that for each proposition p and ﬁxed time t0, there is a world in
which I entertain precisely that proposition p at t0. But this gives a one-to-one
mapping of the power set of a set into the set itself, contrary to Cantor’s wellknown theorem. (Note that if someone has a more ﬁne-grained notion of
proposition than a set of possible worlds, this only makes the problem worse.)
After a long period in which Kaplan was content to have the problem remain
in the oral tradition and be quoted by others—though he presented the puzzle at
meetings—he eventually published it.2 He has also formalized the argument and,
in particular, posited the following axiom:
ðAÞ ð8pÞ^ð8qÞðQ q « p ¼ qÞ
Here Q could be interpreted as saying that a certain person entertains a proposition at a certain time.3 Kaplan argues that even if one has one’s doubts about (A)
for some philosophical reason or other, surely modal logic should not exclude (A)
in its very formulation. It should be as neutral as possible in its metaphysical/
philosophical assumptions.4 Over the years, I have heard the view expressed that
the cardinality considerations in question give real trouble for the notion of
possible worlds, and for “possible world semantics.” Now that I am ﬁnally
writing about this issue, I ﬁnd that other papers have appeared on Kaplan’s
problem, and these may not be the last.5
In this note I wish to say that whatever the issue raised by Kaplan’s argument
may be, it is not really a cardinality problem for the notion of a set of all possible
worlds,6 nor need it depend on any assumption like (A). Of course, Kaplan’s
argument, as he presented it, appeared to involve all these things. However, my
own puzzle is given for the case of time. The analogy between time and modality,
tense logic and modal logic, and the role of times and possible worlds in each is

2
Lewis (1986:104) says he heard the paradox directly from Kaplan in 1975. I also heard it
directly from him; I don’t remember the date. It is published in Kaplan (1995). Kaplan says that he
has been thinking about the problem for about ﬁfteen years (41). I’m not sure exactly or even
approximately what date is implied by this remark, since I don’t know when Kaplan’s paper was
written as opposed to the publication date of the book (1995). However, Kaplan’s ﬁrst footnote says
that the “ﬁrst airing” of the argument was in the mid-’70s, which nearly enough agrees with David
Lewis’s date.
3
Syntactically, Kaplan takes Q to be an intensional propositional operator on a par with ^.
4
This particular question aside, I agree with Kaplan on the general principle he advocates. I say
this because other people have seemed to think that modal logic, at least as based on the possible
worlds idea, involves rich and controversial metaphysical assumptions and classical logic does not.
See explicitly Lewis, who, writing on the issue of Kaplan’s (A), says: “I am not a logician, and
metaphysical neutrality is not among my aims” (1986:105, note 2). It is clear that Lewis’s entire
book is in fact a work of metaphysics. But I think that the attitude that modal logic is a deeply
metaphysical subject is not conﬁned to Lewis.
5
See, e.g., Anderson (2009) and Lindström (2009).
6
I actually have my doubts, if we can speak of all possible worlds, that they do form a set, let
alone that one can speak of their power set. But not for the reasons being discussed here. See
“Concluding Unscientiﬁc Postscript,” below.

A Puzzle about Time and Thought

375

well known.7 Nor is there any cardinality problem; the cardinality of the set of all
instants of time is simply that of the continuum. Therefore, no one is likely to
question the meaningfulness of the notion of a set of all instants of time. Nor do
I make an assumption like Kaplan’s (A). The only assumption made is that I am
free to think of the set S0 at a chosen time t0. Not only does this assumption seem
quite unexceptionable, I have in fact fulﬁlled it; for in presenting the paradox,
I have in fact thought of this set at some particular time.8 When I told my own
paradox to David Lewis, he pointed out (correctly, in my opinion) that I could
also have formulated the problem in terms of sets of people rather than of
instants of time. Presumably he was thinking of egocentric logic, where people,
in analogy to instants or worlds, are the appropriate indices.9 For the same
reasons, it is also unexceptionable to assume that I am free to think at a
designated time about the property of being a world w where I am thinking at
that time about a set Sw of possible worlds w such that Sw does not have w as a
member. In fact, as before, have I not done this simply by stating the problem?
Even though when we discussed the matter Lewis seemed to agree with me
that my paradox showed that there was no special problem about possible worlds
that wouldn’t be a problem about times or people, there is no trace of our
discussion in his well-known book on possible worlds (1986:104ff ). There he
simply rejects Kaplan’s assumption (A) and argues in terms of Cantorian cardinalities that “most sets of worlds, in fact all but an inﬁnitesimal minority of them,
are not eligible contents of thought” (Lewis 1986:105). He adds that there is no
place for “neutrality” as an argument that assumption (A) cannot be excluded.
If we think of the problem simply in terms of cardinalities, then there does not
seem to be anything paradoxical about the result in terms of instants of times. It
would just happen to be the case that most sets of times are not objects of my
thought at any particular time. The result might seem worse if presented in terms
of possible worlds as Lewis does, since it might mean (nearly enough) that there
are propositions whose essence is such that no possible mind can entertain them.

7
But nothing in the argument depends on a commitment to tense logic, as opposed to a fourdimensional treatment that simply takes time as another index.
8
Perhaps there is also another vague analogy with Russell. Thinking of the paradox of the
greatest cardinal, he came to realize that the problem was that of the existence of a certain set, the set
of all sets not members of themselves, and thus, as Gödel remarked (1983:452), freed the problem
from unnecessary technicalities. However, in the present case, the order is in a way reversed. The
present writer, thinking of Russell’s paradox, discovered the paradox presented here directly,
without thinking at all about cardinality problems. In contrast, it was Kaplan’s formulation of his
own paradox that put the matter in terms of a cardinality paradox.
9
As I recall, when this conversation took place, Kaplan’s problem had been ﬂoating around in
the oral tradition. As I said (note 2), I recall having heard it from Kaplan himself, and telling him my
own paradox in response (see the text below). For Lewis, see also note 2.
Kaplan (1995:48–49, note 1) lists many earlier places where he gave the argument, including one
abstract in print (1983). He also has an extensive list of earlier authors, including Lewis, who
mentioned or discussed his argument. I do not intend to go into all of these.

376

A Puzzle about Time and Thought

In his discussion, Lewis goes on to argue in terms of his own psychological views
that this result is not implausible.10
I also discussed my own problem about time with Kaplan himself and argued
that it meant that a special paradox about possible worlds and cardinalities did
not get to the essence of the matter. However, once again, my conversation did
not affect his subsequent talks and writings on the subject. I don’t know what he
thought, or whether I got my point of view across well. In any case, it may not
have made a lasting impression.
Kaplan eventually came to conclude that his assumption (A) leads directly to a
form of the Cretan liar paradox (1995:45–46). In this sense, his argument might
support my view that cardinalities of the set of all possible worlds and its power
set are not the essence of the problem.11
It is only natural that the ﬁrst thing to occur to each of us (that is, Kaplan and
me) as a solution to our respective problems was to follow Russell in his ramiﬁed
theory of types. This is what Russell explicitly does in his treatment of the Cretan
form of the liar paradox. When the Cretan says, “every proposition asserted by a
Cretan is false,” or, alternatively, “for all p, if a Cretan says that p, then not p,” the
Cretan’s assertion must be of higher type, and therefore does not come within the
scope of the quantiﬁer “for all p.” In my case, the property by which one deﬁnes a
set of instants must vary in type, as must the predicate “thinking of a set of
instants.” One must think of a set of instants by virtue of thinking of it through a
deﬁning property, and hence there would be a type-theoretic hierarchy of different predicates “thinking of.” Once one has observed the appropriate restrictions,
the predicate S0, as deﬁned above, must be of a higher type than the properties
deﬁning the sets St and the relation “thinking of ” involved in them.
Kaplan and I have long agreed that Russell’s motivation for ramifying his
theory of types was based on important philosophical arguments, misunderstood
and underestimated by any number of logicians and philosophers. Russell’s
primary motivations for the ramiﬁcation were problems of intensional logic,
illustrated by the liar paradox. Viewed with this motivation in mind, he did not
wipe away the ramiﬁcation by proposing an axiom of reducibility.12
10

Moreover, not to accept Kaplan’s (A) does not seem to me necessarily to commit oneself to the
idea that there are propositions no possible being can entertain. I might mention that in addition to
his intuitive motivation for (A), Kaplan also abstractly motivates it by analogy to a corresponding
assumption about a predicate of individuals (see his 43). However, any analogy with the plausibility
of an assumption about individuals strikes me as somewhat dubious, since in (A) we are concerned
with an assumption about arbitrary sets of worlds, and thus about entities of higher type than the
worlds themselves, whereas in the case of individuals we are not.
11
Actually, such a conclusion is not emphasized in Kaplan’s paper, and he says explicitly
(1995:46) that (A) is not to be blamed for the paradox. However, this is in a context where he
says that ramiﬁed type theory should be a solution to the problem, and that many other empirically
true assumptions would produce a liar paradox.
12
Russell’s motivation seems to be understood better today by many philosophers, whether or
not they advocate ramiﬁed type theory as an appropriate solution (as indeed the papers by Anderson

A Puzzle about Time and Thought

377

One illustration of how the axiom of reducibility does not wipe away the
intensional logic motivation for ramiﬁed type theory is the paradox presented
here. Nothing in the solution of the problem by intensional ramiﬁed type theory
is in conﬂict with accepting Zermelo’s complete axiom of separation for sets of
instants of time, even though this axiom allows sets to be deﬁned impredicatively.
The point is that, as in Russell’s axiom of reducibility, one can maintain in effect
an impredicative point of view for extensions, while maintaining the predicative
(ramiﬁed) point of view for intensions.13
However, I do not wish to commit myself to ramiﬁed type theory as the
proper solution to my problem or to Kaplan’s. If one thinks of paradoxes in
intensional logic as in some way analogues of semantic paradoxes—and Kaplan
even mentions such an analogy in his own case—then ramiﬁed type theory might
be an analogue of the ﬁnite Tarski hierarchy.14 An alternative might be an
intensional logic analogue of my own approach in Kripke (1975) (reprinted
here as Chapter 4), and the many papers extending it or giving alternatives.
Different views and alternatives to a ramiﬁed approach are presented in the
papers by Anderson and Lindström (and Anderson especially criticizes the
ramiﬁed approach). I do not propose as of this writing to investigate the matter
any further and “frame no hypotheses.”
Concluding Unscientiﬁc Postscript. When I did my own work on the semantics
of modal logic, I posited a set K of worlds with an accessibility relation R, a
and Lindström show), and was understood by some all along (probably, e.g., by Prior 1958, even
though he rejects ramiﬁed type theory).
There is another motivation for the ramiﬁcation, also coming out of Russell’s work (and some
others, such as Poincare and Weyl). This motivation is to give a treatment of mathematics, especially
analysis, that does not use impredicative deﬁnitions. Once one proposes an axiom of reducibility,
one does indeed wipe away this motivation. (Russell does discuss in the introduction to the second
edition of Principia, with inconclusive results and little knowledge of what was already done by
Weyl, how far mathematics can get without the axiom of reducibility (see Chapter 8, note 61). In
conversation with me, and in print, well-known logicians and philosophers have held that Russell
did indeed wipe away all motivation for the ramiﬁcation when he proposed the axiom of
reducibility. For instance, in conversation Kreisel expressed the view to me that ramiﬁed type
theory was a major achievement of Russell, but that combining it with the axiom of reducibility was
foolish. I said in reply that ramiﬁed type theory with reducibility still had a motivation in terms of
intensional logic, but I doubt that I got the point across.
13
One paradox that certainly is a cardinality problem and that is somewhat analogous to
Kaplan’s is Russell’s problem about sets of propositions. Russell assumed that for every set of
propositions there is a unique proposition that is its conjunction. But then we get a one-to-one
mapping of arbitrary sets of propositions into propositions, contrary to Cantor’s theorem that there
can never be a one-to-one mapping of the power set of a set into the set itself. Russell would have
greatly clariﬁed his motivations for ramiﬁed type theory, and why the axiom of reducibility does not
eliminate the need for it, if in Principia he had discussed this paradox and how it is solved by
ramiﬁed type theory, even with the axiom of reducibility. For an exposition of this point, see
Church (1984) and Klement (2005).
Myhill (1958) rediscovered essentially the same paradox, showing that it arises formally in
Church’s most intensionally reﬁned alternative for a formalization of the logic of sense and
denotation in Church (1951).
14
See also Church (1976).

378

A Puzzle about Time and Thought

distinguished actual world, and a domain function. My main point was to ﬁnd a
deﬁnition, set theoretically meaningful, of validity, satisﬁability, and other
model-theoretic notions, and to be able to raise completeness problems, and so
on. But the set K was arbitrary and, in a deﬁnition of validity, was allowed to
vary. There was no concern with the unique set (or class) of possible worlds.
Thus, I was not particularly concerned with questions of truth in all possible
worlds simpliciter. (The distinction might be analogous to that of “truth” and
“truth in a model” in standard quantiﬁcational logic.) Much less was I concerned,
as David Lewis certainly was, with giving a reductive analysis of modal notions.
However, given possible-worlds semantics, the development was inevitable that
one consider absolute truth in the unique collection of all possible worlds.
I myself would have considerable doubts that they form a set, let alone that
they have a power set (see note 6). In particular, it seems to me to be reasonable to
suppose (and certainly not in conﬂict with my view of modal logic) that for every
cardinality Œ it is possible that there are exactly Œ individuals. But then it would
immediately follow that the possible worlds cannot form a set.15 This is not related
to Kaplan’s paradox, nor to my own. And whatever one thinks of Kaplan’s
problem, I think it ought to be considered in the light of the present one.16

REFERENCES
Almog, J., and P. Leonardi, eds. (2009). The Philosophy of David Kaplan. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Anderson, C. A. (2009). “The Lesson of Kaplan’s Paradox about Possible Worlds
Semantics.” In Almog and Leonardi (2009), 85–92.
Benacerraf, P., and H. Putnam (1983). Readings in the Philosophy of Mathematics. 2nd ed.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Church, A. (1951). “A Formulation of the Logic of Sense and Denotation.” In Structure,
Method, and Meaning: Essays in Honor of Henry M. Sheffer, ed. P. Henle et al. New
York: Liberal Arts.
———. (1976). “Comparison of Russell’s Resolution of the Semantical Antinomies with
that of Tarski.” Journal of Symbolic Logic 41:747–60.
15
As I recall Jubien (1988) (which I have not reread for the present paper), his doubts about
possible worlds do not affect my original semantics for modal logic but might affect “possible worlds
semantics” if these require arbitrary higher types of sets of possible worlds in a way that would be
violated if these do not form a set. There may be something to be done with this, but I do not go
into the matter here.
16
I would like to thank Jeff Buechner, Gary Ostertag, and especially Romina Padró for their
help in producing this paper. My editors at the Kripke Center have rightly complained that this
paper alludes too brieﬂy to complicated topics that really need more treatment and explanation in
the paper. I have done a bit to comply, but properly to fulﬁll their desires would turn this paper not
into one that presents a paradox of my own, but into a monograph on all these other topics, such as
ramiﬁed type theory. This paper has been completed with support from the Saul A. Kripke Center
at the City University of New York, Graduate Center.

A Puzzle about Time and Thought

379

———. (1984). “Russell’s Theory of Identity of Propositions.” Philosophia Naturalis
21:513–22.
Gödel, K. (1944). “Russell’s Mathematical Logic.” In The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell,
ed. P. A. Schlipp. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press. Reprinted in
Benacerraf and Putnam (1983), 447–69; references are to the reprint.
Jubien, M. (1988). “Problems with Possible Worlds.” In Philosophical Analysis: A Defense
by Example, ed. D. F. Austin. Norwell, MA: Kluwer, 299–322.
Kaplan, D. (1983). “Abstracts of Sections 5 and 12.” In 7th International Congress of Logic
Methodology and Philosophy of Science. Salzburg, Austria: Hutteger.
———. (1995). “A Problem in Possible-Worlds Semantics.” In Modality, Morality and
Belief, ed. W. Sinnott-Armstrong, D. Raffman, and N. Asher. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Klement, K. C. (2005). “Russell-Myhill Paradox.” Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
http://www.iep.utm.edu/par-rusm
Kripke, S. (1975). “Outline of a Theory of Truth.” Journal of Philosophy 72:690–716.
Reprinted in this volume as Chapter 4.
———. (2005). “Russell’s Notion of Scope.” Mind 114:1005–37. Reprinted in this
volume as Chapter 8.
Lewis, D. K. (1986). On the Plurality of Worlds. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lindström, S. (2009). “Possible World Semantics and the Liar. Reﬂections on a Problem
Posed by Kaplan.” In Almog and Leonardi (2009), 93–108.
Myhill, J. (1958). “Problems Arising in the Formalization of Intensional Logic.” Logique
et Analyse 1:78–83.
Prior, A. (1958). “Epimenides the Cretan.” Journal of Symbolic Logic 23:261–66.
Russell, B. (1903). Principles of Mathematics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Whitehead, A. N., and B. Russell. (1910, 1912, 1913). Principia Mathematica.
3 Volumes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 2nd ed., 1925 (Vol. 1), 1927
(Vols. 2, 3).

This page intentionally left blank

Index
Absorption, 194–98, 214n83
accommodation, 353, 362–64
Ackerman, Diana, 131n10
acquaintance. See also self-acquaintance
Frege on, 275, 285n83
reference and direct, 271–72
Russell on, 241–42
acquaintance-revelatory senses, 271
Albritton, R., 26n19, 308
Almog, Joseph, 227n7, 237
anaphora, 268, 351–71
Anscombe, Elizabeth, 296, 309–13, 315, 318
a posteriori truth, 16–17, 21
a priori truth
contingent, 304–5
essentialism distinguished from, 16–17
necessary statements and, 14–15, 18n14
attributive deﬁnite description, 101–9
Austin, John, 346, 347n63
autonymous designators, 267–68, 271,
274–75, 277, 284–85
Bach, Emmon, 232
backtracking, Nozick’s analysis of knowledge
and, 216–17, 216n85
Bedeutung
Frege on, 261–62
tensed senses and, 276
translation of, 254, 254n2
belief. See also de dicto belief; de re belief
assent and, 137–38, 143
contradictory, 145–46
disquotational principle and, 137–38,
137n22
Lewis on possible worlds and, 317n67
proper names and, 128, 142–43, 148, 156–57
referential opacity of, 159–60
consciousness of, 183
substitutivity principle and, 130, 141–42
translation and, 139, 148–49, 157
two kinds of, 230, 314–15, 322–23
unrestricted exportation and, 322–48
Berger, Alan, 231n15
Bernays, P., 236–37, 248, 250
Black, Max, 255, 366n23
Bonjour, Laurence, 173, 173n27
Boolos, George, 228
Buechner, Jeff, 170n21

Burge, Tyler, 256, 256n9, 273
on Sinn, 279–81
Butler, Joseph, 23
Carroll, Lewis, 69
Cartesian argument, 26n19
centered possible worlds, 315–16, 316n65
Chisholm, Roderick, 313–14, 313n58
Church, Alonzo, 257, 259n15, 377n13
on ﬁctional entities, 58n11
on indirect speech, 263–64, 263n35, 264n36
on privileged senses, 286n90
on scope ambiguities, 234
clefts, 352, 363
pseudoclefts and, 364–65
complexity theory, 261, 344, 344n58
computability theory, 344, 344n57
connotation, proper names and, 132, 132n11
contingent a priori, 304–5
contingent identity statements, 1–3, 8–9,
18–20, 21–23
mind-body problem and, 8–9, 23–26
proper names and, 6–8
scientiﬁc discoveries and, 8–9
Wiggins on, 2–3
contradictory beliefs, 138–40, 145–46
conversational principles, 110n18, 111, 328,
337
counterfactual analysis of knowledge, 162–223
counterfactual statements
ﬁctional entities and, 53–55, 69
impossible antecedents and, 212–13, 215
knowledge and, 162–223
Lewis on, 163, 163n5, 211
Stalnaker and, 163, 163n5, 211
tense and, 318, 318n72
transitivity of, 201–2
vacuous names and, 57
counterparts, 11
contingent identity statements and, 20n15
Crocker, L., 101
cumulative hypothesis, projection problem for
presuppositions, 353–54
Davidson, Donald, 256–58, 257n12, 300n23
de dicto belief, 322–23
de re belief implied by, 323, 323n4
Sosa on, 332–33

382

Index

deductive closure of knowledge, 31, 31n7, 37,
43, 46n23
challenges to, 196–197, 206
Nozick on, 179, 179n33, 185–86, 196n60
deﬁnite description, 99. See also attributive
deﬁnite description; referential deﬁnite
description
belief puzzle and, 148
de dicto-de re distinction and, 103–5
deﬁnite article and, 115, 123
Donnellan on, 101–5
“knowing wh-” phrases and, 260–61,
260n22
as predicative, 246
proper names and, 106–7, 117–18, 117n25
referential opacity and, 160n45
rigid, 105–6
scope and, 225–51
semantically ambiguous, 108
speaker’s reference and, 107–8
translation and, 148–49
vacuous, 100–101
deixis, 371
anaphora and, 352
demonstratives
indexicals compared to, 298–99, 299n18
Kaplan on, 106, 281n81
Dennett, Daniel, 230, 337–39
on de re belief, 326–27, 326n18, 341, 341n51
on unrestricted exportation, 327
denoting phrases
analysis of, 226–28
de re belief, 322–23
de dicto belief implying, 323, 323n4
Dennett on, 326–27, 326n18, 341, 341n51
in ordinary language, 327–28
Quine on, 328n19
Sosa on, 332–33, 336
unrestricted exportation and, 325–26,
326n14, 330n25
Descartes, R., 26n19, 287
self-consciousness and, 308–10
descriptions. See deﬁnite description; indeﬁnite
description
direct acquaintance, reference and, 271–72
direct quotation, 268
Frege’s theory of, 268–69
Kaplan on, 262
disquotational principle
belief and, 137–38, 137n22, 154
biconditional form of, 138
homophonic translation and, 142
simple form of, 138–39
strengthened, 141–42, 146
substitutivity principle and, 140–41
Tarskian, 140n26
translation and, 139–40

dogmatism paradox, 48–49
Dolan, John, 217
Donnellan, Keith, 13, 99–124, 235, 341
double-K principle, 33–35
Dretske, Fred, 31n7, 162–63, 162n2, 167
dualism, 26n19, 310
Dummett, Michael, 63n18, 255n6,
258, 270
on indirect reference, 263, 263n35
egocentric logic, 375
Eissfeldt, Otto, 63n20
Ekbom, Lennart, 27n1
empty names. See vacuous names
epistemic modalities, 128
essentialism, 15–16
a priori truth and, 16–17
existence and, 15n11
necessity and, 16–17
essential property, equivalent deﬁnitions of,
15n12
Evans, Gareth, 228, 243, 278n72
on indirect reﬂexive, 315n64
existence. See also necessary existence
essentialism and, 15n11
ﬁctional entities and, 54–55, 55n6, 63–65,
71–72
as predicate, 57
sense-data and, 60–61
existential generalization, Nozick’s analysis of
knowledge and, 200–201
existential quantiﬁcation
speaker’s reference and, 115
in strong Russell language, 114–15
faith, knowledge and, 206. See also belief
Fara, Delia Graff, 244–46
ﬁctional entities
free logic and, 62, 62n17
Frege on, 58n11
Kaplan on, 69–70
metalinguistic analysis of, 70
mythical entities compared to, 67–72
necessary existence and, 55–56
pretended propositions and, 59
pretense principle and, 58–60
a priori truth and, 70
proper names and, 53
properties of, 65
quantiﬁcation over, 63–64
reference and, 59, 61–63, 71
truth and, 65–66
vacuous names as, 68–69, 68n30
vacuous names differing from, 62–63
ﬁrst person statements. See also ‘I’ pronoun
autonymous designators and, 284–85
Frege on, 279

Index
incommunicable thoughts and, 287–88
indexicals and, 283–84
other minds and, 299n21
Perry on, 285
senses and, 286–87
Fitch, Frederic B., 46–47, 46n23, 83n15,
234n23
letter to, 47–48
ﬁxed points
hierarchy of languages and, 86–87
intrinsic, 92
maximal, 91–92
minimal, 91, 94–95
truth and construction of, 88
truth-value gaps and, 93–94
Frankfurt, Harry, 64n22, 305
free logic, 62, 62n17
Frege, Friedrich Ludwig Gottlob
on acquaintance, 285n83
on Bedeutung, 261–62
on direct quotation, 268–69
on ﬁctional entities, 58n11
on ﬁrst person statements, 278
on incommunicable thoughts, 285–87
on indirect reference, 255–56
on indirect senses, 258
on ‘I’ pronoun, 297–98, 302–3, 303n27
Kaplan on indirect quotation and, 265–67,
265n38
Mill’s views on proper names compared to,
126–37
Perry’s criticisms of, 296
on presupposition, 352–53
on proper names, 52–56, 126
on propositions, 273–74
Russell’s correspondence with, 238
Russell’s similarity to, 288
on scope, 5n5
on ‘yesterday’ and ‘today,’ 303, 304n29
Freud, Sigmund, 220, 220n87
future evidence, 40–41, 43–45
Harman on, 49
surprise examination paradox and, 45n17
Geach, Peter, 121n30, 130n9, 241n42, 285
Gedanke, 256, 264, 275, 278n72
Gettier problem, 202
Ginet, Carl, 166
Gödel, Kurt
Liar paradox and, 90
second incompleteness theorem of, 47–48,
78
Gödel-Tarski theorem, 78
Goldbach conjecture, 14–15
Goldfarb, Warren, 233, 250
Goldman, Alvin, 162–3, 166, 170n21,
209–11, 210n75, 217

383

Greene, Graham, 28
Grice, H. P., 342, 343
analysis of meaning, 109–111
conversational principles of, 293n3, 328,
337, 338n44, 356
Harman, Gilbert, 48, 181–84, 207, 318n71
on future evidence, 49
Harrington, Leo, 98n36
heap paradox
surprise examination paradox and, 29–30
Hempel, C. G., 294
Hertzberger, Hans, 78n8
“Hesperus is Phosphorus” statement, 6–8,
17–19
hierarchy of languages
ﬁxed points and, 86–87
modal operators and, 95–96
Tarski and, 79, 79n9, 82, 88n23, 93, 377
translation and, 256–57
truth predicates in, 88–89
Hilbert, D., 215, 236–37, 248, 250
Hintikka, Jaakko, 5n5, 34–35, 39–40, 61–62,
72, 118, 260n21, 326n16, 326n17, 334,
335n37, 344
Holton, Richard, 365n22, 367n24
homophonic translation, 140–41, 142, 154
Hume, D., 41n15, 225n4, 305–10
hydra problem, 249–50, 249n58
identity. See also self-identity
of mental state and physical state, 8–9
across possible worlds, 16
identity statements. See also contingent identity
statements
illusion of contingency of, 25
as metalinguistic, 18
as necessary, 9, 17
identity theory and, 8–9, 24n17, 26n19
idiolect
proper names and, 111, 111n19, 127, 133,
149n29, 150, 150n31, 280, 282
sharing common, 141
incommunicable thoughts
ﬁrst person statements and, 287–88
Frege on, 285–87
indeﬁnite description, 122n31, 123, 230,
244–6
ambiguity of, 239
Russell’s analysis of, 228–9, 233
scope and, 230–31, 239
indeterminacy of translation, Quine, 154–56
indexicals, 281
demonstratives compared to, 298–99,
299n18
ﬁrst person statements and, 283–84
proper names compared to, 283n81

384

Index

indirect quotation, 262
Kaplan on Frege’s treatment of, 265–67,
265n38
indirect reference
ambiguity and, 262–63
Dummett on, 263, 263n35
Frege on, 255–56
indirect reﬂexive, 314
indirect senses, 257–58, 262–63, 269, 272
indirect speech
ambiguities and, 262–63
Church on, 263–64, 263n35, 264n36
‘I’ pronoun and, 302n26
intensional context, 128–29, 129n7
puzzle with, 239–41
scope and, 243
intermediate scope, 13n10, 231
‘I’ pronoun. See also self-consciousness
Anscombe on, 309–12
Cartesian ego and, 311
character and content of, 296
Frege on, 297–98
indirect speech and, 302n26
interpersonal communication and, 301–2
Kaplan on, 295, 295n10, 296n7, 300–1
Lewis on, 314–18
logical inference and, 318n71
possible worlds and, 316–18
self-acquaintance and, 301, 303, 316
self-consciousness and, 308–9
Wittgenstein on, 311–12
Irving, David, 294n5
Johnston, Mark, 168, 190
Kant, Immanuel, 1, 55n6, 225n4
Kaplan, David
on content and character, 273–74
on demonstratives, 106, 283n81
on direct quotation, 262
on ﬁctional entities, 69–70
on Frege’s treatment of indirect quotation,
265–67, 265n38
on ‘I’ pronoun, 295, 295n7, 295n10, 300–1
on knowledge, 46n23
possible worlds and proposition puzzle of,
373–76
scientiﬁc language and, 293–94, 296–97
Kleene, S. C., 84, 84n18, 88, 89n24
Klement, Kevin, 377n13
“the Knower” paradox, 46n23
“knowing wh-” phrases
ambiguities with, 344–45, 345n59
deﬁnite description and, 261–62, 260n22
knowledge. See also Nozick’s analysis of
knowledge
counterfactual analysis of, 162–223

deductive closure of, 31, 31n7, 37, 43,
46n23, 179, 179n33, 185–86, 196n60,
197, 206
faith and, 206
future evidence and, 40–45
justiﬁcation and, 174
linguistic differences of, 42–43
logic of, 34–35
Malcolm on truth and, 40–41, 40n12
Montague on, 46n23
perceptual, 175–76
reliability and, 190
strong requirements for, 118
surprise examination paradox and, 33–34
truth and, 34
unrestricted exportation and, 331–32
Wittgenstein on, 165, 165n10
Kvart, Igal, 326n17, 331, 334n35, 339n47
Levin, Michael, 164n7, 195n59, 203n68,
203n69, 210n75
Lewis, David K., 177, 191, 191n54, 201,
201n67, 300n23, 374n2
on belief and possible worlds, 313–14,
316n67
contextualist theory of, 49n23, 336n39
on counterfactual statements, 163, 163n5,
211
on egocentric logic, 375
on ‘I’ pronoun, 314–18
on possible worlds, 11–12
on presupposition, 353
Quine and, 313n59
Lewy, Casimir, 260
Liar paradox, 46n23
belief puzzle and, 156
empirical predicates in, 76
Gödelian form of, 90
truth and, 75–76
universal language and, 96–97
utterances and, 76–77
Linsky, Leonard, 101, 245–46
Löb’s theorem, 47
logically proper names, 52n2, 102, 149n29
Lumsden, David, 168
Makin, Gideon, 60n14, 242
Malcolm, N., 45n17, 232n16, 260n19
on knowledge and truth, 40–41,
40n12, 43
Marcus, Ruth Barcan, 6–7, 234n23
Martin, Robert L., 82–83, 83n14, 95
Mates, Benson, 134n15, 160n46, 237n32
mathematical truths, 211–13
meaning.
Grice on, 110
senses and, 273–74

Index
speaker’s reference and, 109–10
time of utterance and, 274
Meinong, Alexius, 64, 234
metalinguistic negation, 338n44
metalinguistic statements
ﬁctional entities and, 70
identity statements as, 18
indirect senses and, 259–60
metatheorem of scope, 232–33, 246
Michael, Fred, 45
Michael, Michaelis, 365n22, 367n24
Mill, John Stuart, 52–53, 59
Frege’s views on proper names compared to,
126–37
on proper names, 125–26
mind-body problem, 1n1
contingent identity statements and, 8–9, 23–26
rigid designators and, 24–25, 25n18
modality de re, 3–4, 103–5
monotone operations, 87
Montague, Richard, 95, 95n32, 267n42
on knowledge, 46n23
on scope, 245
Moore, G. E., 221
on necessary existence, 55n6
Moore’s paradox, 33n9
Moschovakis, Y. N., 86
Nagel, Thomas, 308
names. See codesignative names; ﬁctional
entities; proper names; vacuous names
natural kind terms,
ﬁctional entities and, 65–9
proper names and, 152
semantics of, 52
translation of, 152–53, 156n40, 158
Neale, Stephen, 225n1, 226–27, 233, 235n28,
246n55, 246n56, 293n3
scope distinctions of, 229n9, 232
necessary truths
a priori truth and, 14–15, 18n14
essentialism and, 16–17
identity statements and, 17
Mathematical statements and, 211–13
Nozick’s analysis of knowledge, and, 211–15
Nicod, J. G., 250, 250n60
Noth, Martin, 56n9
Nozick, Robert, 49n31
backtracking, 216–17, 216n85
conjunction, 181–99
deductive closure, 179, 179n33, 196n60
factual counterfactuals, 177–78, 177n31
“gnowledge” and, 196n60
knowledge of truths, 219–22
necessary truths, 210–15
relevant alternatives, 167, 167n15, 171,
171n24

385

skepticism, 217–18
supercredulous problem and, 222–23
Nute, Donald, 198n62
‘On Denoting,’ by Russell, 225–27, 227n7,
237, 271
other minds, 299n21
Pap, Arthur, 366n23
paradoxes. See speciﬁc paradoxes
Parikh, Rohit, 170n21
Parsons, Charles, 80n10
Parsons, Terry, 256
Peacocke, Christopher, 241n42
on inference patterns, 312n56
on rigid designators, 129n7
Peano Arithmetic, 46n23
perceptual knowledge, 175–76
Perry, John, 273–74, 275n65, 279n74, 308n44
on ﬁrst person statements, 284–85
Frege criticized by, 296
Philosophical Explanations (Nozick), 162–223
Picardi, Eva, 266n39
possible worlds
cardinality problem and, 374–75
centered, 315–16, 316n65
contingent identity statements and, 10–12
counterfactual statements and, 12
descriptive conditions and, 315
ﬁctional entities and, 59
identity across, 16
instants of time and, 374–75
‘I’ pronoun and, 316–18
Kaplan on, 95, 95n32
Kaplan’s puzzle of proposition and, 373–76
Lewis on, 11–12, 313–14, 316n67
“pragmatic wastebasket fallacy,” 328, 332,
341–43
presupposition. See also projection problem for
presuppositions
accommodation and, 353
active context and, 357, 361, 366–67
again cases and, 360–61, 365
anaphora, 355–56, 366, 370–71
clauses and, 355
clefts and, 363
conﬂicting accounts of, 351
converse inclusion and, 369
Frege on, 352–53
identity elements and, 368–69
other cases and, 366–68
plugs and, 354
presupposed nonidentities and, 365–66
Russell on, 354, 354n7
Stalnaker and Lewis on, 353
stop cases and, 361–63
Strawson on, 352–53

386

Index

presupposition (Continued)
time of utterance and, 361–62
too cases in, 357–61, 367
types of, 352
pretended propositions, ﬁctional entities
and, 59
pretense principle, ﬁctional entities and, 58–60
primary occurrences, scope and, 239–41
Principia Mathematica (Whitehead and
Russell), 232–33, 234, 248–49
privileged senses, 264
Church on, 286n90
projection problem for presuppositions, 352
cumulative hypothesis for, 353–54
pronominalization phenomena, 99, 121n31
anaphora and, 370–71
pronouns, semantic reference and, 121n31.
See also ‘I’ pronoun
proper names
belief and, 128, 130, 141–42, 148, 156–57
belief and substitutivity principle with,
141–42
chain of communication and, 136, 136n21
connotation and, 132, 132n11
contingent identity statements and, 6–8
deﬁnite descriptions and, 6–7, 106–7,
117–18, 117n25
Donnellan on, 106, 106n8
ﬁctional entities and, 53
Frege’s analysis of, 52–56, 126–37
function of, 5–6
idiolect and, 111, 111n19, 127, 133,
149n29, 150, 150n31, 280, 282
indexicals compared to, 283n80
interchangability of, 133–34
in language, 150n29
logically, 52n2, 102, 149n29
Mill’s analysis of, 125–37
natural kind terms and, 152
paradox of belief and, 142–43
propositions and, 127–28
reference and, 126–27, 126n2
reference-ﬁxing and, 106–7
referential deﬁnite description and, 107
rigidity of, 17, 20, 131–32, 131n10, 134, 136
Russell’s analysis of, 52–56, 126n3
self-reference and, 77–78
senses and, 134–35, 134n15, 281
skepticism and, 218
speaker’s reference and, 117n25
as tags, 7–8
technical criterion for, 227n7
translation of, 135n18, 150–51, 150n30, 282
transparency of, 136, 136n19
unrestricted exportation and, 322–48
propositional attitudes, 96, 125–61

propositional function, 242n45
propositions
Frege on, 272–73
Kaplan’s puzzle of possible worlds and,
373–76
self-referential, 78n5
senses and, 272
pseudoclefts, 364–65
Putnam, Hilary, 65, 81, 152, 153n35, 213,
213n80
on skepticism, 217, 217n86
puzzle. See speciﬁc puzzles
Quine, Willard Van Orman, 5–7, 11, 13,
16–17, 27n1, 140, 229–35, 242n45, 248,
250, 259n18, 260, 270n41, 313, 315,
316n65
indeterminacy of translation of, 152n34,
154–56
philosophy of language and, 121n29
scientiﬁc language and, 294n4
on surprise examination paradox, 32,
32n8, 39
opacity of de dicto belief, 130n8
‘Two Dogmas of Empiricism’ by, 225
unrestricted exportation and, 322–48
quotation. See direct quotation; indirect
quotation
quote-reference, 267
reference. See also indirect reference; selfreference; semantic reference; speaker’s
reference
direct, 267
ﬁctional entities and, 59, 61–63, 71
intended, 334n35
of ‘I’ pronoun ﬁxed by subject, 304
proper names and, 126–27, 126n2
senses determining, 269–70, 284, 288
specifying, 255
vacuous names and, 60
referentially-used deﬁnite description, 102–8
referential opacity, 159–60
reﬂexivity, 242n45
relevant alternatives
Nozick’s analysis of knowledge and, 167,
167n15, 171, 171n24
reliability
justiﬁcation and, 190, 190n51
knowledge and, 190
rigid deﬁnite description, 105–6
rigid designators
intuitive test for, 13
mind-body problem and, 24–25,
25n18
nonrigid designator compared to, 9–10

Index
Nozick’s analysis of knowledge, third
condition and, 214
Peacocke on, 129n7
proper names as, 17, 20, 134
Russell, Bertrand, 52n2, 223n90, 255
on acquaintance, 241–42
Cretan liar paradox and, 376
deﬁnite descriptions and, 99–124, 225–251
on denoting phrases, 226–28
Donnellan’s distinction and, 99–124
Frege’s correspondence with, 238
Frege’s similarity to, 288
modal paradoxes eliminated by, 5n5
‘On Denoting’ by, 225–27, 226n7, 238, 272
on presupposition, 354, 354n7
on proper names, 52–56, 126n3
on scope, 3–4, 5n5, 104–5, 225–251
type theory of, 376–77
on vacuous names, 60–61, 60n14
Salmon, Nathan, 237, 242, 249n58, 262n29
on scope, 240
scientiﬁc discoveries, contingent identity
statements and, 8–9
scientiﬁc language
Kaplan and, 293–94, 296–97
object identiﬁcation in, 343–44
propositions and, 318
Quine and, 293n4
subject in, 300
tensed senses and, 297, 297n13
scope
ambiguities, 233, 243
deﬁnite description and, 4–6, 13n10,
104–5, 229
Frege on, 5n5
indeﬁnite descriptions and, 230–31
indifference theorem and, 248–49, 250
intensional context and, 243
intermediate, 13n10, 231, 238
interpreting, 246
islands, 244
metatheorem of, 233–33, 246
Montague on, 245
Neale on, 229n9, 232
path termination and, 250–51
primary occurrences and, 239–41
Russell on, 3–4, 5n5, 104–5, 225–251
Salmon on, 240
secondary occurrences and, 239–41
Searle, J. R., 20–21, 133n13, 268n41
self-consciousness. See also ‘I’ pronoun
belief and, 183
body and, 308–9
Descartes and, 308–10
‘I’ pronoun and, 308–9

387

logic of, 160n46
mirrors and, 306, 306n34
Wittgenstein and, 306–8
sense. See also indirect senses; tensed senses
compositionality and, 269–70, 270n45
ﬁrst person statements and, 286–87
meaning and, 273–74
privileged, 264, 286n89
proper names and, 134–35, 134n15, 281
propositions and, 272
reference determined by, 268–69, 284, 288
revelatory, 259–60
of sentences, 264
specifying, 255
time of utterance and, 277
translation and understanding, 257–59,
282–83
understanding and, 271
Shatz, David, 162n2, 167, 172n26
twin example of, 170n22
Sinn, 254, 256
autonymous, 275, 275n64
Burge’s view on, 279–82
Frege’s theory of, 254–88
synonymy and, 258
Slote, M., 15n11, 26n19
Smullyan, Arthur, 5n5, 47n26, 229n9, 232,
233, 250
Soames, Scott, 242n43, 242n44, 243n47,
352–55, 353n3, 354–55, 356n11,
357n13, 357n14, 358n15, 358n16, 362,
364n21, 367–8, 370, 371n31
Sosa, Ernest, 180n35, 260n21, 322n1, 324n8,
325–26, 332–36, 347–48
Speier, Richard, 29n4
Stalnaker, Robert, 105n7, 177, 191, 194,
242n45, 316, 318n71, 356n11
on counterfactual statements, 163, 163n5, 211
on presupposition, 354
Stanley, Jason, 241n41
stereotypes, truth and, 65–66
Stine, Gail Caldwell, 165–67, 327n17
stop cases, presupposition and, 361–63
Strawson, P. F., 83–84, 99–100, 120
on presupposition, 352–53
on truth-value gaps, 235–36, 235n28,
235n29
substitutivity principle, 140–2, 157–58,
157n42
supercredulous problem, 222–23
supervaluation
disjunctions and, 94
van Fraassen on, 94–95
surprise examination paradox, 28–45
synonyms, 20
synthetic a priori judgments, 1

388

Index

Tarski, Alfred, 83. See also Gödel-Tarski
theorem
disquotational principle of, 140n26
hierarchy of languages of, 79, 79n9, 82,
88n23, 93, 378
Thomason, Richmond, 243n45, 245n52,
353n3
“toy duck fallacy”
philosophy of language and, 345–48
unrestricted exportation and, 347
translation
belief and, 139, 148–51, 157
deﬁnite description and, 148–49
disquotational principle and, 139–40
homophonic, 140–42, 154, 154n37
of natural kind terms, 152–53, 156n40, 158
of proper names, 135n18, 150–51,
150n30, 281
Quine’s doctrine of indeterminacy of,
154–56
sense and, 257–59, 282–83
truth-value gaps, 82, 82n13, 89
controversy over, 98
ﬁxed points and, 93–94
natural language and, 95
Strawson on, 235–36, 235n28, 235n29
universal language and, 97n34
unrestricted exportation, 322–48
belief and, 328–29
consequences of, 328
contextual factors of, 334–35, 335n37
Dennett on, 325–27, 336–44
de re belief and, 325–26, 326n14, 330n25
knowledge and, 331–32
Quine on, 323–26, 335, 335n37, 344

Sosa defending, 326, 334–37, 335n37,
347–48
“toy duck fallacy” and, 347
unnoticed consequences of, 328–32
vacuous names
contingent identity statements and, 60–61
counterfactual statements and, 57
ﬁctional entities and, 62–63, 68–69, 68n30
necessary existence and, 56
reference and, 60
Russell on, 60–61, 60n14
semantics of, 53
van Fraassen, Bas, 82
supervaluation notion of, 94–95
Verstehen, 294
vivid designator, 326n16
Washington, Corey, 267n41
Weinberg, Stephen, 49
Weyl, Hermann, 250n60, 377n12
Wiggins, David, 2–3, 5, 26n19
Williamson, Timothy, 29n5
Wilson, George, 244–5, 244n48
Wilson, Neil, 156n40
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 41n15, 53n3, 56n9, 60–
61, 285, 288n91, 292n2, 295n10,
296n12, 299n20, 300n23, 303n27,
as ‘anti-scientistic,’ 293n4
on “intellectual cramps,” 28
on ‘I’ pronoun, 311–12
on knowledge, 165, 165n10
self-consciousness and, 307–8
Woodruff, Peter, 83, 83n14, 95
Zermelo set theory, 373

