Philosophical Papers
I

This page intentionally left blank

Philosophical Papers
Volume I

DAVID LEWIS

New York Oxford
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS

1983

Copyright © 1983 by David Lewis
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Lewis, David, 1941Philosophical papers.
Includes index.
1. Philosophy—Addresses, essays, lectures.
I. Title.
B29.L49 1982
110
82-22551
ISBN 0-19-503203-9 (v. 1)
ISBN 0-19-503204-7 (pbk. : v. 1)

Printing (last digit):

9876543

Printed in the United States of America

Contents

Acknowledgments
Introduction ix

vii

PART 1: ONTOLOGY

1

1. Holes (with Stephanie Lewis) 3
2. Anselm and Actuality 10
Postscripts to "Anselm and Actuality" 21
3. Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic 26
Postscripts to "Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal
Logic" 39
4. Counterparts of Persons and Their Bodies 47
5. Survival and Identity 55
Postscripts to "Survival and Identity" 73
6. How To Define Theoretical Terms 78

PART 2: PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
7. An Argument for the Identity Theory

99

97

vi

Contents

8. Radical Interpretation 108
Postscripts to "Radical Interpretation" 119
9. Mad Pain and Martian Pain 122
Postscript to "Mad Pain and Martian Pain" 130
10. Attitudes De Dicto and De Se 133
Postscripts to "Attitudes De Dicto and De Se" 156
PART 3: PHILOSOPHY OF LANGUAGE
11. Languages and Language 163
12. General Semantics 189
Postscripts to "General Semantics" 230
13. Scorekeeping in a Language Game 233
14. 'Tensions 250
15. Truth in Fiction 261
Postscripts to "Truth in Fiction" 276
Index 281

161

Acknowledgments

I thank the editors and publishers who have kindly granted permission to reprint
the essays that appear in this volume. The places of first publication are as follows.
"Holes," Australasian Journal of Philosophy 48 (1970):206-12.
"Anselm and Actuality," Nous 4 (1970): 175-88.
"Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic," Journal of Philosophy 65
(1968): 113-26.
"Counterparts of Persons and Their Bodies," Journal of Philsophy 68 (1971):
203-11.
"Survival and Identity," in Amelie O. Rorty, ed., The Identities of Persons (University of California Press, 1976) 17-40.
"How to Define Theoretical Terms," Journal of Philosophy 67 (1970): 427-46.
"An Argument for the Identity Theory," Journal of Philosophy 63 (1966): 1725; with additional material from David M. Rosenthal, ed., Materialism and the
Mind-Body Problem (Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1971) 162 and 164-65.
"Radical Interpretation," Synthese 23 (1974): 331-44. Copyright © 1974 by
D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht, Holland.
"Mad Pain and Martian Pain," in Ned Block, ed., Readings in the Philosophy
of Psychology, Volume I (Harvard University Press, 1980) 216-22.
"Attitudes De Dicto and De Se," The Philosophical Review 88 (1979): 513-43.
"Languages and Language," in Keith Gunderson, ed., Minnesota Studies in the
Philosophy of Science, Volume VII (University of Minnesota Press, 1975) 3-35.

viii

Acknowledgments

"General Semantics," Synthese 22 (1970): 18-67. Copyright © 1970 by D.
Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht, Holland.
"Scorekeeping in a Language Game," Journal of Philosophical Logic 8 (1979):
339-59. Copyright © 1979 by D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht,
Holland.
"'Tensions," reprinted by permission of New York University Press from
Semantics and Philosophy edited by Milton K. Munitz and Peter K. Unger. Copyright © 1974 by New York University.
"Truth in Fiction," American Philosophical Quarterly 15 (1978): 37-46.

Introduction

The fifteen papers in this volume were originally published from 1966 to 1980.
Here, misprints apart, they are reprinted in their original form.' For the most part,
I stand by what I said. Where I do not, or where additions seemed urgently needed,
I have left the paper as it was but appended new postscripts.
The papers in this volume deal with topics in ontology, in philosophy of mind,
and in philosophy of language. Papers on counterfactuals, causation, and related
matters will appear in a sequel. I have left out papers which are rejoinders, or which
are of primarily technical interest, or which overlap too much with the papers I
have included.
I should have liked to be a piecemeal, unsystematic philosopher, offering independent proposals on a variety of topics. It was not to be. I succumbed too often
to the temptation to presuppose my views on one topic when writing on another.
Most notably, my realism toward unactualized possibles shows up in nearly every
paper in the book. Sometimes the argument requires it, as in " 'Tensions"; sometimes my principal point could just as well have been put neutrally, as when I
allude to other worlds in "Mad Pain and Martian Pain." But many cases fall in
between. If I did not take properties as sets of possible individuals, for instance, I
could still defend the thesis of "Attitudes De Dicto and De Se" that properties are
'With the exception of "An Argument for the Identity Theory," which incorporates notes added on the
occasion of an earlier reprinting.

x

Introduction

the appropriate objects of attitudes; but I could no longer support this thesis by
drawing an analogy between self-location with respect to the entire population of
logical space and with respect to the population of the actual world. I hope the
sceptical reader will consider breaking up the package and taking the parts that
suit him, but I have not done all I could have done to make his task easy. For,
after all, my principal interest has not been to proselytize but to figure out what I
should believe.
The reader in search of knock-down arguments in favor of my theories will go
away disappointed. Whether or not it would be nice to knock disagreeing philosophers down by sheer force of argument, 2 it cannot be done. Philosophical theories
are never refuted conclusively. (Or hardly ever. Gödel and Gettier may have done
it.) The theory survives its refutation—at a price. Argle has said what we accomplish in philosophical argument: we measure the price.3 Perhaps that is something
we can settle more or less conclusively. But when all is said and done, and all the
tricky arguments and distinctions and counterexamples have been discovered, presumably we will still face the question which prices are worth paying, which theories are on balance credible, which are the unacceptably counterintuitive consequences and which are the acceptably counterintuitive ones. On this question we
may still differ. And if all is indeed said and done, there will be no hope of discovering still further arguments to settle our differences.
It might be otherwise if, as some philosophers seem to think, we had a sharp
line between "linguistic intuition," which must be taken as unchallengeable evidence, and philosophical theory, which must at all costs fit this evidence. If that
were so, conclusive refutations would be dismayingly abundant. But, whatever may
be said for foundationalism in other subjects, this foundationalist theory of philosophical knowledge seems ill-founded in the extreme. Our "intuitions" are simply
opinions; our philosophical theories are the same. Some are commonsensical, some
are sophisticated; some are particular, some general; some are more firmly held,
some less. But they are all opinions, and a reasonable goal for a philosopher is to
bring them into equilibrium. Our common task is to find out what equilibria there
are that can withstand examination, but it remains for each of us to come to rest
at one or another of them. If we lose our moorings in everyday common sense, our
fault is not that we ignore part of our evidence. Rather, the trouble is that we settle
for a very inadequate equilibrium. If our official theories disagree with what we
cannot help thinking outside the philosophy room, then no real equilibrium has
been reached. Unless we are doubleplusgood doublethinkers, it will not last. And
it should not last, for it is safe to say that in such a case we will believe a great
deal that is false.
2

It would not be nice, of course. Robert Nozick has drawn attention to our strange way of talking about
philosophical argument as if its goal were to subjugate the minds of our esteemed colleagues, and to
escape their efforts to do likewise unto us. See his Philosophical Explanations (Harvard University Press,
1981), pages 4-5.
3
See the conclusion of "Holes" (in this volume).

Introduction

xi

Once the menu of well-worked-out theories is before us, philosophy is a matter
of opinion. Is that to say that there is no truth to be had? Or that the truth is of
our own making, and different ones of us can make it differently? Not at all! If you
say flatly that there is no god, and I say that there are countless gods but none of
them are our worldmates,4 then it may be that neither of us is making any mistake
of method. We may each be bringing our opinions to equilibrium in the most
careful possible way, taking account of all the arguments, distinctions, and counterexamples. But one of us, at least, is making a mistake of fact. Which one is
wrong depends on what there is.
So much for method. Let me briefly list some recurring themes that unify the
papers in this volume, thus frustrating my hope of philosophizing piecemeal.
Extreme modal realism, according to which there are many unactualized possible individuals, and according to which the actual individuals do not differ
in kind from the unactualized ones.
Exploitation of the analogies between space, time, and modality.
Materialism, according to which physical science will, if successful, describe
our world completely.
A broadly functionalist 5 theory of mind, according to which mental states qua
mental are realizers of roles specified in commonsense psychology.
Integration of formal semantics into a broader account of our use of language
in social interaction.
Refusal to take language as a starting point in the analysis of thought and of
modality.
I thank all those who have helped me to think about the matters discussed in
these papers. Those who have helped me most are listed in the footnotes to the
papers and the postscripts. Also I thank the University of California at Los Angeles;

4

As Peter Forrest has pointed out, I am perhaps the most extreme polytheist going. If, as I suppose, a
being does not have to satisfy some inconsistent description to be a god, then I cake the number of the
gods to be at least 32. Unlike most polytheists, however, I think of this world we live in as entirely
godless.
5
I do not know whether I am, strictly speaking, a functionalist. For I reject at least two main planks in
the platform. ( 1 ) 1 reject the individualistic thesis that someone is in pain, say, if and only if he is in
a state that occupies the role of pain for him, then, I think it also matters what role his state plays
in others of his kind. (2) I reject the thesis that "pain" rigidly designates a state shared by all who are
in pain. Rather, it nonrigidly designates the state that occupies the role of pain in the particular kind
under consideration. Indeed there is a state common to all who are in pain—"being in pain," I call
it—but it is not pain, and it does not itself occupy the role of pain. In the terminology of "How To
Define Theoretical Terms" (in this volume), it is a "diagonalized sense."

xii

Introduction

Princeton University; Victoria University of Wellington and the New ZealandUnited States Educational Foundation; and all those institutions that have given
me opportunities to try these papers out on critical audiences.
Princeton
November 1981

D. L.

Philosophical Papers
I

This page intentionally left blank

PART ONE

Ontology

This page intentionally left blank

ONE

Holes
with Stephanie Lewis

Argle. I believe in nothing but concrete material objects.
Bargle. There are many of your opinions I applaud; but one of your less pleasing
characteristics is your fondness for the doctrines of nominalism and materialism.
Every time you get started on any such topic, I know we are in for a long argument.
Where shall we start this time : numbers, colors, lengths, sets, force-fields, sensations, or what?
Argle. Fictions all! I've thought hard about every one of them.
Bargle. A long evening's work. Before we start, let me find you a snack. Will
you have some crackers and cheese?
Argle. Thank you. What splendid Gruyère!
Bargle You know, there are remarkably many holes in this piece.
Argle. There are.
Bargle. Got you!
Bargle. You admit there are many holes in that piece of cheese. Therefore, there
are some holes in it. Therefore, there are some holes. In other words, holes exist.
But holes are not made of matter; to the contrary, they result from the absence of
matter.
Argle. I did say that there are holes in the cheese; but that is not to imply that
there are holes.
Bargle. However not? If you say that there are A's that are B's, you are committed logically to the conclusion that there are A's.

3

4

Ontology

Argle. When / say that there are holes in something, I mean nothing more nor
less than that it is perforated. The synonymous shape-predicates ' ... is perforated'
and 'there are holes in . . .' —just like any other shape-predicate, say ' ... is a
dodecahedron'—may truly be predicated of pieces of cheese, without any implication that perforation is due to the presence of occult, immaterial entities. I am
sorry my innocent predicate confuses you by sounding like an idiom of existential
quantification, so that you think that inferences involving it are valid when they
are not. But I have my reasons. You, given a perforated piece of cheese and believing as you do that it is perforated because it contains immaterial entities called
holes, employ an idiom of existential quantification to say falsely 'There are holes
in it.' Agreeable fellow that I am, I wish to have a sentence that sounds like yours
and that is true exactly when you falsely suppose your existential quantification
over immaterial things to be true. That way we could talk about the cheese without
philosophizing, if only you'd let me. You and I would understand our sentences
differently, but the difference wouldn't interfere with our conversation until you
start drawing conclusions which follow from your false sentence but not from my
homonymous true sentence.'
Bargle, Oh, very well. But behold: there are as many holes in my piece of cheese
as in yours. Do you agree?
Argle. I'll take your word for it without even counting: there are as many holes
in mine as in yours. But what I mean by that is that either both pieces are singlyperforated, or both are doubly-perforated, or both are triply-perforated, and so on.
Bargle. What a lot of different shape-predicates you know! How ever did you
find time to learn them all? And what does 'and so on' mean?2
Argle. Let me just say that the two pieces are equally-perforated. Now I have
used only one two-place predicate.
Bargle. Unless I singly-perforate each of these crackers, how will you say that
there are as many holes in my cheese as crackers on my plate? Be so kind as not to
invent another predicate on the spot. I am quite prepared to go on until you have
told me about all the predicates you have up your sleeve. I have a good imagination, and plenty of time.
Argle. Oh, dear . . . (ponders)
Argle. I was wrong. There are holes.
Bargle. You recant?
Argle. No. Holes are material objects.
Bargle. I expected that sooner. You are thinking, doubtless, that every hole is
'Cf. W. V. Quine, "On What There Is," From a Logical Point of View, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, Mass:
Harvard University Press, 1961), p. 13.
2
Cf. Donald Davidson, "Theories of Meaning and Learnable Languages," in Y. Bar-Hillel, Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science, Proceedings of the 1964 International Congress (Amsterdam, 1965),
pp. 383-94.

Holes

5

filled with matter: silver amalgam, air, interstellar gas, luminiferous ether or whatever it may be.
Argle. No. Perhaps there are no truly empty holes; but I cannot deny that there
might be.
Bargle. How can something utterly devoid of matter be made of matter?
Argle. You're looking for the matter in the wrong place. (I mean to say, that's
what you would be doing if there were any such things as places, which there
aren't.) The matter isn't inside the hole. It would be absurd to say it was: nobody
wants to say that holes are inside themselves. The matter surrounds the hole. The
lining of a hole, you agree, is a material object. For every hole there is a hole-lining;
for every hole-lining there is a hole. I say the hole-lining is the hole.
Bargle. Didn't you say that the hole-lining surrounds the hole? Things don't
surround themselves.
Argle. Holes do. In my language, 'surrounds' said of a hole (described as such)
means 'is identical with.' 'Surrounds' said of other things means just what you
think it means.
Bargle. Doesn't it bother you that your dictionary must have two entries under
'surrounds' where mine has only one?
Argle. A little, but not much. I'm used to putting up with such things.
Bargle. Such whats?
Argle. Such dictionary entries. They're made of dried ink, you recall.
Bargle. Oh. I suppose you'll also say that ' . . . is in . . . ' or ' . . . is through
. . . ' said of a hole means " . . . is part of ...
Argle. Exactly so, Bargle.
Bargle. Then do you still say that 'There are holes in the cheese' contains an
unanalyzed shape-predicate synonymous with ... is perforated'?
Argle. No; it is an existential quantification, as you think it is. It means that
there exist material objects such that they are holes and they are parts of the piece
of cheese.
Bargle. But we wouldn't say, would we, that a hole is made out of cheese?
Argle. No; but the fact that we wouldn't say it doesn't mean it isn't true. We
wouldn't have occasion to say, unless philosophizing, that these walls are perpendicular to the floor; but they are. Anyhow we do say that caves are holes in the
ground and that some of them are made out of limestone.
Bargle. Take this paper-towel roller. Spin it on a lathe. The hole-lining spins.
Surely you'd never say the hole spins?
Argle. Why not?
Bargle. Even though the hole might continue to be entirely filled with a dowel
that didn't spin or move at all?
Argle. What difference does that make?

6

Ontology

Bargle. None, really. But now I have you: take a toilet-paper roller, put it inside
the paper-towel roller, and spin it the other way. The big hole spins clockwise. The
little hole spins counter-clockwise. But the little hole is part of the big hole, so it
spins clockwise along with the rest of the big hole. So if holes can spin, as you
think, the little hole turns out to be spinning in both directions at once, which is
absurd.
Argle. I see why you might think that the little hole is part of the big hole, but
you can't expect me to agree. The little hole is inside the big hole, but that's all.
Hence I have no reason to say that the little hole is spinning clockwise.
Bargle. Consider a thin-walled hole with a gallon of water inside. The volume
of the hole is at least a gallon, whereas the volume of the hole-lining is much less.
If the hole is the hole-lining, then whatever was true of one would have to be true
of the other. They could not differ in volume.
Argle. For 'hole' read 'bottle;' for 'hole-lining' also read 'bottle.' You have the
same paradox. Holes, like bottles, have volume—or, as I'd rather say, are voluminous or equi-voluminous with other things—in two different senses. There's the
volume of the hole or bottle itself, and there's the volume of the largest chunk of
fluid which could be put inside the hole or bottle without compression. For holes,
as for bottles, contextual clues permit us to keep track of which we mean.
Bargle. What is the volume of the hole itself? How much of the cheese do you
include as part of one of these holes? And how do you decide? Arbitrarily, that's
how. Don't try saying you include as little of the cheese as possible, for however
much you include, you could have included less.
Argle. What we call a single hole is really many hole-linings. Some include more
of the cheese, some include less. Therefore I need not decide, arbitrarily or otherwise, how much cheese is part of the hole. Many different decisions are equally
correct.
Bargle. How can a single hole be identical with many hole-linings that are not
identical with one another?
Argle. Really there are many different holes, and each is identical with a different
hole-lining. But all these different holes are the same hole.
Bargle. You contradict yourself. Don't you mean to say that they all surround
the same hole—where by 'surround' I mean 'surround,' not 'be identical with'?
Argle. Not at all. I would contradict myself if I said that two different holes
were identical. But I didn't; what I said was that they were the same hole. Two
holes are the same hole when they have a common part that is itself a hole.
Bargle. You agreed before that there were as many holes in my cheese as crackers
on my plate. Are there still?
Argle, Yes; there are two of each left.
Bargle. Two crackers, to be sure, but how can you say there are two holes?
Argle. Thus: there is a hole, and there is another hole that is not the same hole,
and every hole in the cheese is the same hole as one or the other.

Holes

7

Bargle. Be so kind as to say 'co-perforated,' not 'same,' and stop pretending to
talk about identity when you are not. I understand you now: co-perforation is supposed to be an equivalence relation among hole-linings, and when you say there
are two holes you are trying to say that there are two non-identical co-perforationclasses of hole-linings. Really you identify holes not with hole-linings but with
classes of hole-linings.
Argle. I would if I could, but I can't. No; holes are hole-linings; but when I
speak of them as holes, I find it convenient to use 'same' meaning 'co-perforated'
wherever a man of your persuasion would use 'same' meaning 'identical.' You
know my reason for this trickery: my sentences about sameness of holes will be
true just when you wrongly suppose your like-sounding sentences to be. The same
goes for sentences about number of holes, since we both analyze these in terms of
sameness.3
Bargle. You still haven't told me how you say there are as many holes in my
cheese as crackers on my plate, without also saying how many there are.
Argle. Here goes. There exist three things X, Y, and Z. X is part of the sum of
the crackers, Y is part of the cheese, and Z is part of Y. Every maximal connected
part of Y is a hole, and every hole in the cheese is the same hole as some maximal
connected part of Y. X overlaps each of the crackers and Z overlaps each maximal
connected part of Y. Everything which is either the intersection of X and a cracker
or the intersection of Z and some maximal connected part of Y is the same size as
any other such thing. X is the same size as Z.4
Bargle. Your devices won't work because co-perforation is not an equivalence
relation. Any two overlapping parts of my cheese have a common part that is a
hole-lining, though in most cases the hole-lining is entirely filled with cheese. To
be co-perforated is therefore nothing more than to overlap, and overlapping is no
equivalence relation. The result is that although, as you say, you can find two holelinings in this cheese that are not co-perforated, you can find another one that is
co-perforated with both of them.
Argle, If you were right that a hole made of cheese sould be entirely filled with
the same kind of cheese, you could find far more than two non-co-perforated holelinings; and there would be no such thing as cheese without holes in it. But you
are wrong. A hole is a hole not just by virtue of its own shape but also by virtue
of the way it contrasts with the matter inside it and around it. The same is true of
other shape-predicates; I wouldn't say that any part of the cheese is a dodecahedron,
though I admit that there are parts—parts that do not contrast with their surroundings—that are shaped like dodecahedra.
3

Cf. Quine's maxim of identification of indiscernibles in "Identity, Ostension, and Hypostasis," From
a Logical Point of View, p. 71; P.T. Geach, "Identity," Review of Metaphysics 21 (1967): 3-12.
4
This translation adapts a device from Nelson Goodman and W. V. Quine, "Steps toward a Constructive Nominalism," Journal of Symbolic Logic 12 (1947): 109-10.

8

Ontology

Bargle. Consider the paper-towel roller. How many holes?
Argle. One. You know what I mean: many, but they're all the same.
Bargle. I think you must say there are at least two. The left half and the right
half are not the same hole. They have no common part, so no common part that
is a hole.
Argle. They're not holes, they're two parts of a hole.
Bargle. Why aren't they holes themselves? They are singly-perforated and they
are made of matter unlike the matter inside them. If I cut them apart you'd have
to say they were holes?
Argle. Yes.
Bargle. You admit that a hole can be a proper part of a bigger—say, thickerskinned—hole?
Argle. Yes.
Bargle. You admit that they are shaped like holes?
Argle. Yes, but they aren't holes. I can't say why they aren't. I know which
things are holes, but I can't give you a definition. But why should I? You already
know what hole-linings are. I say the two halves of the roller are only parts of a
hole because I—like you—would say they are only parts of a hole-lining. What
isn't a hole-lining isn't a hole.
Bargle. In that case, I admit that co-perforation may be an equivalence relation
at least among singly-perforated hole-linings.
Argle. All holes are singly-perforated. A doubly-perforated thing has two holes
in it that are not the same hole.
Bargle. Are you sure? Take the paper-towel roller and punch a little hole in its
side. Now you have a hole in a hole-lining. You'd have to say you have a hole in
a hole. You have a little hole which is part of a big hole; the big hole is not singlyperforated; and the little hole and the big hole are the same hole, since the little
hole is a common part of each.
Argle. I think not. You speak of the big hole; but what we have are two big
holes, not the same, laid end to end. There is also the little hole, not the same as
either big hole, which overlaps them both. Of course we sometimes call something
a hole, in a derivative sense, if it is a connected sum of holes. Any decent cave
consists of many holes that are not the same hole, so I must have been speaking in
this derivative sense when I said that caves are holes.
Bargle. What peculiar things you are driven to say when philosophy corrupts
your mind! Tell me the truth: would you have dreamt for a moment of saying there
were two big holes rather than one if you were not suffering under the influence of
a philosophical theory?
Argle. No; I fear I would have remained ignorant.
Bargle. I see that I can never hope to refute you, since I no sooner reduce your
position to absurdity than you embrace the absurdity.
Argle. Not absurdity; disagreement with common opinion.
Bargle. Very well. But I, for one, have more trust in common opinions than I

Holes

9

do in any philosophical reasoning whatever. In so far as you disagree with them,
you must pay a great price in the plausibility of your theories.
Argle. Agreed. We have been measuring that price. I have shown that it is not
so great as you thought; I am prepared to pay it. My theories can earn credence by
their clarity and economy; and if they disagree a little with common opinion, then
common opinion may be corrected even by a philosopher.
Bargle. The price is still too high.
Argle. We agree in principle; we're only haggling.
Bargle. We do. And the same is true of our other debates over ontic parsimony.
Indeed, this argument has served us as an illustration—novel, simple, and selfcontained—of the nature of our customary disputes.
Argle. And yet the illustration has interest in its own right. Your holes, had I
been less successful, would have punctured my nominalistic materialism with the
greatest of ease.
Bargle. Rehearsed and refreshed, let us return to—say—the question of classes.5

5

There would be little truth to the guess that Argle is one of the authors and Bargle is the other. We
thank Charles Chastain, who also is neither Argle nor Bargle, for many helpful comments.

TWO

Anselm and Actuality

I. INTRODUCTION
Philosophy abounds in troublesome arguments—endlessly debated, perennially
plausible, perennially suspect. The standards of validity for modal reasoning have
long been unclear; they become clear only when we provide a semantic analysis of
modal logic by reference to possible worlds and to possible things therein. 1 Thus
insofar as we understand modal reasoning at all, we understand it as disguised
reasoning about possible beings. But if these are intelligible enough to provide
modal logic with foundations, they are intelligible enough to be talked about
explicitly. Modal reasoning can be replaced by nonmodal, ordinary reasoning about
possible things. Given an obscure modal argument, we can translate it into a nonmodal argument—or into several nonmodal arguments, if the given argument was
ambiguous. Once we have a nonmodal argument, we have clear standards of validity; and once we have nonmodal translations of the premises, we can understand
them well enough to judge whether they are credible. Foremost among our modal
headaches is Anselm's ontological argument. How does it fare under the translation
treatment I have prescribed? It turns out to have two principal nonmodal translations. One is valid; the other has credible premises; the difference between the two
I am graceful to Alvin Plantinga for his criticisms of an earlier version of this paper.
'See, for instance, Saul Ktipke, "Semantical Considerations on Modal Logic," Acta Philosophlca Fennica
16(1963): 83-94.

10

Anselm and Actuality

11

is subtle. No wonder the argument has never been decisively refuted; no wonder
it has never convinced the infidel.
II. FORMULATION OF THE ARGUMENT
The ontological argument notoriously comes in countless versions. We shall confine
our attention to one of the arguments that can, with some plausibility, be extracted
from Chapter II of the Proslogion—not the only one, but the one I take to be both
simplest and soundest. The reader must judge for himself whether what I say can
be adapted to his own favorite ontological argument.
The version we shall work on has the merit of bypassing some familiar difficulties that are not at the heart of the matter. It will have no chance to be invalid in
some of the ways that ontological arguments have been said to be invalid. The
proper name "God" will not appear, so we will not have to worry about the form
or content of its definition. In fact, there will be no defining of anything. We will
also not have to worry about the logic of definite descriptions. If I say "That which
is red is not green" I might just mean "Whatever is red is not green," neither
implying nor presupposing that at least or at most one thing is red. Similarly, we
can construe Anselm's "that, than which nothing greater can be conceived" not as
a definite description but rather as an idiom of universal quantification.
Our argument is as follows:
Premise 1. Whatever exists in the understanding can be conceived to exist in reality.
Premise 2. Whatever exists in the understanding would be greater if it existed in
reality than if it did not.
Premise 3. Something exists in the understanding, than which nothing greater can
be conceived.
Conclusion. Something exists in reality, than which nothing greater can be conceived.
HI. THE FIRST PREMISE
It is our plan to reason explicitly about possible worlds and possible things therein.
These possible beings will be included in our domain of discourse. The idioms of
quantification, therefore, will be understood as ranging over all the beings we wish
to talk about, whether existent or nonexistent.
In the context at hand, the appropriate sense of possibility is conceivability. Possible worlds are conceivable worlds. If some otherwise possible worlds are inconceivable—say, seventeen-dimensional worlds—we should not count those; whereas
if some otherwise impossible worlds are conceivable—say, worlds in which there
is a largest prime—we should count those. Given any statement about what may

12

Ontology

be conceived to be the case, we translate it into a statement about what is the case
in some conceivable world.
Thus to say that something can be conceived to exist in reality is to say that in
some conceivable world, it does exist. This makes sense only if existence is taken
to be a relation between beings and worlds, so that we can say that something
exists in one world but not in another. 2
Premise 1 tells us that whatever exists in the understanding exists in some conceivable world or other. Thus the beings that may be said to exist in the understanding are among the beings we have already admitted into our domain of discourse. It is ill-advised to speak of them as existing in the understanding: they do
not bear to the understanding the same relation which something existing in a
world bears to that world! Let us simply call them understandable beings.
We are ready now to give a nonmodal translation of Premise 1, as follows:

(For any understandable being x, there is a world w such that x exists in w.)
Is the premise credible? I have no wish to contest it. Someone might say that a
round square is an understandable being that does not exist in any conceivable
world; and perhaps there is enough latitude in the notions of understandability and
conceivability so that he might be within his rights. But the ontological arguer
who construes those notions so that Premise 1 is a necessary truth is also within his
rights, and that is what matters. It is not for me, but for the ontological arguer, to
explain what existing in the understanding is supposed to be, and what is supposed
to be the relation between the existence in one's understanding of a possible being
and one's understanding of some or all descriptions that would apply to that being.
I am willing to grant that he can give some adequate account.
He might wish to do so in such a way that the understandability of a given
possible being is a contingent matter, so that a being might be understandable in
one world but not in another. I may grant him this; but we shall only be concerned
with actual understandability, understandability in the actual world. Hence the
predicate "U" need not be relativized to worlds.3

IV. THE SECOND PREMISE
In some versions of the ontological argument, it seems that a hypothetical nonexistent God is supposed to be excelled in greatness by some other conceivable being:
2

We will not need to settle the question whether anything—or any non-abstract thing—ever exists in
more than one world, or in none, or partly in one and partly in another. For consideration of such
questions, see my "Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic," in this volume.
3
Similar remarks apply to "W". The ontological arguer might choose to explain conceivabiiity in such
a way that a world sometimes is conceivable from one world but not from another. However, we will
be concerned only with actual conceivability of worlds; that is, conceivability from the actual world.

Anselm and Actuality

13

one that exists, but otherwise is just like the hypothetical nonexistent God. I am
unable to see how this strategy could yield an argument close enough to soundness
to be interesting. Moreover, it is not Anselm's strategy; he writes: "For suppose it
exists in the understanding alone: then it can be conceived to exist in reality; which
is greater." What excels a hypothetical nonexistent God is not some other being;
it is that same being, conceived as existent.
To capture this idea, beings must have their greatnesses relative to worlds. Premise 2 says that any understandable being is greater in worlds in which it exists than
in worlds in which it does not. We have the following nonmodal translation of
Premise 2:

(For any understandable being x, and for any worlds w and v, if x exists in w
but x does not exist in v, then the greatness of x in w exceeds the greatness
of x in v.)
We need not regard the seeming hypostatization of greatnesses as more than a
figure of speech, since we can take "the greatness o f . . . in ... exceeds the greatness
of ... in . . . " as an indivisible 4-place predicate.
I have no wish to dispute the second premise. In saying what makes for greatness, the ontological arguer is merely expounding his standards of greatness.
Within wide limits, he is entitled to whatever standards of greatness he wants. All
we can demand is that he stick to fixed standards throughout his argument, and
throughout his subsequent account of the theological significance of the conclusion
thereof.

V. THE THIRD PREMISE
The third premise says that there is some understandable being x whose greatness
cannot be conceived to be exceeded by the greatness of anything. That is, the greatness of x is not exceeded by the greatness in any conceivable world w of any being
y. We have seen that greatnesses, as thought of by the ontological arguer, belong
to beings paired with worlds; according to the third premise, no such pair has a
greatness exceeding the greatness of a certain understandable being x.
But if greatnesses belong to beings relative to worlds, what are we talking about
when we say: the greatness of x? Which greatness of x? The greatness of x in which
conceivable world? Different answers to the question yield different nonmodal
translations of Premise 3.
We might construe Premise 3 as saying that what is unexceeded is the actual
greatness of x, the greatness of x here in the actual world. If we speak of the greatness of something without mentioning a world, surely we ordinarily mean its greatness in the actual world; for we are ordinarily not talking about any worlds except
the actual world. So it is plausible that even when other worlds are under discus-

14

Ontology

sion, we are speaking about the actual world unless we say otherwise. Thus, introducing a name "@" for the actual world, we obtain this first nonmodal translation
of Premise 3:

(There is an understandable being x, such that for no world w and being y
does the greatness of y in w exceed the greatness of x in the actual world.)
Alternatively, we might construe Premise 3 as saying something weaker: that
what is unexceeded is the greatest greatness of x, the greatness of x in any one of
the worlds in which x is at its greatest. That is equivalent to saying merely that the
greatness of x in some world v is unexceeded; for if the greatness of x in v is
unexceeded, v is one of the worlds in which x is at its greatest. Thus we obtain a
second nonmodal translation of Premise 3:

(There are an understandable being x and a world v, such that for no world
w and being y does the greatness of y in w exceed the greatness of x in v.)
Or we might construe Premise 3 as saying something stronger: that what is
unexceeded is any greatness of x, the greatness of x in any world whatever. Thus
we obtain a third nonmodal translation of Premise 3:

(There is an understandable being x such that for no worlds v and w and
being y does the greatness of y in w exceed the greatness of x in v.)
Under the auxiliary premise 4, which we shall take for granted henceforth,

(The actual world is a world).
3C implies 3A, but not conversely, and 3A implies 3B, but not conversely.
Perhaps there is one more possibility: For any world w, the greatness in w of x
is not exceeded by the greatness in w of anything. Thus we obtain a fourth translation:

(There is an understandable being x such that for no world w and being y
does the greatness of y in w exceed the greatness of x in w.)
3D is not a plausible translation, since it might be true even if the greatness of
anything x in any world w is exceeded by the greatness of something else elsewhere.
Premise 3B, at least, is moderately credible. It says that there is a highest grade
of greatness, and that this grade of greatness is occupied, in some world, by an

Anse/m and Actuality

15

understandable being. If, above some level, we were prepared to discriminate only
finitely many grades of greatness (no matter how many), and if we were prepared
to admit that any grade of greatness, however high, could be occupied by an understandable being, then we would thereby be committed to accepting 3B. I have no
wish to dispute 3B.
We postpone consideration of the credibility of the stronger translations 3A and
3C of Premise 3. We will not need to consider whether 3D is credible.

VI. THE CONCLUSION
The conclusion says that there is some being x, existing in the actual world, whose
greatness cannot be conceived to be exceeded by the greatness of anything. (We
need not add that x is an understandable being, though that would follow if the
rest did.) That is, the greatness of x is not exceeded by the greatness in any conceivable world w of any being y.
We ask again: which greatness of x? But this time the answer clearly should be:
the actual greatness of x, the greatness of x here in the actual world. Other versions
of the conclusion would either imply this version or be of no theological interest.
The fool would not mind being convinced that there is an actual being who might
conceivably have been—is, in some conceivable world—of unexcelled greatness.
So our nonmodal translation of the conclusion resembles 3A, our first version of
Premise 3:

(There is a being x existing in the actual world such that for no world w and
being y does the greatness of y in w exceed the greatness of x in the actual
world.)

VII. VALIDITY OF THE ARGUMENT
We now have four precise, nonmodal translations of our original argument, one
for each alternative translation of Premise 3. It is a routine matter to determine,
by ordinary nonmodal logic, which are valid and which are not. It turns out that
the arguments from 3A and 3C
1, 2, 3A, 4

1, 2, 3C, 4
C

C

are valid, whereas the arguments from 3B and 3D
1, 2, 3B, 4
C

1, 2, 3D, 4
C

16

Ontology

are not valid. Hence, we shall not consider the arguments from 3B and 3D further,
despite the moderate credibility of 3B. Moreover, since 3C implies 3A and the
argument from 3A is already valid, we need not consider the argument from 3C
separately. Rather, we shall regard the inference from 3C to 3A as a possible preliminary to the argument from 3A, and ask whether 3C has any credibility to pass
on to 3A.

VIII. CREDIBILITY OF THE THIRD PREMISE
The success of our form of the ontological argument therefore turns out to depend
on the credibility of 3A, our first nonmodal translation of the premise that something exists in the understanding, than which nothing greater can be conceived.
Why might an ontological arguer accept 3A?
He might infer 3A from 3C, if 3C were credible. Why might he accept 3C?
He might infer 3C from premises he accepts concerning the existence and nature
of God. But in that case he could not argue from 3C without circularity.
He might assume that for every description he understands, there is some understandable being answering to that description. But what of such well-understood
descriptions as "largest prime" or "round square"? Possibly he can give some
account of understandable beings such that one of them answers to any understood
description; but if so, we can hardly continue to grant him Premise 1, according
to which every understandable being can be conceived to exist. Premise 1 is indispensable to the argument from 3C, since without Premise 1, 3C might be true by
virtue of a supremely great understandable being existing in no conceivable world.
He might obtain 3C by using the following Principle of Saturation: any sentence
saying that there exists an understandable being of so-and-so description is true
unless provably false. Such a principle would, of course, permit a much simpler
ontological argument than ours: apply it to the description "Divine being existing
in every world." But the Principle of Saturation can as easily be used to refute 3C
as to defend it. Consider the sentence (*) saying that there is an understandable
being which is greater than anything else in some world, but is exceeded in greatness in another world.

If the Principle of Saturation supports 3C,4 it should equally well support (*);
otherwise it makes a discrimination unjustified by any visibly relevant difference
between 3C and (*). But (*) is incompatible with 3C. So if the Principle of Saturation supports 3C, then it is a bad principle.
''I argue conditionally since we cannot say whether the Principle of Saturation supports 3C (and (*})
until we have formulated the Principle more precisely. In particular, we would have to settle whether
the provability mentioned in the Principle is to include provability by means of the Principle itself.

Anselm and Actuality

17

I know of no other way to defend 3C. Therefore let us turn to the question
whether 3A, unsupported by 3C, is credible in its own right.
The ontological arguer might accept 3A with or without also accepting G, a
generalization over all worlds of which 3A is the instance pertaining to the actual
world.

(For any world v, there is an understandable being x such that for no world
w and being y does the greatness of y in w exceed the greatness of x in v.)
Why might he accept G? He might infer it from 3C; but we know of no noncircular reasons for him to believe 3C. Unless inferred from 3C, G does not seem
credible. Let v be a bad world—say, one containing nothing but a small chunk of
mud—and let w be the most splendid conceivable world. Then according to G
there is some understandable being whose greatness in v is unexceeded by the greatness in w of anything—even the greatest of the inhabitants of w. What could this
understandable being be? By 1 and 2 (which the onto logical arguer accepts) it is
something that exists in v. Is it part of the mud? Or is it an abstract entity that
exists everywhere? If the latter, then there is no reason for it to be especially great
at v, while if it is equally great everywhere then we are back to arguing from 3C.
It seems that in order to believe G without inferring it from 3C, the ontological
arguer would need to adopt standards of greatness so eccentric as to rob his conclusion of its expected theological import. If some mud in its mud-world is deemed
to be as great as the greatest angel in his heavenly world, then it does not matter
whether or not something exists in reality than which nothing greater—by these
standards of greatness—can be conceived.
If the ontological arguer accepts 3A without also accepting G, then he is claiming that the actual world possesses a distinction which at least some other worlds
lack: the actual world is one of those worlds at which something achieves a greatness unexceeded by the greatness of anything anywhere. For short: the actual world,
unlike some other worlds, is a place of greatest greatness. Why is this credible?
What is special about the actual world, compared to some others, that should lead
us to think it a place of greatest greatness?
It will not do for the ontological arguer to cite various features of the actual
world that impress him: its tall mountains, beautiful women, wise philosophers or
what not. In the first place, the actual world is greatly excelled in all such respects
by other worlds—it is possible for mountains to be taller than they actually are,
and so on. In the second place, the ontological arguer is not supposed to be giving
us empirical theology; we wish to know whether his premises are at all credible a
priori.
It remains for the ontological arguer to hold that the actual world is special, and
a fitting place of greatest greatness, precisely because it, alone out of the worlds, is
actual. This reason seems prima facie to have some force: whatever actuality may

18

Ontology

be, it is something we deem tremendously important, and there is only one world
that has it. We picture the actual world—indefensibly—as the one solid, vivid,
energetic world among innumerable ghostly, faded, wispy, "merely" possible
worlds. Therefore it may well seem plausible that the actual world, being special
by its unique actuality, might also be special by being a place of greatest greatness.
This does not pretend to be a proof of 3A, but we do not demand proof; we wish
to know if the ontological arguer has any reason at all to accept 3A, even a reason
that does no more than appeal to his sense of fitness.

IX. THE NATURE OF ACTUALITY
But this last reason to accept 3A is not only weak; it is mistaken. It is true that
our world alone is actual; but that does not make our world special, radically different from all other worlds.
I suggest that "actual" and its cognates should be analyzed as indexical terms:
terms whose reference varies, depending on relevant features of the context of utterance. The relevant feature of context, for the term "actual," is the world at which
a given utterance occurs. According to the indexical analysis I propose, "actual"
(in its primary sense) refers at any world w to the world w. "Actual" is analogous
to "present," an indexical term whose reference varies depending on a different
feature of context: "present" refers at any time t to the time t. "Actual" is analogous also to "here," "I," "you," "this," and "aforementioned"—indexical terms
depending for their reference respectively on the place, the speaker, the intended
audience, the speaker's acts of pointing, and the foregoing discourse.5
I do not mean to say that "actual" has different meanings in the languages used
in different worlds, so that for any world w, "the actual world" is a proper name
of w in the native language of w. That is false. (Just as it would be false to say that
"today" changes its meaning every midnight). Rather, the fixed meaning we give
to "actual" is such that, at any world w, "actual" refers in our language to w.
I use "refers" broadly to cover various semantic relations for indexical terms of
various grammatical categories. To speak more precisely: at any world w, the name
"the actual world" denotes or names w; the predicate "is actual" designates or is
true of w and whatever exists in w; the operator "actually" is true of propositions
true at w, and so on for cognate terms of other categories. Similarly, at any time t
the name "the present time" denotes t, the predicate "is present" is true of t and
whatever exists at t, the operator "presently" is true of propositions true at t, and
so on.
'For a general account of indexicality, see Richard Montague, "Pragmatics," Contemporary Philosophy,
ed. by Raymond Klibansky (Florence: La Nuova Italic Editrice, 1968.) A. N. Prior states the indexical
analysis of actuality in "Modal Logic and the Logic of Applicability," Theoria 34 (1968): 191-92;
but, sadly, he goes on to say "this seems a tall story, and ... I doubt whether anyone seriously believes
it."

Anselm and Actuality

19

A complication: we can distinguish primary and secondary senses of "actual" by
asking what world "actual" refers to at a world w in a context in which some other
world v is under consideration. In the primary sense, it still refers to w, as in "If
Max ate less, he would be thinner than he actually is." In the secondary sense it
shifts its reference to the world v under consideration, as in "If Max ate less, he
would actually enjoy himself more." A similar distinction occurs among temporal
indexicals: the unaccompanied present tense does, and the present tense accompanied by "now" does not, tend to shift its reference from the time of an utterance
to another time under consideration.6 "It will be the case in 2100 A.D. that there
are men on Mars," said now, is probably true, whereas "It will be the case in 2100
A.D. that there are now men on Mars," said now, is probably false. The secondary,
shifting sense of "actual" is responsible for our translation 3D. If we set out on the
route that leads to 3A, we get "There is an understandable being x, such that for
no world w and being y does the greatness of y in w exceed the actual greatness of
x." Then if we take "actual" in the secondary sense, it shifts from referring to our
own world to referring to the world w under consideration, thereby yielding 3D
rather than 3A.
The strongest evidence for the indexical analysis of actuality is that it explains
why skepticism about our own actuality is absurd. How do we know that we are
not the unactualized possible inhabitants of some unactualized possible world? We
can give no evidence: whatever feature of our world we may mention, it is shared
by other worlds that are not actual. Some unactualized grass is no less green, some
unactualized dollars buy no less (unactualized) bread, some unactualized philosophers are no less sure they are actual. Either we know in some utterly mysterious
way that we are actual; or we do not know it at all.
But of course we do know it. The indexical analysis of actuality explains how
we know it: in the same way I know that I am me, that this time is the present,
or that I am here. All such sentences as "This is the actual world," "I am actual,"
"I actually exist," and the like are true on any possible occasion of utterance in any
possible world. That is why skepticism about our own actuality is absurd.
"This is the actual world" is true whenever uttered in any possible world. That
is not to say, of course, that all worlds are actual. "All worlds are actual" is false
whenever uttered in any world. Everyone may truly call his own world actual, but
no one, wherever located, may truly call all the worlds actual. It is the same with
time. Sometimes it seems to the novice that indexical analysts of "present" are
pretending that all times alike are present. But no: although "This time is present"
is always true, "All times are present"is never true. If we take a timeless point of
view and ignore our own location in time, the big difference between the present
time and other times vanishes. That is not because we regard all times as equally
present, but rather because if we ignore our own location in time we cannot use
6

I owe this distinction to J. A. W. Kamp, "The Treatment of 'Now' As a 1-place Sentential Operator"
(1967, unpublished). It is discussed also by A. N. Prior in '"Now,"' Noûs 2 (1968): 101-19.

20

Ontology

temporally indexical terms like "present" at all. And similarly, I claim, if we take
an a priori point of view and ignore our own location among the worlds, the big
difference between the actual world and other worlds should vanish. That is not
because we regard all worlds as equally actual7 but rather because if we ignore our
own location among the worlds we cannot use indexical terms like "actual."
If I am right, the ontological arguer who says that his world is special because
his world alone is the actual world is as foolish as a man who boasts that he has
the special fortune to be alive at a unique moment in history: the present. The
actual world is not special in itself, but only in the special relation it bears to the
ontological arguer. Other worlds bear the same relation to other ontological
arguers. The ontological arguer has no reason to regard his own actual world as
special except in its relation to him. Hence he has not even a weak reason to think
that his world differs from some other worlds in being a place of greatest greatness—that is, not even a weak reason to accept 3A without also accepting its generalization G. We have already found that he has no reason to accept G without
3C and no good, non-circular reason to accept 3C We should conclude, therefore,
that the argument from 3A is a valid argument from a premise we have no noncircular reason to accept.

X. CONCLUSION
Of the alternative non-modal translations of our ontological argument, the best are
the arguments from 3A and 3B. The premises of the argument from 3B enjoy some
credibility, but the argument is invalid. The argument from 3A is valid, but 3A
derives its credibility entirely from the illusion that because our world alone is
actual, therefore our world is radically different from all other worlds—special in
a way that makes it a fitting place of greatest greatness. But once we recognize the
indexical nature of actuality, the illusion is broken and the credibility of 3A evaporates. It is true of any world, at that world but not elsewhere, that that world
alone is actual. The world an ontological arguer calls actual is special only in that
the ontological arguer resides there—and it is no great distinction for a world to
harbor an ontological arguer. Think of an ontological arguer in some dismally
mediocre world—there are such ontological arguers—arguing that his world alone
is actual, hence special, hence a fitting place of greatest greatness, hence a world
wherein something exists than which no greater can be conceived to exist. He is
wrong to argue thus. So are we.
7

Prior slips here in presenting the indexical analysis (as a tall story). He writes, "this word 'actual' must
not be taken as signifiying that the world in question is any more 'real' than those other worlds . . . "
But "real" (even in scare-quotes) is presumably indexical in the same way as "actual." Hence we can
no more say that all worlds are equally real than we can say that all worlds alike are actual.

Anselm and Actuality

21

Postscripts to
"Anselm and Actuality"
A. IMPOSSIBLE WORLDS
I retract my misguided stipulation that "If some otherwise impossible worlds are
conceivable ... we should count those [as worlds]." I thought to smooth over the
difference between my own talk of possible worlds and Anselm's talk of what can
be conceived, but I did so at an intolerable cost. Truth to tell, there are no impossible worlds, whatever feats of conceiving may be within our power.
Suppose there were. We would have to take great care in describing the impossible things that go on therein. We would have to distinguish very carefully
between (1) the consistent truth about this extraordinary subject matter, and (2)
false contradictions about it. For contradictions are not the truth about any subject
matter whatsoever, no matter how exotic.1 For instance, we would have to distinguish (1) the uncanny truth about a certain impossible world where pigs can fly
and also they cannot from (2) the contradictory falsehood that, in that world, pigs
can fly, although it is not so that, in that world, pigs can fly. —Nonsense! There
is no such distinction to be drawn.
I am well aware that formal means are on offer for keeping track of the alleged
distinction. It would suffice to imitate my own way of distinguishing between (1)
the truth about the inconsistent content of an impossible story, and (2) contradictory falsehoods about that story. (See Postscript B to "Truth in Fiction," in this
volume.) There are also the proposals of the relevantists. 2 But it's no use knowing
how to keep track of a distinction that does not exist. If worlds were stories, or
"set-ups," or suitably constructed models, or representations of some other sort,
there could very well be impossible ones. They would purport to represent worlds,
but could not really do so. We could very well distinguish between the truth about
the content of an impossible representation and contradictory falsehoods about it.
But worlds are not representations, as witness the case of this world. If anyone takes
distinctions that make sense only for representations, and applies them to
"worlds," charity dictates that really he is not speaking of worlds at all. He is not
referring to those huge things, in one of which we live and move and have our
being. Let us hope he didn't even intend to.
1

This is uncontroversial, though it has been controverted. See, for instance, Graham Priest, "The Logic
of Paradox," Journal of Philosophical Logic 8 (1979): 219-41.
2
For instance, the *-function that governs "negation" in R. and V. Routley, "The Semantics of First
Degree Entailment," Nous 6 (1972): 335-59.

22

Ontology

B. THE AMBIGUITY OF SHIFTINESS
I noted in passing that we can distinguish two senses of actual: a primary sense in
which it refers to the world of utterance even in a context where another world is
under consideration, and a secondary sense in which it shifts its reference in such a
context. This ambiguity deserves more emphasis than I gave it, for without it my
indexical analysis is indefensible. This has been shown by Peter van Inwagen3 and
Allen Hazen,4 as follows. Consider these sentences.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

The following is contingent: in the actual world, Caesar is murdered.
Let 'Alpha' name the actual world; Alpha might not have been actual.
Let 'Beta' name some nonactual world; Beta might have been actual.
There could have been objects other than those there actually are.
I could have been richer than I actually am.

Each of these sentences, I take it, is true on a natural reading. But if "actual" always
has its primary, unshifty sense, how can (l)-(3) be true? If, on the other hand, it
always has its secondary, shifty sense, how can (4)-(5) be true? Neither sense will
serve for all cases. We need both.

C. SCEPTICISM REVIVIFIED?
According to my modal realism, there are countless unfortunates just like ourselves
who rely on reasonable inductive methods and are sorely deceived. Not the best
but the third best explanation of their total evidence is the true one; or all their
newly examined emeralds turn out to be blue; or one dark day their sun fails to
rise. To be sure, these victims of inductive error differ from us in that they are not
actual. But I consider that no great difference. They are not our worldmates, but
they do not differ from us in kind.
Among those who trust induction, those who are sorely deceived are just as
numerous as those who are not. For it follows from plausible premises that both
sets have the same cardinality as the set of worlds.
And yet we are confident that we are not among the deceived! Inductive disaster
strikes ever so many victims no different from ourselves, and still we feel safe in
continuing to trust induction. We have no reason at all for this faith in our own
luck.
So it seems that the modal realist must be a sceptic about induction, else he is
totally unreasonable in his optimism. —I disagree. As a modal realist, I have no
more and no less reason than anyone else to give over my groundless faith in my
inductive luck. I have the reason everyone has: it is possible, and possible in ever
'"Indexcality and Actuality," Philosophical Review 89 (1980): 403-26.
4
"One of the Truths about Actuality," Analysis 39 (1979): 1-3.

Anselm and Actuality

23

so many ways, that induction will deceive me. That reason is metaphysically neutral. It becomes no better and no worse if reformulated in accordance with one or
another ontology of modality.
Then why does it sound so much more disturbing when stated in the modal
realist way? —Simply because it sounds fresh and new. We have never defeated
the case for scepticism, we have only learned not to let it bother us. Let it reappear
in new guise—any new guise—and our habit of ignoring it gives out.
No getting around it: there is a striking analogy between our inductive reason,
on the one hand, and unreasonable optimism, on the other. For both consist in
ignoring possibilities—perfectly good possibilities, which we cannot rule out—of
disaster. It does not matter what the metaphysical nature of the ignored possibilities
may be. The distressing analogy of reason to unreason remains. That analogy is no
reason to start calling reason unreason, or vice versa. (Even if life is somehow very
like a fountain, we had best go on calling the two by different names.) All the same
it is disconcerting, especially if presented in a fresh way that gets past our defenses.5

D. THE ANTHROPIC PRINCIPLE
"Why is there something and not rather nothing?" —"If there were nothing, you
wouldn't be here to ask the question." Ask a silly question, get a silly answer. But
perhaps what makes the answer silly is just that it tells the questioner no more than
he must have known already. What if an answer of the same sort were more informative?
"Why is the universe such as to make possible the evolution of intelligent
life?"—"If it were not, you wouldn't be here to ask the question." A bit better,
but still it gives no real news.
"Why does the recessional velocity of the universe after the big bang exactly
equal the escape velocity?" —"If it did not, the universe would not be such as to
make possible the evolution of intelligent life [here follows an elaborate
demonstration], in which case you wouldn't be here to ask the question." This
time, the answer deserves to be taken seriously. In recent cosmology, such questions
sometimes do get such answers. They are called "anthropic." 6
What is an anthropic answer? It might be meant as a veiled argument from
design, or from natural teleology, or from subjective idealism. Let me assume that
5

I am grateful to J. J. C. Smart, Robert M. Adams, and Peter Forrest, for forcefully putting to me the
objection here considered. It is discussed at length by Forrest in "The Sceptical Implications of Realism
about Possible Worlds," presented at the August 1981 conference of the Australasian Association of
Philosophy. Forrest thinks, however, that to make the objection stick, we must find some sense in
which the deceived vastly outnumber the undeceived.
6
George Gale, "The Anthropic Principle." Scientific American 245, no. 6 (December 1981): 154-71;
and John Leslie, "Anthropic Principle, World Ensemble, Design," American Philosophical Quarterly 9
(1982): 141-51.

24

Ontology

it is none of these. Then it is not a straight answer to the "why"-question. The
questioner sought information about the causal history of his explanandum.7 He
was not given any. (And not necessarily because there was none to give. In at least
some of the cases in which anthropic answers are offered, he could truly have been
told that his explanandum is so global a feature of the world that it leaves no room
for causes distinct from itself, and hence it cannot have any causal history.) And
yet he was told something that was responsive, in a way, to his request for explanatory information.
I think he was offered consolation for the lack of the explanatory information he
sought. He was told: the thing is not so very mystifying after all, it was only to be
expected. Therefore it is not so very bad if it must be left unexplained.
If actuality is a special distinction whereby one world is distinguished from all
the rest, the anthropic consolation falls flat. For it seems that the capacity to support
life also is a very special distinction, at least among worlds with roughly the same
sort of physics as ours. It does not get rid of any mystery if we are told that both
these rare distinctions happen to belong to the same world.
It is otherwise if actuality is not a rare distinction at all, but merely indexical.
The anthropic answer serves its purpose well. For then the unexplained explanandum comes down, either immediately or by way of an elaborate demonstration, to
this: the world we inhabit is one of the habitable worlds. However scarce the habitable worlds may be, it is no wonder that our world is one of them. We should
turn out to live in a world that isn't habitable? Or, to return to the original question, in a world where there is nothing, and not rather something?8

E. TERMINOLOGICAL ACTUALISM
It is part of my view that many things—whole worlds and all their parts, including
some people very like ourselves—are not actual. Hence my view is opposed to
actualism: the thesis that everything there is (taking the quantifier as entirely unrestricted) is actual.
Actualism might be a metaphysical thesis to the effect that there are far fewer
things than I believe in—only a large finite number of people, for instance, instead
of an uncountable infinity of them spread over countless worlds.
But it might just be a terminological proposal, neutral with respect to ontology:
whatever things there may or may not be, and however they may be related, all of
them are to be called actual. "Actual" is to be used indiscriminately, as a blanket
term applicable to everything there is (and again we take the quantifier as entirely
unrestricted).
7
8

See my "Causal Explanation" (to appear in the sequel to this volume).
I am grateful to Peter van Inwagen, who called my attention to the connection between indexical
actuality and certain anthropic answers. He comments on this connection in "Indexicality and Actuality," 403-4.

Anselm and Actuality

25

Terminological actualism will suit a philosopher who accepts common opinion
as to what there is. It does not suit me. I would prefer to disagree with common
opinion that everything is actual, so that I may instead agree with common opinion
about the extent of actuality—about what sorts of things are actual, how many of
them there are, how they are related to us. I cannot agree with common opinion
on both points. I do not think there is any determinate convention of language that
requires me to agree on the first point rather than the second. Why should there
be? Why should our linguistic community have troubled to settle a point that has
arisen so seldom?
But it scarcely matters. I have no objection of principle to absolutely indiscriminate blanket terms; I myself use "entity" that way. What does matter is that no
one should foist metaphysical actualism on us by representing it as an innocent
terminological stipulation.
If I had to, I too could say that everything is actual, only not all that is actual
is part of this world. (Then I would advance an indexical analysis of thisworldliness.) But the game would begin over. Someone would be sure to say that by
definition the world consists of everything there is, so there can be nothing that is
not part of the world. . . . The moves go just as before.

THREE

Counterpart Theory
and
Quantified Modal Logic

I. COUNTERPART THEORY
We can conduct formalized discourse about most topics perfectly well by means of
our all-purpose extensional logic, provided with predicates and a domain of quantification suited to the subject matter at hand. That is what we do when our topic
is numbers, or sets, or wholes and parts, or strings of symbols. That is not what
we do when our topic is modality: what might be and what must be, essence and
accident. Then we introduce modal operators to create a special-purpose, nonextensional logic. Why this departure from our custom? Is it a historical accident, or was
it forced on us somehow by the very nature of the topic of modality?
It was not forced on us. We have an alternative. Instead of formalizing our
modal discourse by means of modal operators, we could follow our usual practice.
We could stick to our standard logic (quantification theory with identity and without ineliminable singular terms) and provide it with predicates and a domain of
quantification suited to the topic of modality. That done, certain expressions are
available which take the place of modal operators. The new predicates required,
together with postulates on them, constitute the system I call Counterpart Theory.

I am indebred to David Kaplan, whose criticisms have resulted in many important improvements. A,
N. Prior has informed me that my theory resembles a treatmenr of de re modality communicated to
him by P. T. Geach in 1964.

26

Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic

27

The primitive predicates of counterpart theory are these four:
Wx
Ixy
Ax
Cxy

(x
(x
(x
(x

is
is
is
is

a possible world)
in possible world y)
actual)
a counterpart of y).

The domain of quantification is to contain every possible world and everything in
every world. The primitives are to be understood according to their English readings and the following postulates:
P1:

(Nothing is in anything except a world)
P2:

(Nothing is in two worlds)
P3:

(Whatever is a counterpart is in a world)
P4:

(Whatever has a counterpart is in a world)
P5:

(Nothing is a counterpart of anything else in its world)
P6:

(Anything in a world is a counterpart of itself)
P7:

(Some world contains all and only actual things)
P8:

(Something is actual)
The world mentioned in P7 is unique, by P2 and P8. Let us abbreviate its description:

(the actual world
Unactualized possibles, things in worlds other than the actual world, have often
been deemed "entia non grata,"1 largely because it is not clear when they are or
are not identical. But identity literally understood is no problem for us. Within
any one world, things of every category are individuated just as they are in the
actual world; things in different worlds are never identical, by P2. The counterpart
relation is our substitute for identity between things in different worlds.2 Where
some would say that you are in several worlds, in which you have somewhat different properties and somewhat different things happen to you, I prefer to say that
you are in the actual world and no other, but you have counterparts in several other
'W. V. Quinc, Word and Object (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1960), p. 245.
Yet with this substitute in use, it would not matter if some things were identical with their counterparts
after all! P2 serves only to rule out avoidable problems of individuation.

2

28

Ontology

worlds. Your counterparts resemble you closely in content and context in important
respects. They resemble you more closely than do the other things in their worlds.
But they are not really you. For each of them is in his own world, and only you
are here in the actual world. Indeed we might say, speaking casually, that your
counterparts are you in other worlds, that they and you are the same; but this
sameness is no more a literal identity than the sameness between you today and
you tomorrow. It would be better to say that your counterparts are men you would
have been, had the world been otherwise.3
The counterpart relation is a relation of similarity. So it is problematic in the
way all relations of similarity are: it is the resultant of similarities and dissimilarities
in a multitude of respects, weighted by the importances of the various respects4
and by the degrees of the similarities.5
Carnap,6 Kanger,7 Hintikka, 8 Kripke,9 Montague,10 and others have proposed
interpretations of quantified modal logic on which one thing is allowed to be in
several worlds. A reader of this persuasion might suspect that he and I differ only
verbally: that what I call a thing in a world is just what he would call a (thing,
world) pair, and that what he calls the same thing in several worlds is just what I
would call a class of mutual counterparts. But beware. Our difference is not just
verbal, for I enjoy a generality he cannot match. The counterpart relation will not,
in general, be an equivalence relation. So it will not hold just between those of his
(thing, world) pairs with the same first term, no matter how he may choose to
identify things between worlds.
It would not have been plausible to postulate that the counterpart relation was
transitive. Suppose x, in world w1 resembles you closely in many respects, far more
closely than anything else in w1, does. And suppose x2 in world w2 resembles x1
closely, far more closely than anything else in w2 does. So x2 is a counterpart of
your counterpart x,. Yet x2 might not resemble you very closely, and something
else in w2 might resemble you more closely. If so, x2 is not your counterpart.
It would not have been plausible to postulate that the counterpart relation was
symmetric. Suppose x3 in world w3 is a sort of blend of you and your brother; x3
resembles both of you closely, far more closely than anything else in w3 resembles
either one of you. So x3 is your counterpart. But suppose also that the resemblance
3

This way of describing counterparts is due to L. Sprague de Camp, "The Wheels of If," Unknown
Fantasy Fiction, October, 1940.
4
As discussed in Michael A. Slote, "The Theory of Important Criteria," Journal of Philosophy 63, no.
8 (Apr. 14, 1966): 211-24.
5
The counterpart relation is very like the relation of intersubjective correspondence discussed in Rudolf
Carnap, Der Logische Aufbau der Welt (Berlin-Schlachtensee: Weltkreis-Verlag, 1928), sec. 146.
6
"Modalities and Quantification," Journal of Symbolic Logic 11, no. 2 (June 1946): 33-64.
7
Provability in Logic (Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell, 1957).
8
"Modality as Referential Multiplicity," Ajatus 20 (1957): 49-64.
9
"A Completeness Theorem in Modal Logic," Journal of Symbolic Logic 24, no. 1 (March 1959): 1-14;
"Semantical Considerations on Modal Logic," Acta Philosophica Fennica 16 (1963): 83-94.
10
"Logical Necessity, Physical Necessity, Ethics, and Quantifiers," Inquiry 3 (1960): 259-69.

Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic

29

between x3 and your brother is far closer than that between x3 and you. If so, you
are not a counterpart of x3.
It would not have been plausible to postulate that nothing in any world had
more than one counterpart in any other world. Suppose X4a, and X4b in world w4 are
twins; both resemble you closely; both resemble you far more closely than anything
else in w4 does; both resemble you equally. If so, both are your counterparts.
It would not have been plausible to postulate that no two things in any world
had a common counterpart in any other world. Suppose you resemble both the
twins x4a and x4b far more closely than anything else in the actual world does. If
so, you are a counterpart of both.
It would not have been plausible to postulate that, for any two worlds, anything
in one was a counterpart of something in the other. Suppose there is something x5
in world w5—say, Batman—which does not much resemble anything actual. If so,
x5 is not a counterpart of anything in the actual world.
It would not have been plausible to postulate that, for any two worlds, anything
in one had some counterpart in the other. Suppose whatever thing x6 in world w6
it is that resembles you more closely than anything else in w6 is nevertheless quite
unlike you; nothing in w6 resembles you at all closely. If so, you have no counterpart in w6..

II. TRANSLATION
Counterpart theory and quantified modal logic seem to have the same subject matter; seem to provide two rival ways of formalizing our modal discourse. In that
case they should be intertranslatable; indeed they are. Hence I need not give directions for formalizing modal discourse directly by means of counterpart theory; I
can assume the reader is accustomed to formalizing modal discourse by means of
modal operators, so I need only give directions for translating sentences of quantified modal logic into sentences of counterpart theory.
Counterpart theory has at least three advantages over quantified modal logic as
a vehicle for formalized discourse about modality. (1) Counterpart theory is a theory, not a special-purpose intensional logic. (2) Whereas the obscurity of quantified
modal logic has proved intractable, that of counterpart theory is at least divided,
if not conquered. We can trace it to its two independent sources. There is our
uncertainty about analyticity, and, hence, about whether certain descriptions
describe possible worlds; and there is our uncertainty about the relative importance
of different respects of similarity and dissimilarity, and, hence, about which things
are counterparts of which. (3) If the translation scheme I am about to propose is
correct, every sentence of quantified modal logic has the same meaning as a sentence
of counterpart theory, its translation; but not every sentence of counterpart theory
is, or is equivalent to, the translation of any sentence of quantified modal logic.
Therefore, starting with a fixed stock of predicates other than those of counterpart

30

Ontology

theory, we can say more by adding counterpart theory than we can by adding modal
operators.
Now let us examine my proposed translation scheme." We begin with some
important special cases, leading up to a general definition.
First consider a closed (0-place) sentence with a single, initial modal operator:
Cty or 00. It is given the familiar translation: Vj3(W/3 3 0") (0 holds in any
possible world /3) or 3/3(lf/3 & 0") (0 holds in some possible world /?). To
form the sentence <jf (<j> holds in world /?) from the given sentence <t>, we need
only restrict the range of each quantifier in </> to the domain of things in the
world denoted by /?; that is, we replace Va by Va(/a/3 D • • •) and 3a by
3a(la/3 & • • •) throughout 0.
Next consider a 1-place open sentence with a single, initial modal operator: Q0a
or 00a. It is given the translation V/3Vy(W(i & ly(3 & Cya .D tj>?y) (</> holds
of every counterpart 7 of a in any world /3) or 3/33y(W/3 & Iy(3 & Cya & 0^7)
(0 holds of some counterpart 7 of a in some world /3). Likewise for an open sentence with any number of places.
If the modal operator is not initial, we translate the subsentence it governs. And
if there are quantifiers that do not lie within the scope of any modal operator, we
must restrict their range to the domain of things in the actual world; for that is
their range in quantified modal logic, whereas an unrestricted quantifier in counterpart theory would range at least over all the worlds and everything in any of
them. A sentence of quantified modal logic that contains no modal operator—a
nonmodal sentence in a modal context—is therefore translated simply by restricting its quantifiers to things in the actual world.
Finally, consider a sentence in which there are modal operators within the scopes
of other modal operators. Then we must work inward; to obtain <jf from 0 we
must not only restrict quantifiers in 0 but also translate any subsentences of 0 with
initial modal operators.
The general translation scheme can best be presented as a direct definition of the
translation of a sentence 0 of quantified modal logic:
Tl:

The translation of <f> is 0® (0 holds in the actual world); that is, in
primitive notation, 3/3(Va(/a/3 == Act) & <jf)

followed by a recursive definition of 0" (<j> holds in world j3)

T2a:
T2b:
T2c:

is atomic

"NOTATION: Sentences are mentioned by means of the Greek letters '<£', '^',. . .; variables by means of
'a', '/3', '7', '5',. . . If 0 is any »-place sentence and OL\. . .a, are any n different variables, then
0a,. . .ctn is the sentence obtained by substituting a1 uniformly for the alphabetically first free variable
in 0, fX2 for the second, and so on. Variables introduced in translation are to be chosen in some
systematic way that prevents confusion of bound variables. Symbolic expressions are used
autonymously.

Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic

31

T2d:
T2e:
T2f:
T2g:
T2h:
T2i:
T2j:
Using these two definitions, we find, for example, that

are translated, respectively, as

(Everything actual is an F)
(Some possible world contains an F)
(Every counterpart of x, in any world, is an F)
(If anything is a counterpart of an actual F, then it is an F)
(Every counterpart of x has a counterpart which is an F)
The reverse translation, from sentences of counterpart theory to sentences of
quantified modal logic, can be done by finite search whenever it can be done at all.
For if a modal sentence \fr is the translation of a sentence tj) of counterpart theory,
then \{/ must be shorter than <f> and $ must contain no predicates or variables not
in <j>. But not every sentence of counterpart theory is the translation of a modal
sentence, or even an equivalent of the translation of a modal sentence. For instance,
our postulates P1-P7 are not.
It may disturb us that the translation of VxO3y(x = y) (everything actual necessarily exists) comes out true even if something actual lacks a counterpart in some
world. To avoid this, we might be tempted to adopt the alternative translation
scheme, brought to my attention by David Kaplan, in which T2i and T2j are
replaced by

32

Ontology

with heterogeneous rather than homogeneous quantifiers. Out of the frying pan,
into the fire: with T2j', 3xO(x *£ x) (something actual is possibly non-self-identical) comes out true unless everything actual has a counterpart in every world! We
might compromise by taking T2i' and T2j, but at the price of sacrificing the ordinary duality of necessity and possibility.12 So I chose to take T2i and T2j.
III. ESSENTIALISM
Quine has often warned us that by quantifying past modal operators we commit
ourselves to the view that "an object, of itself and by whatever name or none, must
be seen as having some of its traits necessarily and others contingently, despite the
fact that the latter traits follow just as analytically from some ways of specifying
the object as the former traits do from other ways of specifying it."13 This so-called
"Aristotelian essentialism"—the doctrine of essences not relative to specifications—"should be every bit as congenial to [the champion of quantified modal
logic] as quantified modal logic itself."14
Agreed. Essentialism is congenial. We do have a way of saying that an attribute
is an essential attribute of an object—essential regardless of how the object happens
to have been specified and regardless of whether the attribute follows analytically
from any or all specifications of the object.
Consider the attribute expressed by a 1-place sentence 0 and the object denoted
by a singular term f." To say that this attribute is an essential attribute of this
object is to assert the translation of O</>f.
But we have not yet considered how to translate a modal sentence containing a
singular term. For we know that any singular term f may be treated as a description
ia(\l/a) (although often only by letting i^ contain some artificial predicate made
from a proper name); and we know that any description may be eliminated by
Russell's contextual definition. Our translation scheme did not take account of singular terms because they need never occur in the primitive notation of quantified
12
If
we also postulate that the counterpart relation is an equivalence relation, we get an interpretation
like that of Fdllesdal in "Referential Opacity in Modal Logic" (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard, 1961), sec. 20, and in "A Model-Theoretic Approach to Causal Logic," in Det Kongeliger Norske
Videnskabers Selskahs Forhandlinger (1966): 3-13.
13
"Reference and Modality," in From a Logical Point of View, 2d ed. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard,
1961), p. 155.
14
"Reply to Professor Marcus," in The Ways of Paradox (New York: Random House, 1966), p. 182.
15
NOTATION: Terms are mentioned by means of the Greek letters '$", '?;',. . . The sentence 0f is that
obtained by substituting the term f uniformly into the 1-place sentence (ft.

Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic

33

modal logic. We must always eliminate singular terms before translating; afterwards, if we like, we can restore them.
There is just one hitch: before eliminating a description, we must assign it a
scope. Different choices of scope will, in general, lead to nonequivalent translations.
This is so even if the eliminated description denotes precisely one thing in the
actual world and in every possible world.16
Taking f as a description laCt/'a) and assigning it narrow scope, our sentence
Ck/>f is interpreted as

Its translation under this interpretation is
(Any possible world 0 contains a unique a such that ^"a; and for any such
a, d)fa)
This is an interpretation de dicto: the modal operator attaches to the already closed
sentence $f. It is referentially opaque: the translation of an ostensible use of Leibniz's Law

or of an ostensible existential generalization

is an invalid argument if the terms involved are taken as descriptions with narrow
scope.
Taking f as a description with wide scope, Q£f is interpreted as

and translated as

(The actual world contains a unique a. such that ^®a; and for any counterpart
7 thereof, in any world 0, <t>ay)
This is an interpretation de re: the modal operator attaches to the open sentence <f>
to form a new open modal sentence D0, and the attribute expressed by Ocj) is then
16

I follow Arthur Smullyan's treatment of scope ambiguity in modal sentences, given in "Modality and
Description," Journal of Symbolic Logic 13, no. 1 (March 1948): 31-37, as qualified by Wilson's
objection, in The Concept of Language (Toronto: University Press, 1959), p. 43, that some ostensible
uses of Leibniz's law on modal sentences are invalid under any choice of scope in the conclusion.

34

Ontology

predicated of the actual thing denoted by £. This interpretation is referentially
transparent: the translation of an ostensible use of Leibniz's law or of an ostensible
existential generalization is a valid argument if the terms involved are taken as
descriptions with wide scope.
How are we to choose between the two interpretations of O0f? Often we cannot,
unless by fiat; there is a genuine ambiguity. But there are several conditions that
tend to favor the wide-scope interpretation as the more natural: (1) whenever f is
a description formed by turning a proper name into an artificial predicate; (2)
whenever the description f has what Donnellan calls its referential use,17 (3) whenever we are prepared to accept
f is something a such that necessarily $a
as one possible English reading of D0f. (The force of the third condition is due to
the fact that 3a(f = a & O<f>a) is unambiguously equivalent to Ck/>f with f given
wide scope.)18
The translations of D0f under its two interpretations are logically independent.
Neither follows from the other just by itself. But with the aid of suitable auxiliary
premises we can go in both directions. The inference from the narrow-scope translation to the wide-scope translation (exportation)19 requires the further premise
(There is something a in the actual world, any counterpart 7 of which is the
only thing 5 in its world /3 such that \ffS)
which is a simplified equivalent of the translation of 3ad(f = a) with f given
narrow scope.20 The inference from the wide-scope translation to the narrow-scope
translation (importation) requires the same auxiliary premise, and another as well:
(The unique a in the actual world such that i^®a, has at least one counterpart
7 in any world /3)
This second auxiliary premise is not equivalent to the translation of any modal
sentence,21
In general, of course, there will be more than two ways to assign scopes. Consider
Q<Xi? = f)- Each description may be given narrow, medium, or wide scope; so
there are nine nonequivalent translations.
It is the wide-scope, de re, transparent translation of Btj>£ which says that the
attribute expressed by cj) is an essential attribute of the thing denoted by f. In short,
l7

"Reference and Definite Descriptions," Philosophical Review 75, no. 3 (July 1966): 281-304.
Cf. Hintikka, Knowledge and Belief (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Univ. Press, 1962), pp. 156-57.
"I follow Quine's use of this term in "Quantifiers and Propositional Attitudes," in The Ways of Paradox, p. 188.
20
Cf. Hintikka, of. cil., pp. 138-55.
21
But under any variant translation in which T2i is replaced by T2i', it would be equivalent to the
translation of n3a(£" — a) (^"necessarily exists) with f given wide scope.
18

Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic

35

an essential attribute of something is an attribute it shares with all its counterparts.
All your counterparts are probably human; if so, you are essentially human. All
your counterparts are even more probably corporeal; if so, you are essentially corporeal.
An attribute that something shares with all its counterparts is an essential attribute of that thing, part of its essence. The whole of its essence is the intersection of
its essential attributes, the attribute it shares with all and only its counterparts.
(The attribute, because there is no need to distinguish attributes that are coextensive
not only in the actual world but also in every possible world.) There may or may
not be an open sentence that expresses the attribute that is the essence of something;
to assert that the attribute expressed by 4> is the essence of the thing denoted by f
is to assert

(The actual world contains a unique a such that \}/®a\ and for anything 7 in
any world 0, 7 is a counterpart of a if and only if <jfy)
This sentence is not equivalent to the translation of any modal sentence.
Essence and counterpart are interdefinable. We have just defined the essence of
something as the attribute it shares with all and only its counterparts; a counterpart
of something is anything having the attribute which is its essence. (This is not to
say that that attribute is the counterpart's essence, or even an essential attribute of
the counterpart.)
Perhaps there are certain attributes that can only be essential attributes of things,
never accidents. Perhaps every human must be essentially human; more likely, perhaps everything corporeal must be essentially corporeal. The attribute expressed by
<j) is of this sort, incapable of being an accident, just in case it is closed under the
counterpart relation; that is, just in case
(For any counterpart 7 in any world 0, of anything a in any world ft, if
(t/a then <t>siy)
This is a simplified equivalent of the translation of

We might wonder whether these attributes incapable of being accidents are what
we call "natural kinds." But notice first that we must disregard the necessarily
universal attribute, expressed, for instance, by the open sentence a = a, since it is
an essential attribute of everything. And notice second that arbitrary unions of attributes incapable of being accidents are themselves attributes incapable of being accidents; so to exclude gerrymanders we must confine ourselves to minimal attributes
incapable of being accidents. All of these may indeed be natural kinds; but these
cannot be the only natural kinds, since some unions and all intersections of natural
kinds are themselves natural kinds.

36

Ontology

IV. MODAL PRINCIPLES
Translation into counterpart theory can settle disputed questions in quantified
modal logic. We can test a suggested modal principle by seeing whether its translation is a theorem of counterpart theory; or, if not, whether the extra postulates
that would make it a theorem are plausible. We shall consider eight principles and
find only one that should be accepted.
(Becker's principle)
The translation is not a theorem unless 0 is a closed sentence, but would have been
a theorem in general under the rejected postulate that the counterpart relation was
transitive.
(Brouwer's principle)
The translation is not a theorem unless </> is a closed sentence, but would have been
a theorem in general under the rejected postulate that the counterpart relation was
symmetric.
(a, and «2 not the same variable)
The translation is not a theorem, but would have been under the rejected postulate
that nothing in any world had more than one counterpart in any other world.
, (a, and «2 not the same variable)
The translation is not a theorem, but would have been under the rejected postulate
that no two things in any world had a common counterpart in any other world.
(Barcan's principle)
The translation is not a theorem, but would have been under the rejected postulate
that, for any two worlds, anything in one was a counterpart of something in the
other.

The translation is not a theorem, but would have been under the rejected postulate
that, for any two worlds, anything in one had some counterpart in the other.
(Converse of Barcan's principle)
The translation is a theorem.

The translation is not a theorem, nor would it have been under any extra postulates
with even the slightest plausibility.

Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic

37

V. RELATIVE MODALITIES
Just as a sentence 0 is necessary if it holds in all worlds, so 0 is causally necessary
if it holds in all worlds compatible with the laws of nature; obligatory for you if
it holds in all worlds in which you act rightly; implicitly known, believed, hoped,
asserted, or perceived by you if it holds in all worlds compatible with the content
of your knowledge, beliefs, hopes, assertions, or perceptions. These, and many
more, are relative modalities, expressible by quantifications over restricted ranges
of worlds. We can write any dual pair of relative modalities as

where the index i indicates how the restriction of worlds is to be made and the m
arguments 5,,. . .,5m, with m >; 0, denote things to be considered in making the
restriction (say, the person whose implicit knowledge we are talking about). To
every dual pair of relative modalities there corresponds a characteristic relation
R'xyz^- • • zm (world x is /-related to world y and z,,. . .,zm therein)
governed by the postulate

The characteristic relation gives the appropriate restriction: we are to consider only
worlds /-related to whatever world we are in (and certain things in it). Necessity
and possibility themselves are that pair of relative modalities whose characteristic
relation is just the 2-place universal relation between worlds. 22
We can easily extend our translation scheme to handle sentences containing miscellaneous modal operators. We will treat them just as we do necessity and possibility, except that quantifiers over worlds will range over only those worlds which
bear the appropriate characteristic relation to some world and perhaps some things
in it. The translation of 4> remains $®; we need only add two new clauses to the
recursive definition of </>:

22

Cf. Hintikka, "Quantifiers in Deontic Logic," Societal Scientiarum Fennica, Commentationei Humanarum Litterarum 23, no.4; Ranger, op. at.', Kripke, op. cit.; Montague, op. cit.; Prior, "Possible
Worlds," Philosophical Quarterly 12, no.46 (January 1962): 36-4}; Hintikka, Knowledge and Belief,
pp. 42-49; Ftfllesdal, "Quantification into Causal Contexts," in Boston Studies in the Philosophy of
Science (New York: Humanities Press, 1965), pp. 263-74; Hintikka, "The Logic of Perception," in
his Models for Modalities (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1969).

38

Ontology

(since necessity and possibility are relative modalities, we no longer need T2i and
T2j). For example, our translations of

where 0 is a 0-place sentence, \l/ is a 1-place sentence, D' is a 0-place relative modality, and O is a 1-place relative modality, are, respectively,
(<t> holds in any world /-related to the actual world)
(\f/ holds of any counterpart 7 of a in any world /3 /-related to the actual
world and 8 therein)
((j) holds in any world |82 such that, for some world /?, that is /-related to the
actual world and for some counterpart 7 in /3, of 5, @2 is /'-related to /3,
and y)
The third example illustrates the fact that free variables occurring as arguments of
relative modal operators may need to be handled by means of the counterpart
relation.
Our previous discussion of singular terms as eliminable descriptions subject to
ambiguity of scope carries over, with one change: in general, the auxiliary premise
for exportation (and the first of two auxiliary premises for importation) must be
the translation of D'5,- • -5a(£ — f) with one occurrence of f given wide scope and
the other given narrow scope. The translation of Bod'S, • • '5a(£ = a) will do only
for those relative modalities, like necessity, for which R'@ @5, • • -bm—and, hence,
the translation of d'5, • • -5,4> D 0—are theorems under the appropriate postulates
on the ^'-relation. More generally, the argument

where 0 is a 1-place sentence, has a valid translation if f is given wide scope and
TI is given narrow scope throughout.
Principles corresponding to those discussed in section IV can be formulated for
any relative modality (or, in the case of Becker's and Brouwer's principles, for any
mixture of relative modalities). The acceptability of such principles will depend,
in general, not just on the logical properties of the counterpart relation and the irelations involved, but on the logical relations between the counterpart relation and
the i-relations. For example, consider a relative necessity without arguments, so

Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic

39

that its characteristic j-relation will be 2-place. (Such an /-relation is often called
an accessibility relation between worlds). And consider Becker's principle for
this relative necessity (but with '-3' still denned in terms of necessity itself):
Q'<£-3ntl'$; that is, d(n'(/> D Q1H'0). It is often said that Becker's principle holds
just in case accessibility is transitive, which is correct if </> is a closed sentence. But
for open 0 Becker's principle holds just in case

even if neither accessibility nor the counterpart relation is transitive.

Postscripts to

"Counterpart Theory
and
Quantified Modal Logic"1
A. BEING IN A WORLD
I took as primitive the notion of an individual being in a possible world. I would
now wish to distinguish the relation I had foremost in mind from two others.
A world is a large possible individual; it has smaller possible individuals as
parts. A galaxy, a planet, a man, an electron—these things inhabit their world
simply by being parts of it. Just as the electron is part of the man, and the man in
turn is part of his planet which is part of its galaxy, so the galaxy in turn is part
of its world. And so are its parts, and their parts, . . . , since the relation of part to
whole is transitive. Any possible individual is part of a world, and in that sense it
is in a world. (As a special case, a world is an improper part of itself.) Worlds do
not overlap; unlike Siamese twins, they have no shared parts. Thus I stand by
Postulate 2, construed as meaning that no possible individual is part of two worlds.
However, the possible individuals are not all the individuals. I wish to impose
no restrictions on mereological summation of individuals, hence I must grant that
there are individuals consisting of parts from several worlds. But such a cross-world
sum is not a possible individual. There is no way for the whole of it to be actual.
'in these postscripts, I am much indebted to discussion with Allen Hazen, and to his "Counterparttheoretic Semantics for Modal Logic," Journal of Philosophy 76 (1979): 3 19-38.

40

Ontology

No matter which world is actual, at most a proper part of it actually exists. It is
not in any world, in the sense just discussed, for it is not part of any world. But it
is partly in each of many worlds, overlapping different worlds in virtue of different
ones of its parts.
Finally, there are the non-individuals: that is, the sets. Provisionally,2 my ontology consists of iterative set theory with individuals; the only unorthodox part is my
view about what individuals there are. I take it that the part-whole relation applies
to individuals, not sets. Then no set is in any world in the sense of being a part of
it. Numbers, properties, propositions, events3—all these are sets, and not in any
world. Numbers el al. are no more located in logical space than they are in ordinary
time and space. Even a sequence of possible individuals all from the same world
is not, strictly speaking, itself in that world.
When we evaluate the truth of a quantified sentence, we usually restrict the
domain and quantify over less than all there is. If we evaluate a quantification at
a world, we will normally omit many things not in that world, for instance the
possible individuals that inhabit other worlds. But we will not omit the numbers,
or some of the other sets. Let us say that an individual exists from the standpoint of
a world iff it belongs to the least restricted domain that is normally—modal metaphysics being deemed abnormal—appropriate in evaluating the truth at that world
of quantifications. I suppose that this domain will include all the indivduals in that
world; none of the other individuals; and some, but not all, of the sets. There will
be many sets that even exist from the standpoint of all worlds, for instance the
numbers. Others may not; for instance the unit set of a possible individual might
only exist from the standpoint of the world that the individual is in.
Thus we have three relations: being in a world, i.e. being part of a world; being
partly in a world, i.e. having a part that is wholly in that world; and existing from
the standpoint of & world. Postulate 2, the principle that nothing is in two worlds,
applies only to the first of these.
The language of counterpart theory, and the modal language it replaces, had
best be understood as quantifying only over possible individuals. Modifications are
called for if we wish to quantify over more of what there is.

B. MODAL CONTINUANTS
I granted, none too enthusiastically, that there are individuals, not wholly in any
world and hence incapable of being actualized in their entirety, that consist of parts
from several worlds. Some of these cross-world individuals are unified by counterpart relations. For instance, there is the mereological sum of myself and all my
2

I am not sure what to say about universals, as advocated in D. M. Armstrong, Universal! and Scientific
Realism (Cambridge University Press, 1978), except for this: they are not to be confused with the sets
of individuals that I call properties. If there are universals, they differ in many ways from properties
and they meet completely different theoretical needs.
'See my "Events" (in the sequel to this volume).

Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic

41

counterparts. Or (what is not the same) there is a cross-world individual which is
a maximal counterpart-interrelated sum of possible individuals of whom I am one.
In fact, there are many such.
More precisely, let us call X a world-stage of Y iff (1) X is a possible individual,
entirely in one world, and is part of Y; and (2) X is not a proper part of any other
individual of which the same is true. And let us call Y counterpart-interrelated iff
any two world-stages of Y are counterparts. And let us call Y maximal counterpartinterrelated, or for short let us call it a modal continuant, iff (1) Y is counterpartinterrelated; and (2) Y is not a proper part of any other individual of which the
same is true.
At this point it lies close to hand to suggest that ordinary things—stars, locomotives, cats, ourselves—are modal continuants, just as they are temporal continuants having many temporal parts and not wholly located at any one time. Then
we can have our counterpart theory and our identity across worlds as well, and
everyone's intuitions will be satisfied.
I am not impressed. I have no objection to the theory of modal continuants. It
is an equivalent reformulation of counterpart theory, so it is just as right as counterpart theory itself. It does not offend against Postulate 2, which merely prohibited
individuals from being wholly in more than one world.
But I cannot see that the theory of modal continuants has any intuitive advantage. On the one hand, it makes a problem. Given the intransitivity of the counterpart relation, doubtless I—or rather, as we should now say, the actual worldstage of me—am part of ever so many different modal continuants. Which one is
me? The puzzle is like that of Methuselah in "Survival and Identity" (in this volume). Then let us borrow the solution. To be sure, I am (we are?) infinitely many
different modal continuants. No worries: if we count by stage-sharing rather than
identity, there is only one. —Will this really do? For temporal continuants, the
pathological cases are fictional. It is only fitting and proper that such extraordinary
goings on should force us to say something a bit counterintuitive. For modal continuants, every case is pathological. Everything that can happen does. If we adopt
the theory of modal continuants, we must count by stage-sharing not only when
we want to treat the uncanny Methuselah as if he (they?) were an ordinary person,
but also in the case of the ordinary people who are all, modally speaking, Methuselahs.
And to what end? Presumably, to make Hubert Humphrey come out literally
right when, after losing, he thinks: I myself might have won. 4 He is supposed to
think: I am a modal continuant with a world-stage that wins. That is: the modal
continuant of which one world-stage thinks this thought has a world-stage—a different one—that wins. (It isn't "the" but let that pass.) For even if Humphrey is
a modal continuant, it doesn't take the whole of him to do such things as winning
or thinking the thought. The continuant does them by having a world-stage that
4

See Saul Kripke, "Naming and Necessity," in Donald Davidson and Gilbert Harman, eds., Semantics
of Natural Language (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1972), p. 344.

42

Ontology

does them (in the senses appropriate respectively to continuants and to worldstages), just as a temporal continuant does this or that through its stages. But what
good is that? If Humphrey yearns to think only of himself and nobody else, it is
no use that he the thinker is part of the same mereological sum as some winner.
That much is provided by the thisworldly sum of Humphrey and Nixon! No; what
matters is that the modal continuant is counterpart-interrelated, so that the thinker
of the thought has a winner for a counterpart. Then why not just say so, and leave
the modal continuant out of it?
I think intuition is well enough satisfied if we take "myself to modify "might
have won." Humphrey thinks that he himself, and not someone else who resembles
him, has the modal property expressed by "might have won." And that is true on
anybody's theory. In counterpart theory, it is true because Humphrey himself, in
virtue of his very own qualitative character, is such as to have some winners for
counterparts.
If more is wanted, I do not think the theory of modal continuants can provide
it. 5

C. VAGUENESS AND VARIETY OF COUNTERPART RELATIONS
I am by no means offering a wholehearted defense of "Aristotelian essentialism."
For the essences of things are settled only to the extent that the counterpart relation
is, and the counterpart relation is not very settled at all. Like any relation of comparative overall similarity, it is subject to a great deal of indeterminacy (1) as to
which respects of similarity and difference are to count at all, (2) as to the relative
weights of the respects that do count, (3) as to the minimum standard of similarity
that is required, and (4) as to the extent to which we eliminate candidates that are
similar enough when they are beaten by competitors with stronger claims.
Further, as with vagueness generally, the vagueness of the counterpart relation—
and hence of essence and de n modality generally—may be subject to pragmatic
pressures, and differently resolved in different contexts.6 The upshot is that it is
hard to say anything false about essences. For any halfway reasonable statement
will tend to create a context that (partially) resolves the vagueness of the counterpart relation in such a way as to make that statement true in that context. So almost
anything goes. The true-hearted essentialist might well think me a false friend, a
Quinean sceptic in essentialist's clothing.
'If it really must be Humphrey himself who does rhe winning, the very same Humphrey who thinks
the modal thought, the best solution is to think not of genuine worlds but of world-stories—ersatz
worlds—so that we think of Humphrey's actual losing and possible winning as two stories about him,
one true and the other false. It is my impression that something like this, and not a theory of modal
continuants, was Kripke's intention.
6
See the Appendix to "General Semantics" and Example 5 of "Scorekeeping in a Language Game"
(both in this volume) for discussions of vagueness and the effects of context on its resolution.

Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic

43

To take one extreme, a suitable context might deliver an antiessentialist counterpart relation—one on which anything is a counterpart of anything, and nothing
has any essence worth mentioning. Or, as Hazen has suggested,7 we might somehow partition things into kinds, and take a counterpart relation on which anything
is a counterpart of anything of its kind. That would make the essence of a thing
simply be its kind. Such unselective counterpart relations as these would violate
my Postulate 5, since things would have counterparts in their own worlds besides
themselves. But I needn't insist on Postulate 5 for any counterpart relation that
might be appropriate in any context; it is enough to take it as a condition governing
the more commonplace of them.
At the opposite extreme, a suitable context might deliver a hyperessentialist
counterpart relation—one on which nothing has any counterpart except itself. Then
by Postulate 2 nothing has otherworldly counterparts, and hence nothing has any
of its attributes nonessentially. This counterpart relation, of course, is simply identity.
A common sort of counterpart relation, especially in the context of recent discussions of essentialism, is one that gives decisive weight to perfect match of
origins. (I count this simply as one respect of similarity, pace Jaakko Hintikka who
says that I ought to have considered match of origins as well as similarity. 8 ) It is
this sort of counterpart relation that we need to make sense of such possibilities as
that of Hitler's leading a blameless life while someone else moves into his actual
role and ends by living a wicked life just like the life that Hitler actually lived.9
Not only may the vagueness of the counterpart relation be very differently
resolved in different contexts. Also we may need to play off one counterpart relation
against another in a single context.10 Or we may need to play off one relation of
comparative similarity that governs the counterpart relation against another that
governs explicit judgements of similarity. For as Fred Feldman has observed, one
might truly say:
I could have been more like what you in fact are like than like what in fact
I am, and at the same time, you could have been more like what I in fact am
like than what you in fact are."
'O/i. «/., p. 332.
8
See his The Intentions of Intentionality and Other New Models for Modalities (Dordrecht: Reidcl, 1975),
pp. 127-29 and 209.
9
See my Counterfactuals (Oxford: Blackwell, 1973), p. 41. For the case of blameless Hitler, see Kripke,
"Naming and Necessity," pp. 288-89.
10
See Hintikka's discussion of "two kinds of cross-identification," in "On the Logic of Perception" in
his Models far Modalities (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1969); my Counterfactuals, pp. 42-43; and "Counterparts of Persons and Their Bodies" (in this volume). The last shows how to use a harmless multiplicity
of counterpart relations to replace an undesired multiplication of entities. Denis Robinson has applied
the same method to many other cases, in a lecture at the Australasian Association of Philosophy
Conference in Sydney in August 1980.
""Counterparts," Journal of Philosophy 68 (1971): 406-9. A parallel problem about similarity and
Counterfactuals is discussed in "Counterfactual Dependence and Time's Arrow" (in the sequel to this
volume).

44

Ontology

D. PAIRS OF COUNTERPARTS AND COUNTERPARTS OF PAIRS
Consider the twin brothers Dee and Dum. Together they comprise a pair. In this
easy case, we may take the pair simply as a mereological sum; then it is a possible
individual, not a set, so counterpart theory applies to it without need for any modification.
In another world are two duplicate planets, far apart in time and space. On one
planet there live a pair of twin brothers, Dee, and Dum,; and together they comprise the pair Dee,-cum-Dum,. Likewise on the other planet there live Dee2 and
Dum 2 , who comprise Dee 2 -cum-Dum 2 . Dee, and Dee2 resemble Dee equally, and
quite well, and better than anything else in their world does, and so they are both
his counterparts. Likewise Dum, and Dum 2 are both counterparts of Dum.
Now we ask a doubly de re modal question about Dee and Dum: might they
have been not twin brothers, but totally unrelated inhabitants of separated planets?
Intuitively, it seems not. They are essentially related (or, at any rate, related if they
both exist). But counterpart theory disagrees, and gives an answer that seems counterintuitive. For Dee and Dum satisfy the counterpart-theoretic translation of the
formula
Ox and y are unrelated
as values respectively of its two variables. That is because there is a world in which
there are unrelated counterparts of Dee and Dum respectively: namely, Dee, and
Dum 2 in the world of the duplicate planets. (Or, for good measure, Dee2 and
Dum,.)
But whether counterpart theory gives a counterintuitive answer depends on
exactly how we put the question. Instead of a doubly de re question about Dee and
Dum, we might better have asked a singly de re question about their pair, Deecum-Dum. Might it have been not a pair of twin brothers, but rather a pair of
totally unrelated inhabitants of separate planets? Again it seems not. This time,
counterpart theory agrees. For, under a reasonable counterpart relation, the pair
Dee-cum-Dum does not satisfy the translation of the formula
0 3y 3z(x is y-cum-z & y and z are unrelated).
That is so because, for instance, the only counterparts of Dee-cum-Dum in the
world of the duplicate planets are Dee,-cum-Dum, and Dee 2 -cum-Dum 2 , and each
of these is a related pair. We needn't worry about the unrelated pairs, Dee,-cumDum 2 and Dee2-cum-Dum,, Nothing requires us to count these pairs as counterparts of Dee-cum-Dum, and the important difference between related pairs and
unrelated ones gives us an excellent reason not to.
Two morals. First, we must learn the right way to apply counterpart theory. It
seems that we do best to avoid doubly de re formulations if we want to respect
intuition. And that seems plausible enough: doubly de re formulations may seem
natural enough in the artificial language of quantified modal logic, but it is not so
clear that they are part of our ordinary modal thought. Second, we should not

Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic

4")

accept any neat principle to the effect that a pair of counterparts is a counterpart of
the pair, or any generalization thereof.12

E. DOES COUNTERPART THEORY CHANGE LOGIC?
If counterpart theory calls for the rejection of some popular modal principles, that
needn't worry us. But if it forces us to reject principles of the logic of identity and
quantification, that is more serious. Allen Hazen and Saul Kripke have said that it
does." I plead not guilty. I shall consider one case of the trouble they have in mind,
but I think my defense carries over to other cases.
Consider schema (1) and sentence (2) below. (1) is a valid schema of the classical
logic of identity and quantification. It says something very uncontroversial indeed,
if by " = " we really mean identity: if we have one and the same thing, what's true
of it is the same as what's true of it. (2), on the other hand, is an invalid sentence
of quantified modal logic, since its counterpart-theoretic translation is not (and
should not be) a theorem of counterpart theory.

How can (2) fail? Would its denial mean that we have two different things that
are contingently identical? Or perhaps one thing that is only contingently self-identical? No—the denial of (2) would mean no such nonsensical thing. To see what
it would really mean, don't guess, but read the counterpart-theoretic translation.
The translation of (2) turns out to say that nothing in the actual world has more
than one counterpart in any other world. Then its denial says that something actual
does have two counterparts in a single world. The case of Dee, Dee,, and Dee2
could serve as an illustration, if Dee is actual. Again, we are in trouble when a
doubly de re formulation meets something with double counterparts.
So (1) is not to be challenged while its instance (2) may well be false! How is
that? —I reply that (2) is not an instance of (1), so there is nothing at all wrong
with accepting (1) and rejecting (2).
Compare another invalid sentence, (3). How can we accept (1) and reject (3)? —
That's easy: to take (3) as an instance of (1) is to commit a fallacy of confusing
bound variables.

To make (3) an instance of (1), the final occurrence of "y" would have to be bound
to the initial "V/'. It isn't. It's bound to the nearby "By".
12

I have more or less followed Hazen, op. cit., in stating and solving the problem. But with this minor
technical difference: he builds the. solution into a modified counterpart-theoretic semantics for multiply
de re formulations, whereas I apply it in unmodified counterpart theory by steering clear of the multiply de re,
I3
Hazen, ibid. Kripke, "Naming and Necessity," footnote 13-

46

Ontology

I say much the same about (2). To treat it as an instance of (1) is to confuse
bound variables. The abbreviated notation of quantified modal logic conceals the
true pattern of binding, but it is revealed when we examine the counterpart-theoretic translation. It is as follows.

The diamonds conceal quantifiers that bind the occutrences of "x" and "y" that
follow. (Indeed, in the translation, the variables that follow would not be "x" and
"y" at all, but different variables altogether.) The diamonds also conceal occurrences of "x" and "y" that are bound by the initial "Vx" and "Vy". This pattern
of binding is not right for an instance of (1), any more than the pattern in (3) is.
So counterpart theory is no threat to standard logic. It is only a threat to simplistic methods of keeping track of variable-binding and instancehood when we
are dealing with the perversely abbreviated language of quantified modal logic.
F. NONEXTENSIONALITY TOLERATED
Whatever else may fairly be said against the language of quantified modal logic, I
withdraw my complaint against its nonextensionality. See '"Tensions" (in this volume), in which I argue that such violations of extensionality as it commits are of
no deep significance. If we want to restore extensionality, we need only reanalyze
the language in an otherwise pointless, but harmless, way.
G. ATTITUDINAL MODALITIES ABANDONED
In view of the arguments of "Attitudes De Dicta and De Se" (in this volume), I
withdraw my statement that implicit knowledge, belief, etc. are relative modalities,
expressible by quantification over restricted ranges of worlds. They are, however,
something closely analogous to that: we need only put possible individuals in place
of the worlds.
H. CONVENTIONALITY OF POSTULATE 2 DISOWNED
Footnote 2 has given some readers the impression that I regard Postulate 2 as a
mere convention, and that we could just as truly say that some things are identical
with their otherworldly counterparts after all. Not so. I was alluding to the possibility of a hybrid theory—a theory opposed to my own, a theory which I take to
be false—according to which there are identities across worlds, but we use the
counterpart relation anyway.

FOUR

Counterparts of Persons
and
Their Bodies

Materialists like myself hold that persons and their bodies are identical. But there
is a simple argument to show that this identity thesis is refuted by the mere possibility that a person might switch bodies. To defeat the argument it seems necessary to revise my counterpart theory by providing for a multiplicity of counterpart
relations. This revision has an odd result. Modal predications may be de re, yet not
referentially transparent.
The thesis I wish to defend here may be stated more precisely, as follows:
(T)

Necessarily, a person occupies a body at a time if and only if that person
is identical with that body at that time.

Note that the thesis (T) is formulated not in terms of identity itself, a two-place
relation, but in terms of a derivative three-place relation of identity at a time. I
wish to regard enduring things such as persons and bodies as aggregates—sets,
mereological sums, or something similar—of momentary stages. Enduring things
X and Y are identical at a time t if and only if they both have stages at t—that
is, exist at t—and their stages at / are identical. Therefore X and Y are identical
simpliciter if and only if they are identical whenever either one exists. Note that
(T) does not say that persons and bodies must be identical simpliciter. It does imply
that if A certain person occupies a certain body whenever either the person or the

I am indebted to M. J. Cresswell, David Kaplan, and John Perry for illuminating discussion of these
matters.

41

48

Ontology

body exists, then the person and the body are identical. In such a case, ail and only
those stages which are stages of the person are stages of the body he occupies. But
(T) also permits other cases: for instance, a body consisting of the stages of a certain
person together with some final dead stages that are not stages of any person (and
some initial prenatal stages that perhaps are not stages of any person); or a person
consisting of stages of a certain body together with some initial or final ghostly
stages that are not stages of any body; or even a body-switching person consisting
partly of stages of one body and partly of stages of another body. A person consists
of stages related pairwise by a certain relation we may call the relation of personal
unity; a body consists of stages related pairwise by another relation we may call the
relation of bodily unity? Since for the most part persons occupy bodies and bodies
are occupied by persons, it follows according to (T) that the two relations of unity
are relations on almost the same set of stages. The exceptions are dead stages, perhaps prenatal stages, and perhaps ghostly stages. Moreover, if we leave out the dead
or ghostly or perhaps prenatal stages, then at least for the most part the two relations of unity are coextensive. The exceptions would be body-switchers and perhaps
split personalities. Nevertheless, the two relations of unity are different relationsin-intension; so they are coextensive only contingently if at all.
Now I shall present an argument against (T). I regard it as a simplified descendant of an argument put forth by Jerome Shaffer, 2 but I have changed it so much
that he might not wish to acknowledge it as his own.
Body-switching is logically possible. Because I might have switched out of my
present body yesterday, though in fact I did not, I and my actual present body are
such that the former might not have occupied the latter today. Whether or not
persons are identical with bodies they occupy, certainly persons are never identical
with bodies they do not occupy. So we have:
(1)

I and my body are such that they might not have been identical today.

Suppose that, as is surely at least possible, I occupy the same body from the time
when it and I began until the time when it and I will end. Then, by (T), it and I
are identical whenever it or I exist. Hence my body and I, enduring things, are
identical simpliciter. By this identity and Leibniz's law, (1) yields (2):
(2)

My body and my body are such that they might not have been identical
today.

Since (2) is self-contradictory, (T) has apparently been refuted.
To rescue (T) without denying the possibility of body-switching and without
denying that I might occupy the same body throughout the time that it or I exist,
'The so-called "problem of personal identity" is the problem of explicating the relation of personal
unity between stages. This view is expounded more fully by John Perry in "Can the Self Divide?"
Journal of Philosophy 69 (1972): 463-88.
2
"Persons and Their Bodies," Philosophical Review 75, no. 1 (January 1966): 59-77.

Counterparts of Persons and Their Bodies

49

I plan to show that the step from (1) to (2) by Leibniz's law is illegitimate—in
other words, that (1) is not referentially transparent with respect to the term T.
I have used the familiar "are such that" construction to indicate that (1) and (2)
are to be taken as de re rather than de dicto modal predications. That is, we are to
consider what happens in other possible worlds to the things denoted here in our
actual world by the terms T and 'my body,' not what happens in other worlds to
the things denoted there by those terms. Suppose (1) were taken de dicto, as if it
were this:
It might have been the case that I and my body were not identical today.
There is no problem explaining why this is not referentially transparent. Its truth
conditions involve the denotations in other worlds of the terms T and 'my body';
even if these denote the same thing here in our world, they denote different things
in some other worlds, for instance in a world in which I switched bodies yesterday.
Hence they are not interchangeable. But it would be wrong to take (1) as de dido,
for the argument leading up to (1) would then be incoherent and question-begging.
As we understand (1) in the argument, it seems true even given (T) because of the
fact that I might have switched bodies yesterday. But (1) taken de dicto is a
straightforward denial of an instance of (T), and the possibility of body-switching
is irrelevant to its truth or falsity. For (1) taken de dicto is true today if and only
if there is some world such that the things denoted in that world today by T and
'my body' are not identical today. But in any world, 'my body' today denotes
whichever body is today occupied by the person who is today denoted by T,
regardless of whether that person occupied that body yesterday. If (T) is true, then
in any world the person today denoted there by T and the body today denoted
there by 'my body' are identical today; so (1) taken de dicto is false. (It should be
understood that when I speak of the denotation in another world of T and 'my
body,' I am not concerned with any utterance of these terms by some inhabitant
of the other world, but rather with the denotation of these terms in the other world
on the occasion of their utterance by me here in our world.)
I have suggested elsewhere3 that de re modal predications may best be understood by the method of counterparts. To say that something here in our actual
world is such that it might have done so-and-so is not to say that there is a possible
world in which that thing itself does so-and-so, but that there is a world in which
a counterpart of that thing does so-and-so. To say that I am such that I might have
been a Republican, but I am not such that I might have been a cockatrice, is to
say that in some world I have a counterpart who is a Republican, but in no world
do I have a counterpart who is a cockatrice. That is plausible enough, for the counterpart relation is a relation of similarity. X's counterparts in other worlds are all
and only those things which resemble X closely enough in important respects, and
3

"Counterparc Theory and Quantified Modal Logic," in this volume.

50

Ontology

more closely than do the other things in their worlds. It is easier for a Republican
than for a cockatrice to resemble me enough to be my counterpart.
The counterpart relation serves as a substitute for identity between things in
different worlds. The principal advantage of the method of counterparts over the
method of interworld identities is that if we adopted the latter in its most plausible
form, we would say that things were identical with all and only those things which
we would otherwise call their counterparts. But that could not be correct: first,
because the counterpart relation is not transitive or symmetric, as identity is; and
second, because the counterpart relation depends on the relative importances we
attach to various different respects of similarity and dissimilarity, as identity does
not.
To recapitulate: in each possible world there is a set of momentary stages and a
set of enduring things composed of stages related pairwise by various relations of
unity. An enduring thing and its stages exist only in one world, but may have
counterparts in other worlds. We shall be concerned here only with counterparts
of enduring things, though we can allow that stages also have their counterparts.
Applying the method of counterparts to the problem at hand, we immediately
encounter a bothersome distraction. The translation of (2), which seemed self-contradictory, is this:
There are a world W, a counterpart X in IF of my body, and a counterpart
Y in W of my body, such that X and Y are not identical today.
Unfortunately, this translation comes out true, but for an irrelevant reason. I, and
also my body whether or not I am identical with it, might have been twins. My
body therefore does have two different counterparts in certain worlds. Not only is
the translation true; it seems to me to show that (2) itself is true. But the argument
against (T) can easily be repaired. Replace (1) and (2) by:
(!')
(2')

I and my body are such that (without any duplication of either) they
might not have been identical today.
My body and my body are such that (without any duplication of either)
they might not have been identical today.

The argument works as well with (!') and (2') as it did with (1) and (2). Indeed,
(!') and (2') correspond to (1) and (2) as we would have understood them if we
had forgotten that I might have been twins.4
Applying counterpart theory to the repaired argument, we obtain these translations of (!') and (2'):
(1*)

4

There are a world W, a unique counterpart X in W of me, and a unique
counterpart Y in W of my body, such that X and Y are not identical
today.

I do not know how or whether (1') and (20 can be expressed in the language of quantified modal
logic. That does not bother me. I know how to express them in English and in counterpart theory.

Counterparts of Persons and Their Bodies

(2*)

51

There are a world W, a unique counterpart X in W of my body, and
a unique counterpart Y in W of my body, such that X and Y are not
identical today.

The argument against (T) seems to go through, using (1*) and (2*): (1*) seems
true because I might have switched bodies yesterday; (2*) is self-contradictory; yet
(1*) implies (2*) by Leibniz's law, given (T) and the supposition that I occupy the
same body whenever I or it exist.
In defense of (T), however, I claim that (1*) is false, despite the fact that I might
have switched bodies yesterday, What is true because I might have switched bodies
is not (1*) but rather (1**):
(1**)

There are a world W, a unique personal counterpart X in IF of me,
and a unique bodily counterpart Y in W of my body, such that X and
Y are not identical today.

I now propose a revision of counterpart theory to the effect that, at least in the
present context, (1**) rather than (1*) is the correct translation of (!')• What follows from (1**) by Leibniz's law, given (T) and the supposition that I occupy the
same body whenever I exist, is not the self-contradiction (2*) but rather the truth:
There are a world W, a unique personal counterpart X in W of my body, and
a unique bodily counterpart y in IF of my body, such that X and Y are not
identical today.
Two other truths follow from (1**) in the same way:
There are a world W, a unique personal counterpart X in IF of me, and a
unique bodily counterpart y in W of me, such that X and Y are not identical
today.
There are a world W, a unique personal counterpart X in W of my body, and
a unique bodily counterpart Y in W of me, such that X and Y are not identical today.
However, the translation of (2') is none of these. If the translation of (!') is (1**),
the translation of (2') should be (2**):
(2**)

There are a world W, a unique bodily counterpart X in IF of my
body, and a unique bodily counterpart V in IF of my body, such that
X and Y are not identical today.

Though (2**) is not (2*), it is still a self-contradiction.
As we already noted, counterpart relations are a matter of over-all resemblance
in a variety of respects. If we vary the relative importances of different respects of
similarity and dissimilarity, we will get different counterpart relations. Two respects
of similarity or dissimilarity among enduring things are, first, personhood and personal traits, and, second, bodyhood and bodily traits. If we assign great weight to

52

Ontology

the former, we get the personal counterpart relation. Only a person, or something
very like a person, can resemble a person in respect of personhood and personal
traits enough to be his personal counterpart. But if we assign great weight to the
latter, we get the bodily counterpart relation. Only a body, or something very like
a body, can resemble a body in respect to bodyhood and bodily traits enough to
be its bodily counterpart.
If I am my body, then in many worlds there are things that are both personal
and bodily counterparts of me and ipso facto of my body. These things, like me,
are both persons and bodies. But in other worlds I (and my body) have neither
personal counterparts nor bodily counterparts; or personal counterparts that are not
bodily counterparts; or bodily counterparts that are not personal counterparts; or
personal and bodily counterparts that are not identical. A world in which I
switched out of my body—that is, my personal counterpart switched out of my
bodily counterpart—yesterday is of this last sort. I and my body have there a personal counterpart that is a person but not a body and also a bodily counterpart that
is a body but not a person. These are not identical today, and not identical simpliciter, though they were identical at times before yesterday since they shared their
earlier stages. However, my personal counterpart is identical today with a different
body. My bodily counterpart is identical today with a different person (if the bodyswitching was a trade) or with none.
We may draw an analogy between the relations of personal and bodily unity
among stages of persons and bodies and the personal and bodily counterpart relations among enduring persons and bodies. If I ask of something that is both a stage
of a body and a stage of a body-switching person "Was this ever in Borneo?" you
should ask whether I mean this person or this body. If the former, I am asking
whether the given stage is linked by personal unity to an earlier stage located in
Borneo. If the latter, I am asking whether it is linked by bodily unity to an earlier
stage located in Borneo. Similarly, if I ask of something that is both an enduring
person and an enduring body "Might this have been an orangutan?" you should
again ask whether I mean this person or this body. If the former, I am asking
whether it has an orangutan for a personal counterpart; if the latter, whether it has
an orangutan for a bodily counterpart.
But the analogy is imperfect. The two relations of unity are equivalence relations,
at least for the most part and as a matter of contingent fact. Therefore it is easy
and natural to form the concept of an enduring person or body, consisting of stages
linked together pairwise by a relation of personal or bodily unity. It is tempting to
do the same with the counterpart relations, forming the concept of a superperson
or superbody consisting of persons or bodies in different worlds, linked together by
a personal or bodily counterpart relation. But this cannot be done in any straightforward way because counterpart relations are not equivalence relations. Like all
similarity relations on a sufficiently variegated domain, they fail to be transitive
because chains of little differences add up to big differences.
Why should I think it plausible to employ multiple counterpart relations to
translate (!') as (1**) rather than (1*)? Precisely because by doing so I escape the

Counterparts of Persons and Their Bodies

53

refutation of (T), and I am convinced of (T). I am offered a trade: instead of a
multiplicity of kinds of thing I can have a multiplicity of counterpart relations. A
reductio refutes the whole combination of assumptions that led to contradiction; if
all but one of those assumptions are highly plausible, whichever remains is the
refuted one. And in addition, if I contemplate the propositions I express by means
of (!') and (1**), it seems to me that they are the same.
I would like to present the translation of (!') by (1**) and (2') by (2**) as
instances of a general scheme for translating English modal predications into sentences of counterpart theory with multiple counterpart relations. I do not know
how to do this. Roughly, the idea is that the sense of a term somehow selects the
counterpart relation that is to be used to find the counterparts of the thing denoted
by that term. The terms T, 'you,' 'that person,' 'the lady I saw you with last night,'
'George,' all select the personal counterpart relation. 'This thing' (pointing at
myself), 'this body,' 'my body,' 'that which will be my corpse after I die,' all select
the bodily counterpart relation. Similarly for indefinite terms (phrases of restricted
quantification): 'everybody' selects the personal counterpart relation, whereas 'every
body' selects the bodily counterpart relation. Even if everybody is his body, and
conversely, "Everybody is such that he might have been a disembodied spirit" is
true, whereas "Every body is such that it might have been a disembodied spirit"
is false. The former means that each of those things which are both persons and
bodies has a disembodied spirit as personal counterpart, whereas the latter means
that each of those same things has a disembodied spirit as bodily counterpart.
In certain modal predications, the appropriate counterpart relation is selected
not by the subject term but by a special clause. To say that something, regarded as
a such-and-such, is such that it might have done so-and-so is to say that in some
world it has a such-and-such-counterpart that does so-and-so. With these
"regarded as" clauses in mind, I might say that I translate (!') as (1**) because I
take it to be synonymous with (!"):
(1")

I, regarded as a person, and my body, regarded as a body, are such
that (without any duplication of either) they might not have been identical today.

Likewise I translated (2') as if it had contained two "regarded as a body" clauses.
If we are to have multiple counterpart relations, we may well wonder how many
to have. One for every sortal? One for every natural kind? One for any common
noun phrase whatever that can grammatically be inserted into 'regarded as a
,' even the phrase 'yellow pig or prime number? One for any kind of
entity, even kinds that cannot be specified in our language?5 I do not know. Nor
do I know whether one of the counterpart relations, corresponding perhaps to the
clause 'regarded as an entity,' can be identified with the single counterpart relation
of my original counterpart theory.
5

We could also put this question another way: given a three-place relation "
counterpart of
," which kinds are appropriate middle arguments;*

is a

al

54

Ontology

It is customary to distinguish real essences of things from their nominal essences
under descriptions. Now, however, we have a third, intermediate, kind of essence.
My real essence consists of the properties common to all my counterparts. (Here I
use the original single counterpart relation.) My nominal essence under the description 'person' consists of the properties common to all possible persons. My intermediate essence under the description 'person' consists of the properties common
to all my personal counterparts. I have no reason to think that any two of these
sets of properties are the same. It may even be that none of the three is properly
included in any other, if my personal counterparts include some entities (robots,
say) which are almost persons but not quite. Counterpart relations are vague, being
dependent on the relative weights assigned to respects of similarity or dissimilarity.
Hence real essences are vague in a way nominal essences are not. Intermediate
essences under descriptions share this vagueness, for the new multiple counterpart
relations are no less vague than the original counterpart relation.
In my original counterpart theory, any de re modal predication is referentially
transparent. Something has the same counterparts however we may choose to refer
to it. Given a de re modal predication, we find the thing denoted by the subject
term in the actual world; then we consider what befalls that thing—or rather, its
counterparts—in other worlds. Only the denotation of the subject term matters.
We can substitute another subject term with the same denotation but different
sense, and the truth value of the modal predication will not change.
But in the present revision of counterpart theory, de re modal predications are
not in general transparent. Not only the denotation of the subject term matters,
but also the counterpart relation it selects. If we substitute another subject term
with the same denotation but different sense, it may change the truth value of the
modal predication by selecting a different counterpart relation. Then even though
the denoted thing here in our world remains the same, we have a different way of
following the fortunes of that thing in other worlds.
Nevertheless, these modal predications are still de re, not de dicta. We still find
the denoted thing in our actual world and then find counterparts of that thing
eleswhere. We do not at all consider the things denoted by the subject term in
other worlds, as we would in the case of a de dicto modal predication.
Transparency of modal predications can fail whenever the sense of the subject
term is used to do anything beyond determining the actual denotation of the subject term. One further thing it might do is determine the denotation of the subject
term in other worlds; that is the de dicto case. Another, and altogether different,
further thing it might do is select a counterpart relation. (These two are not the
only alternatives.) It is the latter, I suggest, that happens in the argument we are
considering. Therefore we can accept (!') as a consequence of the possibility that I
might have switched bodies, reject (20 as self-contradictory, and yet accept (T) and
its consequence that if I occupy the same body whenever I or it exist then I am my
body.

FIVE

Survival and Identity

What is it that matters in survival? Suppose I wonder whether I will survive the
coming battle, brainwashing, brain transplant, journey by matter-transmitter, purported reincarnation or resurrection, fission into twins, fusion with someone else,
or what not. What do I really care about? If it can happen that some features of
ordinary, everyday survival are present but others are missing, then what would it
take to make the difference between something practically as good as commonplace
survival and something practically as bad as commonplace death?
I answer, along with many others: what matters in survival is mental continuity
and connectedness. When I consider various cases in between commonplace survival
and commonplace death, I find that what I mostly want in wanting survival is that
my mental life should flow on. My present experiences, thoughts, beliefs, desires,
and traits of character should have appropriate future successors. My total present
mental state should be but one momentary stage in a continuing succession of
mental states. These successive states should be interconnected in two ways. First,
by bonds of similarity. Change should be gradual rather than sudden, and (at least
in some respects) there should not be too much change overall. Second, by bonds
of lawful causal dependence. Such change as there is should conform, for the most
part, to lawful regularities concerning the succession of mental states—-regularities,
moreover, that are exemplified in everyday cases of survival. And this should be so
not by accident (and also not, for instance, because some demon has set out to
create a succession of mental states patterned to counterfeit our ordinary mental
55

56

Ontology

life) but rather because each succeeding mental state causally depends for its character on the states immediately before it.
I refrain from settling certain questions of detail. Perhaps my emphasis should
be on connectedness: direct relations of similarity and causal dependence between
my present mental state and each of its successors; or perhaps I should rather
emphasize continuity: the existence of step-by-step paths from here to there, with
extremely strong local connectedness from each step to the next. Perhaps a special
place should be given to the special kind of continuity and connectedness that
constitute memory;1 or perhaps not. Perhaps the "mental" should be construed
narrowly, perhaps broadly. Perhaps nonmental continuity and connectedness—in
my appearance and voice, for instance—also should have at least some weight. It
does not matter, for the present, just which version I would prefer of the thesis that
what matters is mental continuity and connectedness. I am sure that I would
endorse some version, and in this paper I want to deal with a seeming problem for
any version.
The problem begins with a well-deserved complaint that all this about mental
connectedness and continuity is too clever by half. I have forgotten to say what
should have been said first of all. What matters in survival is survival. If I wonder
whether I will survive, what I mostly care about is quite simple. When it's all
over, will I myself—the very same person now thinking these thoughts and writing
these words—still exist? Will any one of those who do exist afterward be me? In
other words, what matters in survival is identity—identity between the I who exists
now and the surviving I who will, I hope, still exist then.
One question, two answers! An interesting answer, plausible to me on reflection
but far from obvious: that what matters is mental connectedness and continuity
between my present mental state and other mental states that will succeed it in the
future. And a compelling commonsense answer, an unhelpful platitude that cannot
credibly be denied: what matters is identity between myself, existing now, and
myself, still existing in the future.
If the two answers disagreed and we had to choose one, I suppose we would
have to prefer the platitude of common sense to the interesting philosophical thesis.
Else it would be difficult to believe one's own philosophy! The only hope for the
first answer, then, is to show that we need not choose: the answers are compatible,
and both are right. That is the claim I wish to defend. I say that it cannot happen
that what matters in survival according to one answer is present while what matters
in survival according to the other answer is lacking.

'Better, quasi-memory: that process which is memory when it occurs within one single person, but might
not be properly so-called if it occurred in a succession of mental states that did not all belong to a
single person.

Survival and Identity

57

I. PARFIT'S ARGUMENT
Derek Parfit has argued that the two answers cannot both be right, and we must
therefore choose.2 (He chooses the first). His argument is as follows:
(a) Identity is a relation with a certain formal character. It is one-one and it does
not admit of degree.
(b) A relation of mental continuity and connectedness need not have that formal
character. We can imagine problem cases in which any such relation is one-many
or many-one, or in which it is present to a degree so slight that survival is questionable.
Therefore, since Parfit believes as I do that what matters in survival is some sort
of mental continuity or connectedness,
(c) What matters in survival is not identity. At most, what matters is a relation
that coincides with identity to the extent that the problem cases do not actually
arise.
Parfit thinks that if the problem cases did arise, or if we wished to solve them
hypothetically, questions of personal identity would have no compelling answers.
They would have to be answered arbitrarily, and in view of the discrepancy stated
in (a) and (b), there is no answer that could make personal identity coincide perfectly with the relation of mental continuity and connectedness that matters in
survival.
Someone else could just as well run the argument in reverse. Of course what
matters in survival is personal identity Therefore what matters cannot be mental
continuity or connectedness, in view of the discrepancy stated in premises (a) and
(b). It must be some better-behaved relation.
My task is to disarm both directions of the argument and show that the opposition between what matters and identity is false. We can agree with Parfit (and I
think we should) that what matters in questions of personal identity is mental
continuity or connectedness, and that this might be one-many or many-one, and
admits of degree. At the same time we can consistently agree with common sense
(and I think we should) that what matters in questions of personal identity—-even
in the problem cases—is identity.
I do not attack premises (a) and (b). We could, of course, say "identity" and
just mean mental continuity and connectedness. Then we would deny that "identity" must have the formal character stated in (a). But this verbal maneuver would
not meet the needs of those who think, as I do, that what matters in survival is
literally identity: that relation that everything bears to itself and to no other thing.
As for (b), the problem cases clearly are possible under Parfit's conception of the
sort of mental continuity or connectedness that matters in survival: or under any

2

Derek Parfit, "Personal Identity," Philosophical Review 80 (1971): 3-27.

58

Ontology

conception I might wish to adopt. The questions about continuity and connectedness which I left open are not relevant, since no way of settling them will produce
a relation with the formal character of identity. So we do indeed have a discrepancy
of formal character between identity and any suitable relation of mental continuity
and connectedness.
But what does that show? Only that the two relations are different. And we
should have known that from the start, since they have different relata. He who
says that what matters in survival is a relation of mental continuity and connectedness is speaking of a relation among more or less momentary person-stages, or
time-slices of continuant persons, or persons-at-times. He who says that what matters in survival is identity, on the other hand, must be speaking of identity among
temporally extended continuant persons with stages at various times. What matters
is that one and the same continuant person should have stages both now and later.
Identity among stages has nothing to do with it, since stages are momentary. Even
if you survive, your present stage is not identical to any future stage,3 You know
that your present stage will not survive the battle—that is not disconcerting—but
will you survive?

II. THE R-RELATION AND THE I-RELATION
Pretend that the open questions have been settled, so that we have some definite
relation of mental continuity and connectedness among person-stages in mind as
the relation that matters in survival. Call it the R-relation, for short. If you wonder
whether you will survive the coming battle or what-not, you are wondering whether
any of the stages that will exist afterward is R-related to you-now, the stage that
is doing the wondering. Similarly for other "questions of personal identity." If you
wonder whether this is your long-lost son, you mostly wonder whether the stage
before you now is R-related to certain past stages. If you also wonder whether he
is a reincarnation of Nero, you wonder whether this stage is R-related to other
stages farther in the past. If you wonder whether it is in your self-interest to save
for your old age, you wonder whether the stages of that tiresome old gaffer you
will become are R-related to you-now to a significantly greater degree than are all
the other person-stages at this time or other times. If you wonder as you step into
the duplicator whether you will leave by the left door, the right door, both, or
neither, you are again wondering which future stages, if any, are R-related to younow.
Or so say I. Common sense says something that sounds different: in wondering
whether you will survive the battle, you wonder whether you—a continuant person
^Unless time is circular, so that it is in its own future in the same way that places are to the west of
themselves. But that possibility also has nothing to do with survival.

Survival and Identity

59

consisting of your present stage along with many other stages—will continue
beyond the battle. Will you be identical with anyone alive then? Likewise for other
questions of personal identity.
Put this way, the two answers seem incomparable. It is pointless to compare the
formal character of identity itself with the formal character of the relation R that
matters in survival. Of course the R-relation among stages is not the same as identity either among stages or among continuants. But identity among continuant
persons induces a relation among stages: the relation that holds between the several
stages of a single continuant person. Call this the l-relation. It is the I-relation, not
identity itself, that we must compare with the R-relation. In wondering whether
you will survive the battle, we said, you wonder whether the continuant person
that includes your present stage is identical with any of the continuant persons that
continue beyond the battle. In other words: whether it is identical with any of the
continuant persons that include stages after the battle. In other words: you wonder
whether any of the stages that will exist afterward is I-related to—belongs to the
same person as—your present stage. If questions of survival, or personal identity
generally, are questions of identity among continuant persons, then they are also
questions of I-relatedness among person-stages; and conversely. More precisely: if
common sense is right that what matters in survival is identity among continuant
persons, then you have what matters in survival if and only if your present stage is Irelated to future stages, I shall not distinguish henceforth between the thesis that
what matters in survival is identity and the thesis that what matters in survival is
the I-relation. Either way, it is a compelling platitude of common sense.
If ever a stage is R-related to some future stage but I-related to none, or if ever
a stage is I-related to some future stage but R-related to none, then the platitude
that what matters is the I-relation will disagree with the interesting thesis that what
matters is the R-relation. But no such thing can happen, I claim; so there can be
no such disagreement. In fact, I claim that any stage is l-related and R-related to
exactly the same stages. And I claim this not only for the cases that arise in real
life, but for all possible problem cases as well. Let us individuate relations, as is
usual, by necessary coextensiveness. Then I claim that the l-relation is the R-relation.
A continuant person is an aggregate4 of person-stages, each one I-related to all
the rest (and to itself)' For short: a person is an l-interrelated aggregate. Moreover,
a person is not part of any larger I-interrelated aggregate; for if we left out any
stages that were I-related to one another and to all the stages we included, then
what we would have would not be a whole continuant person but only part of one.
For short: a person is a maximal I-interrelated aggregate. And conversely, any maximal I-interrelated aggregate of person-stages is a continuant person. At least, I
4

It does not matter what sort of "aggregate." I prefer a mereological sum, so that the stages are literally
parts of the continuant. But a class of stages would do as well, or a sequence or ordering of stages, or
a suitable function from moments or stretches of time to stages.

60

Ontology

cannot think of any that clearly is not.5 So far we have only a small circle, from
personhood to I-interrelatedness and back again. That is unhelpful; but if the Irelation is the R-relation, we have something more interesting: a noncircular definition of personhood. I claim that someting is a continuant person if and only if it
is a maximal R-interrelated aggregate of person-stages. That is: if and only if it is an
aggregate of person-stages, each of which is R-related to all the rest (and to itself),
and it is a proper part of no other such aggregate.
I cannot tolerate any discrepancy in formal character between the I-relation and
the R-relation, for I have claimed that these relations are one and the same. Now
although the admitted discrepancy between identity and the R-relation is harmless
in itself, and although the I-relation is not identity, still it may seem that the Irelation inherits enough of the formal character of identity to lead to trouble. For
suppose that S,, S2, . . .are person-stages; and suppose that C, is the continuant
person of whom S, is a stage, C2 is the continuant person of whom S2 is a stage,
and so on. Then any two of these stages Sj and S, are I-related if and only if the
corresponding continuant persons C; and C, are identical. The I-relations among the
stages mirror the structure of the identity relations among the continuants.
I reply that the foregoing argument wrongly takes it for granted that every person-stage is a stage of one and only one continuant person. That is so ordinarily;
and when that is so, the I-relation does inherit much of the formal character of
identity. But ordinarily the R-relation also is well behaved. In the problem cases,
however, it may happen that a single stage S is a stage of two or more different
continuant persons. Worse, some or all of these may be persons to a diminished
degree, so that it is questionable which of them should count as persons at all. If
so, there would not be any such thing (in any straightforward way) as the person
of whom S is a stage. So the supposition of the argument would not apply. It has
not been shown that the I-relation inherits the formal character of identity in the
problem cases. Rather it might be just as ill behaved as the R-relation. We shall
examine the problem cases and see how that can happen.6
It would be wrong to read my definition of the I-relation as saying that personstages S, and S2 are I-related if and only if the continuant person of whom S, is a
stage and the continuant person of whom S2 is a stage are identical. The definite
articles require the presupposition that I have just questioned. We should substitute the indefinite article: S, and S2 are I-related if and only if a continuant person
of whom S, is a stage and a continuant person of whom S2 is a stage are identical.

'The least clear-cut cases are those in which the stages cannot be given any "personal time" ordering
with respect to which they vary in the way that the stages of an ordinary person vary with respect to
time. But it is so indeterminate what we want to say about such bizarre cases that they cannot serve as
counter-examples to any of my claims.
6
The argument also takes it for granted that every person-stage is a stage of at least one person. I do
not object to that. If there is no way to unite a stage in a continuant with other stages, let it be a very
short-lived continuant person all by itself.

Survival and Identity

61

More simply: if and only if there is some one continuant person of whom both S,
and S2 are stages.
One seeming discrepancy between the I-relation and the R-relation need not
disturb us. The I-relation must be symmetrical, whereas the R-relation has a direction. If a stage S2 is mentally connected to a previous stage S,, S, is available in
memory to S2 and S2 is under the intentional control of S, to some extent—not the
other way around. 7 We can say that S, is R-related forward to S2, whereas S2 is Rrelated backward to S,. The forward and backward R-relations are converses of one
another. Both are (normally) antisymmetrical. But although we can distinguish the
forward and backward R-relations, we can also merge them into a symmetrical
relation. That is the R-relation I have in mind: §! and S2 are R-related simpliciter
if and only if S, is R-related either forward or backward to S2.
While we are at it, let us also stipulate that every stage is R-related—forward,
backward, and simpliciter—to itself. The R-relation, like the I-relation, is reflexive.
Parfit mentions two ways for a discrepancy to arise in the problem cases. First,
the R-relation might be one-many or many-one. Second, the R-relation admits in
principle of degree, and might be present to a degree that is markedly subnormal
and yet not negligible. Both possibilities arise in connection with fission and fusion
of continuant persons, and also in connection with immortality or longevity.

III. FISSION AND FUSION
Identity is one-one, in the sense that nothing is ever identical to two different
things. Obviously neither the I-relation nor the R-relation is one-one in that sense.
You-now are a stage of the same continuant as many other stages, and are R-related
to them all. Many other stages are stages of the same continuant as you-now, and
are R-related to you-now. But when Parfit says that the R-relation might be onemany or many-one, he does not just mean that. Rather, he means that one stage
might be R-related to many stages that are not R-related to one another, and that
many stages that are not R-related to one another might all be R-related to one
single stage. (These possibilities do not differ once we specify that the R-relation is
to be taken as symmetrical.) In short, the R-relation might fail to be transitive.
In a case of fission, for instance, we have a prefission stage that is R-related
forward to two different, simultaneous postfission stages that are not R-related
either forward or backward to each other. The forward R-relation is one-many, the
backward R-relation is many-one, and the R-relation simpliciter is intransitive.
In a case of fusion we have two prefusion stages, not R-related either forward or
backward to each other, that are R-related forward to a single postfusion stage. The
forward R-relation is many-one, the backward R-relation is one-many, and the Rrelation simpliciter is again intransitive.
7

As before, it would be better to speak hete of quasi-memory; and likewise of quasi-intentional control.

62

Ontology

Identity must be transitive, but the I-relation is not identity. The I-relation will
fail to be transitive if and only if there is partial overlap among continuant persons.
More precisely: if and only if two continuant persons C, and C2 have at least one
common stage, but each one also has stages that are not included in the other. If
S is a stage of both, S, is a stage of C, but not C2, and S2 is a stage of C2 but not
C,, then transitivity of the I-relation fails. Although S, is I-related to S, which in
turn is I-related to S2, yet S, is not I-related to S2. In order to argue that the Irelation, unlike the R-relation, must be transitive, it is not enough to appeal to the
uncontroversial transitivity of identity. The further premise is needed that partial
overlap of continuant persons is impossible.
Figure 1 shows how to represent fission and fusion as cases of partial overlap.
The continuant persons involved, C, and C2, are the two maximal R-interrelated
aggregates of stages marked by the two sorts of cross-hatching. In the case of fission,
the prefission stages are shared by both continuants. In the case of fusion, the postfusion stages are likewise shared. In each case, we have a shared stage S that is Irelated to two stages S, and S2 that are not I-related to each other. Also S is Rrelated to S, and S2 (forward in the case of fission, backward in the case of fusion)
but S, and S2 are not R-related to each other. More generally, the I-relation and
the R-relation coincide for all stages involved in the affair.
There is, however, a strong reason for denying that continuant persons can overlap in this way. From this denial it would indeed follow (as it does not follow from
the transitivity of identity alone) that the I-relation cannot share the possible intransitivities of the R-relation.
The trouble with overlap is that it leads to overpopulation. To count the population at a given time, we can count the continuant persons who have stages at
that time; or we can count the stages. If there is overlap, there will be more continuants than stages. (I disregard the possibility that one of the continuants is a
time traveler with distinct simultaneous stages.) The count of stages is the count

Survival and Identity

63

we accept; yet we think we are counting persons, and we think of persons as continuants rather than stages. How, then, can we tolerate overlap?
For instance, we say that in a case of fission one person becomes two. By describing fission as initial stage-sharing we provide for the two, but not for the one. There
are two all along. It is all very well to say from an eternal or postfission standpoint
that two persons (with a common initial segment) are involved, but we also
demand to say that on the day before the fission only one person entered the duplication center; that his mother did not bear twins; that until he fissions he should
only have one vote; and so on. Counting at a time, we insist on counting a person
who will fission as one. We insist on a method of counting persons that agrees with
the result of counting stages, though we do not think that counting persons just is
counting (simultaneous) stages.
It is not so clear that we insist on counting a product of fusion as one (or a time
traveler meeting himself as two). We are not sure what to say. But suppose we
were fully devoted to the doctrine that the number of different persons in existence
at a time is the number of different person-stages at that time. Even so, we would
not be forced to deny that continuant persons could overlap. We would therefore
not be driven to conclude that the I-relation cannot share the possible intransitivities of the R-relation.
The way out is to deny that we must invariably count two nonidentical continuants as two. We might count not by identity but by a weaker relation. Let us say
that continuants C, and C2 are identical-at-time-t if and only if they both exist at
t and their stages at t are identical. (More precisely: C, and C2 both have stages at
t, and all and only stages of C, at t are stages of C2 at t.) I shall speak of such
relations of identity-at-a-time as relations of tensed identity. Tensed identity is not
a kind of identity. It is not identity among stages, but rather a derivative relation
among continuants which is induced by identity among stages. It is not identity
among continuants, but rather a relation that is weaker than identity whenever
different continuants have stages in common. If we count continuants by tensed
identity rather than by identity, we will get the right answer—the answer that
agrees with the answer we get by counting stages—even if there is overlap. How
many persons entered the duplication center yesterday? We may reply: C, entered
and C2 entered, and no one else; although C, and C2 are not identical today, and
are not identical simpliciter, they were identical yesterday. So counting by identityyesterday, there was only one. Counting by identity-today, there were two; but it
is inappropriate to count by identity-today when we are talking solely about the
events of yesterday. Counting by identity simpliciter there were two; but in talking
about the events of yesterday it is as unnatural to count by identity as it is to count
by identity-today. There is a way of counting on which there are two all along; but
there is another way on which there are first one and then two. The latter has
obvious practical advantages. It should be no surprise if it is the way we prefer.
It may seem far-fetched to claim that we ever count persons otherwise than by
identity simpliciter. But we sometimes do count otherwise. If an infirm man wishes

64

Ontology

to know how many roads he must cross to reach his destination, I will count by
identity-along-his-path rather than by identity. By crossing the Chester A. Arthur
Parkway and Route 137 at the brief stretch where they have merged, he can cross
both by crossing only one road. Yet these two roads are certainly not identical.
You may feel certain that you count persons by identity, not by tensed identity.
But how can you be sure? Normal cases provide no evidence. When no stages are
shared, both ways of counting agree. They differ only in the problem cases: fission,
fusion, and another that we shall soon consider. The problem cases provide no very
solid evidence either. They are problem cases just because we cannot consistently
say quite all the things we feel inclined to. We must strike the best compromise
among our conflicting initial opinions. Something must give way; and why not the
opinion that of course we count by identity, if that is what can be sacrificed with
least total damage?
A relation to count by does not have to be identity, as the example of the roads
shows. But perhaps it should share the key properties of identity. It should at least
be an equivalence relation: reflexive, symmetrical, and transitive. Relations of tensed
identity are equivalence relations. Further, it should be an indiscernibility relation;
not for all properties whatever, as identity is, but at least for some significant class
of properties. That is, it ought to be that two related things have exactly the same
properties in that class. Identity-at-time-t is an indiscernibility relation for a significant class of properties of continuant persons: those properties of a person which
are logically determined by the properties of his stage at t. The class includes the
properties of walking, being tall, being in a certain room, being thirsty, and believing in God at time t; but not the properties of being forty-three years old, gaining
weight, being an ex-Communist, or remembering one's childhood at t. The class
is sizable enough, at any rate, to make clear that a relation of tensed identity is
more of an indiscernibility relation than is identity-along-a-path among roads.
If we are prepared to count a product of fusion as two, while still demanding to
count a person who will fission as one, we can count at t by the relation of identityat-all-times-up-to-t. This is the relation that holds between continuants C, and C2
if and only if (1) they both exist at some time no later than t, (2) at any time no
later than t, either both exist or neither does, and (3) at any time no later than t
when both exist, they have exactly the same stages. Again, this is a relation among
continuants that is weaker than identity to the extent that continuants share stages.
Although derived from identity (among stages) it is of course not itself identity. It
is even more of an indiscernibility relation than identity-at-t, since it confers indiscernibility with respect to such properties as being forty-three years old, gaining
weight (in one sense), being an ex-Communist, and remembering one's childhood
at t; though still not with respect to such properties as being, at t, the next winner
of the State Lottery.
It may be disconcerting that we can have a single name for one person (counting
by tensed identity) who is really two nonidentical persons because he will later
fission. Isn't the name ambiguous? Yes; but so long as its two bearers are indiscer-

Survival and Identity

65

nible in the respects we want to talk about, the ambiguity is harmless. If C, and
C2 are identical-at-all-times-up-to-now and share the name "Ned" it is idle to
disambiguate such remarks as "Ned is tall," "Ned is waiting to be duplicated,"
"Ned is frightened," "Ned only decided yesterday to do it," and the like. These
will be true on both disambiguations of "Ned," or false on both. Before the fission,
only predictions need disambiguating. After the fission, on the other hand, the
ambiguity of "Ned" will be much more bother. It can be expected that the ambiguous name "Ned" will then fall into disuse, except when we wish to speak of the
shared life of C, and C2 before the fission.
But what if we don't know whether Ned will fission? In that case, we don't
know whether the one person Ned (counting by identity-now) is one person, or
two, or many (counting by identity). Then we don't know whether "Ned" is
ambiguous or not. But if the ambiguity is not a practical nuisance, we don't need
to know. We can wait and see whether or not we have been living with a harmless
ambiguity.
This completes my discussion of fission and fusion. To summarize: if the Rrelation is the I-relation, and in particular if continuant persons are maximal Rinterrelated aggregates of person-stages, then cases of fission and fusion must be
treated as cases of stage-sharing between different, partially overlapping continuant
persons. If so, the R-relation and the I-relation are alike intransitive, so there is no
discrepancy on that score. If it is granted that we may count continuant persons by
tensed identity, then this treatment does not conflict with our opinion that in fission
one person becomes two; nor with our opinion (if it really is our opinion) that in
fusion two persons become one.

IV. LONGEVITY
I turn now to a different problem case. Parfit has noted that mental connectedness
will fade away eventually. If the R-relation is a matter of direct connectedness as
well as continuity, then intransitivities of the R-relation will appear in the case of
a person (if it is a person!) who lives too long.
Consider Methuselah. At the age of 100 he still remembers his childhood. But
new memories crowd out the old. At the age of 150 he has hardly any memories
that go back before his twentieth year. At the age of 200 he has hardly any memories that go back before his seventieth year; and so on. When he dies at the age
of 969, he has hardly any memories that go beyond his 839th year. As he grows
older he grows wiser; his callow opinions and character at age 90 have vanished
almost without a trace by age 220, but his opinions and character at age 220 also
have vanished almost without a trace by age 350. He soon learns that it is futile
to set goals for himself too far ahead. At age 120, he is still somewhat interested
in fulfilling the ambitions he held at age 40; but at age 170 he cares nothing for

66

Ontology

those ambitions, and it is beginning to take an effort of will to summon up an
interest in fulfilling his aspirations at age 80. And so it goes.
We sometimes say: in later life I will be a different person. For us short-lived
creatures, such remarks are an extravagance. A philosophical study of personal identity can ignore them. For Methuselah, however, the fading-out of personal identity
looms large as a fact of life. It is incumbent on us to make it literally true that he
will be a different person after one and one-half centuries or so.
I should imagine that this is so just in virtue of normal aging over 969 years. If
you disagree, imagine that Methuselah lives much longer than a bare millennium
(Parfit imagines the case of immortals who change mentally at the same rate as we
do). Or imagine that his life is punctuated by frequent amnesias, brain-washings,
psychoanalyses, conversions, and what not, each one of which is almost (but not
quite) enough to turn him into a different person.
Suppose, for simplicity, that any two stages of Methuselah that are separated by
no more than 137 years are R-related; and any two of his stages that are separated
by more than 137 years are not R-related. (For the time being, we may pretend
that R-relatedness is all-or-nothing, with a sharp cutoff.)
If the R-relation and the I-relation are the same, this means that two of Methuselah's stages belong to a single continuant person if and only if they are no more
than 137 years apart. (Therefore the whole of Methuselah is not a single person.)
That is the case, in particular, if continuant persons are maximal R-interrelated
aggregates. For if so, then segments of Methuselah are R-interrelated if and only if
they are no more than 137 years long; whence it follows that all and only the
segments that are exactly 137 years long are maximal R-interrelated aggregates; so
all and only the 137-year segments are continuant persons.
If so, we have intransitivity both of the R-relation and of the I-relation. Let S,
be a stage of Methuselah at the age of 400; let S2 be a stage of Methuselah at the
age of 500; let S3 be a stage of Methuselah at the age of 600. By hypothesis S, is
R-related to S2 and S2 is R-related to S3, but S, and S3 are not R-related. Being
separated by 200 years, they have no direct mental connections. Since S, and S2 are
linked by a 137-year segment (in fact, by infinitely many) they are I-related; likewise S2 and S3 are I-related. But S, and S, are not linked by any 137-year segment,
so they are not I-related. The R-relation and the I-relation are alike intransitive.
The problem of overpopulation is infinitely worse in the case of Methuselah than
in the cases of fission or fusion considered hitherto. Methuselah spends his 300th
birthday alone in his room. How many persons are in that room? There are infinitely many different 137-year segments that include all of Methuselah's stages on
his 300th birthday. One begins at the end of Methuselah's 163rd birthday and
ends at the end of his 300th birthday; another begins at the beginning of his 300th
and ends at the beginning of his 437th. Between these two are a continuum of
other 137-year segments. No two of them are identical. Every one of them puts in
an appearance (has a stage) in Methuselah's room on Methuselah's 300th birthday.
F.very one of them is a continuant person, given our supposition that Methuselah's

Survival and Identity

67

stages are R-related if and only if they are not more than 137 years apart, and given
that continuant persons are all and only maximal R-interrelated aggregates of person-stages. It begins to seem crowded in Methuselah's room!
Tensed identity to the rescue once more. True, there are continuum many nonidentical continuant persons in the room. But, counting by the appropriate relation
of tensed identity, there is only one. All the continuum many nonidentical continuant persons are identical-at-the-time-in-question, since they all share the single
stage at that time. Granted that we may count by tensed identity, there is no overcrowding.

V. DEGREE
We turn now to the question of degree. Identity certainly cannot be a matter of
degree. But the I-relation is not defined in terms of identity alone. It derives also
from personhood: the property of being a continuant person. Thus personal identity
may be a matter of degree because personhood is a matter of degree, even though
identity is not. Suppose two person-stages S, and S2 are stages of some one continuant that is a person to a low, but not negligible, degree. Suppose further that they
are not stages of anything else that is a person to any higher degree. Then they are
I-related to a low degree. So if personhood admits of degree, we have no discrepancy in formal character between the I-relation and the R-relation.
Parfit suggests, for instance, that if you fuse with someone very different, yielding
a fusion product mentally halfway between you and your partner, then it is questionable whether you have survived. Not that there is a definite, unknown answer.
Rather, what matters in survival—the R-relation—is present in reduced degree.
There is less of it than in clear cases of survival, more than in clear cases of nonsurvival.8 If we want the I-relation and the R-relation to coincide, we may take it
that Q and C2 (see Fig. 1 for cases of fusion) are persons to reduced degree because
they are broken by abrupt mental discontinuities. If persons are maximal R-interrelated aggregates, as I claim, that is what we should expect; the R-relations across
the fusion point are reduced in degree, hence the R-interrelatedness of C, and C2
is reduced in degree, and hence the personhood of C, and C2 is reduced in degree.
C, and C2 have less personhood than clear cases of persons, more personhood than
continuant aggregates of stages that are clearly not persons. Then S and S,, or S
and S2, are I-related to reduced degree just as they are R-related to reduced degree.
Personal identity to reduced degrees is found also in the case of Methuselah. We
supposed before that stages no more than 137 years apart are R-related while states
more than 137 years apart were not. But if the R-relation fades away at all—if it
is a relation partly of connectedness as well as continuity—it would be more realB

No similar problem arises in cases of fission. We imagine the immediate postfission stages to be pretty
much alike, wherefore they can all be strongly R-related to the immediare prefission srages.

68

Ontology

istic to suppose that it fades away gradually. We can suppose that stages within
100 years of each other are R-related to a high enough degree so that survival is
not in doubt; and that stages 200 or more years apart are R-related to such a low
degree that what matters in survival is clearly absent, There is no significant connectedness over long spans of time, only continuity. Then if we want the R-relation
and the I-relation to coincide, we could say roughly this: 100-year segments of
Methuselah are persons to a high degree, whereas 200-year segments are persons
only to a low degree. Then two stages that are strongly R-related also are strongly
I-related, whereas stages that are weakly R-related are also weakly I-related. Likewise for all the intermediate degrees of R-relatedness of stages, of personhood of
segments of Methuselah, and hence of I-relatedness of stages.
It is a familiar idea that personhood might admit of degrees. Most of the usual
examples, however, are not quite what I have in mind. They concern continuants
that are said to be persons to a reduced degree because their stages are thought to
be person-stages to a reduced degree. If anyone thinks that the wolf-child, the
"dehumanized" proletarian, or the human vegetable is not fully a person, that is
more because he regards the stages themselves as deficient than because the stages
are not strongly enough R-interrelated. If anyone thinks that personhood is partly
a matter of species membership, so that a creature of sorcery or a freak offspring of
hippopotami could not be fully a person no matter how much he resembled the
rest of us, that also would be a case in which the stages themselves are thought to
be deficient. In this case the stages are thought to be deficient not in their intrinsic
character but in their causal ancestry; there is, however, nothing wrong with their
R-interrelatedness. A severe case of split personality, on the other hand, does consist
of perfectly good person-stages that are not very well R-related. If he is said not to
be fully a person, that is an example of the kind of reduced personhood that permits us to claim that the R-relation and the I-relation alike admit of degrees.
Let us ignore the complications introduced by deficient person-stages. Let us
assume that all the stages under consideration are person-stages to more or less the
highest possible degree. (More generally, we could perhaps say that the degree of
I-relatedness of two stages depends not on the absolute degree of personhood of
the continuant, if any, that links them; but rather on the relative degree of personhood of that continuant compared to the greatest degree of personhood that the
degree of person-stage-hood of the stages could permit. If two wolf-child-stages are
person-stages only to degree 0.8, but they are stages of a continuant that is a person
to degree 0.8, we can say that the stages are thereby I-related to degree 1.)
If we say that a continuant person is an aggregate of R-interrelated person-stages,
it is clear that personhood admits of degree to the extent that the R-relation does.
We can say something like this: the degree of R-interrelatedness of an aggregate is
the minimum degree of R-relatedness between any two stages in the aggregate.
(Better: the greatest lower bound on the degrees of R-relatedness between any two
stages.) But when we recall that a person should be a maximal such aggregate,
confusion sets in. Suppose we have an aggregate that is R-interrelated to degree

Survival and Identity

69

0.9, and it is not included in any larger aggregate that is R-interrelated to degree
0.9 or greater. Suppose, however, that it is included in a much larger aggregate
that is R-interrelated to degree 0.88. We know the degree to which it qualifies as
an R-interrelated aggregate, but to what degree does it qualify as a maximal one?
That is, to what degree does it qualify as a person, if persons are maximal Rinterrelated aggregates? I am inclined to say: it passes the R-interrelatedness test for
personhood to degree 0.9, but at the same time it flunks the maximality test to
degree 0.88. Therefore it is a person only to degree 0.02!
This conclusion leads to trouble. Take the case of Methuselah. Assuming that
R-relatedness fades out gradually, every segment that passes the R-interrelatedness
test to a significant degree also flunks the maximality test to almost the same
degree. (If the fadeout is continuous, delete "almost.") So no segment of Methuselah passes both tests for personhood to any significant degree. No two stages, no
matter how close, are stages of some one continuant that is a person to high degree.
Rather, nearby stages are strongly I-related by being common to many continuants,
each one of which is strongly R-interrelated, is almost as strongly non-maximal,
and therefore is a person only to a low degree.
We might sum the degrees of personhood of all the continuants that link two
stages, taking the sum to be the degree of I-relatedness of the stages.
But there is a better way. Assume that R-relatedness can come in all degrees
ranging from 0 to 1 on some scale. Then every number in the interval from 0 to
1 is a possible location for an arbitrary boundary between pairs of stages that are
R-related and pairs that are not. Call every such number a delineation of this
boundary. Every delineation yields a decision as to which stages are R-related. It
thereby yields a decision as to which continuants are R-interrelated; a decision as
to which continuants are included in larger R-interrelated aggregates; a decision as
to which continuants are persons, given that persons are maximal R-interrelated
aggregates; and thence a decision as to which stages are I-related. We can say that
a certain continuant is a person, or that a certain pair of stages are I-related, relative
to a given delineation. We can also say whether something is the case relative to a
set of delineations, provided that all the delineations in the set agree on whether it
is the case. Then we can take the degree to which it is the case as the size (more
precisely: Lebesgue measure) of that set. Suppose, for instance, that two stages
count as I-related when we set the cut-ofF for R-relatedness anywhere from 0 to
0.9, but not when we set the cut-ofT more stringently between 0.9 and 1. Then
those two stages are I-related relative to delineations from 0 to 0.9, but not relative
to delineations from 0.9 to 1. They are I-related to degree 0.9—the size of the
delineation interval on which they are I-related. Yet there may not be any continuant linking those stages that is a person to degree more than 0. It may be that
any continuant that links those stages is both R-interrelated and maximal only at
a single delineation. At any more stringent delineation, it is no longer R-interrelated; while at any less stringent delineation it is still R-interrelated but not
maximal.

70

Ontology

The strategy followed here combines two ideas. (1) When something is a matter
of degree, we can introduce a cutoff point. However, the choice of this cutoff point
is more or less arbitrary. (2) When confronted with an arbitrary choice, the thing
to do is not to make the choice. Rather, we should see what is common to all or
most ways (or all or most reasonable ways) of making the choice, caring little what
happens on any particular way ot making it. The second idea is van Fraassen's
method uf supcrvaluations, 9
On this proposal the I-relation admits of degree; and further, we get perfect
agreement between degrees of I-relatedness and degrees of R-relatedness, regardless
of the degrees of personhood of continuants. For at any one delineation, two stages
are R-related if and only if they belong to some one maximal R-interrelated aggregate; hence if and only if they belong to some one continuant person; hence if and
only if they are I-related. Any two stages are R-related and I-related relative to
exactly the same set of delineations. Now if two stages are R-related to a degree x,
it follows (given our choice of scale and measure) that they are R-related at all and
only the delineations in a certain set of size x. Therefore they are I-related at all
and only the delineations in a certain set of size x; which means that they are Irelated to degree x. The degree of I-relatedness equals the degree of R-relatedness.
In this way personal identity can be just as much a matter of degree as the mental
continuity or connectedness that matters in survival.

VI. PERRY'S TREATMENT OF FISSION
It is instructive to contrast my way and John Perry's way 10 of overcoming the seeming discrepancies in character between personal identity and mental continuity or
connectedness. Perry and I have the same goals, but our priorities differ. Perry does
not need to resort to tensed identity to recue the common opinion that in fission
there is only one person beforehand. However, Perry's way does not permit identification of the R-relation and the I-relation themselves, but only of certain timedependent subrelations thereof. Further, he must introduce an unintuitive discrimination among the persons who exist at (have stages at) any given time. Some of
them (all, except in the problem cases) are classified as determinable at that time.
These are the ones who count. There may be others, not determinable at that time,
who are left out of consideration for certain purposes.
Say that Stage S, is R-related at time t—for short,R-related—to stage S2 if and
only if stages S, and S2 are R-related simpliciter, and also S2 is located at time t.
The R,-relation, then, is the R-relation between stages at t and stages at other times
(or at t).
9

See Bas van Fraassen, "Singular Terms, Truth-Value Gaps, and Free Logic," Journal of Philosophy 63
(1966): 481-95. See also the discussion of vagueness in my "General Semantics," in this volume.
"'John Perry, "Can the Self Divide?," Journal of Philosophy 69 (1972): 463-88

Survival and Identity

71

Say that stage S, is I-related at time t—for short, I-related—to stage S2 if and
only if both S, and S2 are stages of some one continuant person who is determinable
at time t, and S2 is located at time t. The I,-relation, then, is the I-relation between
stages at t and stages at other times (or at t), if we leave out any continuant persons
who are not determinable at t.
Perry proposes that something C is a continuant person determinable at t if and
only if, for some person-stage S located at t, C is the aggregate comprising all and
only the stages R,-related to S. A continuant person, in general, is a continuant
person determinable at some time. (No one is doomed to permanent indetermmability.) If something is a continuant person according to this proposal, Perry calls
it a lifetime. If something is a continuant person according to my proposal—that
is, if it is a maximal R-interrelated aggregate of person-stages—Perry calls it a
branch. In normal cases, all and only lifetimes are branches.
In a case of fission, however, some lifetimes are not branches (see Fig. 1 for cases
of fission). Branch C, is a lifetime determinable at t,, since it comprises all and
only the stages R^-related to S,. Likewise branch C2 is a lifetime determinable at
t,. But C—the whole thing—though not a branch, is a lifetime determinable at
t0, since it comprises all and only the stages R,0-related to S. Note that C, and C2
are not yet determinable at t0, whereas C is no longer determinable at t,.
On Perry's proposal, the R-relation is not the same as the I-relation in this case.
Since C is a lifetime, and hence according to Perry a continuant person, S, and S2
are I-related. However, they are not R-related.
What does follow from Perry's proposal is that, for any time t, the R,-relation
is the same as the I,-relation. Perhaps that is good enough. Any particular question
of survival, or of personal identity in general, arises at some definite time. If the
question arises at time t, it is the R,-relation and the 1,-relation that are relevant.
We want them to give the same answer. The rest of the R-relation and the Irelation are not involved. In particular, it is harmless that S t and S2 are I-related,
since they are neither It|)-related nor I^-related, nor indeed 1,-related for any time t
whatever.
On Perry's proposal, any person-stage existing at any time must belong to exactly
one continuant person who is determinable at that time. Persons can share stages,
to be sure. More so on Perry's proposal than on mine, in fact: stage S in the fission
case belongs to three lifetimes (C, C,, and C2) but only two branches (C, and C2).
Stage S, belongs to two lifetimes (C and C,) but only one branch (C,). But Perry's
persons share stages only when all but one of the sharers is not determinable. Therefore we can count by identity, counting only the persons determinable at the time,
and we will get the right answer. One determinable person (counting by identity)
exists before the fission, but two exist afterward. There are three all along, counting
by identity but including the nondeterminables; but at the fission one loses determinability and the other two gain it.
I grant that counting by tensed identity is somewhat counterintuitive; but isn't
excluding the nondeterminable persons just as bad? They are (timelessly speaking)
persons; they do exist at (have stages at) the time; they are not identical to persons

72

Ontology

we are counting. If we want to count the persons at the time, is it not gratuitous
to exclude them? Perry can say: Yes, but we just do. Or: we do it for excellent
practical reasons. I will say the same about counting by tensed identity without any
exclusions. Both are counterintuitive; neither is unbearably so; either is better than
not having any way to count that gives the correct answer; either is better than
permitting the possibility of fission to create a discrepancy between personal identity and what matters in survival.
Perry considers only fission and fusion, but his proposal can apply also to the
case of Methuselah. I do not know whether Perry would wish so to apply it. He
might prefer to let mental continuity predominate over connectedness in the Rrelation, so that the whole of Methuselah is both a branch and a lifetime, and thus
an unproblematic person.
Suppose as before, however, that the R-relation fades out with an (arbitrary)
cutoff at 137 years. For me, the 137-year segments (the branches) are the continuant persons; for Perry, the 274-year segments (the lifetimes) are the continuant
persons. For instance, a segment that begins on Methuselah's 420th birthday and
ends at the same time on his 694th comprises all and only the stages R t -related to
a certain stage S on his 557th, t being the time of that stage. The lifetimes are not
branches and the branches are not lifetimes. (With a trivial exception: the initial
and final 137-year segments are both branches and lifetimes. More generally: the
initial and final lifetimes are shorter than the others, being cut off by birth or
death.) Any stage at any time belongs to exactly one person determinable at that
time, and to infinitely many nondeterminable persons. Counting by identity gives
the right answer, provided the nondeterminable hordes are left out. The R,-relation
and the I t -relation are the same for any time t, but the R-relation and the I-relation
disagree for any two stages separated by more than 137 years but no more than
274.
Perry says nothing about degrees of personal identity. However, there is nothing
to prevent him from taking over all I have said. If the R-relation admits of degree,
then so does personhood, no matter whether continuant persons are branches or
lifetimes. Then the 1,-relations also admit of degree, and there is no obstacle here
to identifying them with the corresponding R,-reladons.
I have one serious misgiving about Perry's treatment of the problem. Perry has
concentrated on making things come out as they should from the standpoint of
any particular time, provided that persons not then determinable are not counted
among the persons existing at that time. But what shall we do when we wish to
generalize over persons existing at various times-' Exclusion of the nondeterminables
requires a definite point of reference, which is lacking. Overpopulation sets in
again. Of course my cure for overpopulation—counting by tensed identity—also
requires a definite point of reference. But let us count by identity, if we count from
the standpoint of no definite time. How many persons were involved in an episode
of fission long ago? I say: two. Perry says: three. Or else he says: none now determinable. Isn't two the correct answer?

Survival and Identity

73

Postscripts to
"Survival and Identity"
A. TWO MINDS WITH BUT A SINGLE THOUGHT
Derek Parfit rejects my attempt to square his views (which are mine as well) with
common sense.1 He objects that before I bring off the reconciliation, I must first
misrepresent our commonsensical desire to survive. Consider a fission case as
shown. I say there are two continuant persons all along, sharing their initial segments. One of them, C,, dies soon after the fission. The other, C 2> lives on for many
years. Let S be a shared stage at time t0, before the fission but after it is known that
fission will occur. The thought to be found in S is a desire for survival, of the most
commonsensical and unphilosophical kind possible. Since S is a shared stage, this
desire is a shared desire. Certainly C2 has the survival he desired, and likewise has
what we think matters: mental continuity and connectedness (the R-relation)
between S and much later stages such as S2. But how about C,?

'"Lewis, Perry and What Matters," in Ameiie Rorty, The Identities of Persons (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1976), pp. 91-96.

74

Ontology

I wrote that "if common sense is right that what matters in survival is identity
. . . , then you have what matters in survival if and only if your present stage is Irelated to future stages" where stages are I-related iff they belong to some single
continuant person (page 59). If that is right, then C, has what he commonsensically
desired. For C,'s stage S at time t0 is indeed I-related to stages far in the future
such as S2. These stages are I-related via the person C 2 .—"But isn't this the wrong
person?" says Parfit. C, himself survives only a short time. The one who lives longer
is another person, one with whom C, once shared stages. If his desire is satisfied
by this vicarious survival, it cannot really have been a commonsensical desire to
survive.
If C, really had the commonsensical desire that he himself—the continuant person C,—survive well into the future, then I grant that his desire is not satisfied.
But I don't think he could have had exactly that desire. I said that the desire found
in S was to be of the most commonsensical and unphilosophical kind possible. And
there is a limit to how commonsensical one's desires can possibly be under the
peculiar circumstance of stage-sharing.
The shared stage S does the thinking for both of the continuants to which it
belongs. Any thought it has must be shared. It cannot desire one thing on behalf
of C, and another thing on behalf of C2. If it has an urgent, self-interested desire
for survival on the part of C,, that very thought must also be an urgent, selfinterested (and not merely benevolent) desire for survival on the part of C2. It is
not possible that one thought should be both. So it is not possible for S to have
such a desire on behalf of C,. So it is not possible for C, at t,, to have the straightforward commonsensical desire that he himself survive.
If C, and C2 share the most commonsensical kind of desire to survive that is
available to them under the circumstances, it must be a plural desire: let us survive.
Now we must distinguish two different plural desires: existential and universal,
weak and strong.
(weak) Let at least one of us survive,
(strong) Let all of us survive.
Because these desires are plural instead of singular, they are not perfectly commonsensical. Because they are put in terms of survival of continuants rather than relations of stages, they are more commonsensical than the "philosophical" desire for
R-relatedness of one's present stage to future stages.
If C,'s (imperfectly) commonsensical desire for survival is predominantly the
weak desire, then my reconciliation goes through. For C/S weak desire is satisfied
even though it is his stage-sharer rather than himself who survives. The weak desire
is indeed equivalent to a desire for I-relatedness to future stages. Then if I am right
that the I-relation is the R-relation, it is equivalent also to the desire for R-relatedness to future stages.
If C,'s desire is predominantly the strong desire, on the other hand, it is not
satisfied. Then his desire for survival is not equivalent to the "philosophical" desire

Survival and Identity

75

for R-relatedness to future stages, and my reconciliation fails. (However, the strong
desire is equivalent to a more complicated desire concerning R-relatedness of
stages.) But should we say that C, has the strong desire, and that since it is not
satisfied, he does not have what commonsensically matters in survival? I think not.
For if we say that of C,, we must say it also of C2. If one has the strong desire,
both do. The strong desire is no more satisfied for C2 than it is for C,. But it seems
clear that C2, at least, does have what commonsensically matters in survival.
It is instructive to consider a system of survival insurance described by Justin
Leiber, in Beyond Rejection? (But let us imagine it without the risks and unpleasantness that Leiber supposes.) From time to time your mind is recorded; should a
fatal accident befall you, the latest recording is played back into the blank brain
of a fresh body. This system satisfies the weak desire for survival, but not the strong
desire. Let S at t0 be the stage that desires survival and therefore decides to have a
recording made; the fission occurs at the time of recording; C, dies in an accident
not long after; C2 survives. The only extra peculiarities, compared with a simple
case of fission, are that C2 is interrupted in time and undergoes a body transplant.
If this system would fairly well satisfy your desire for survival—or if your misgivings about it concern the body transplant rather than the fission—then your desire
is predominantly the weak desire.
So far, I have supposed that C, and C2 at t0 already anticipate their fission. Now
suppose not. Now, cannot they share the perfectly commonsensical singular desire:
let me survive? After all, the desire to be found in the stage S in this case is no
different from the desire that would be there if S were what it takes itself to be: a
stage of a single person with no fission in his future. I agree that C, and C2 have
the singular desire. But it is not a desire that can be satisfied, for it rests on the
false presupposition that they are a single person. The "me" in their shared thought
(unless it refers to the thinking stage) has the status of an improper description. It
cannot refer to C, in C,'s thought and to C2 in C 2 's thought, for these thoughts are
one and the same. But their desire to survive is satisfied; at least C2's is, and C,'s
is no different. Therefore their desire for survival cannot consist only of their unsatisfiable singular desire. They must have the weak plural desire as well, despite the
fact that they don't anticipate fission. And so must we. Doubtless we seldom have
it as an occurrent desire. But many of our urgent desires are not occurrent, for
instance your present desire not to suffer a certain torture too fiendish for you to
imagine.
(At this point the reader of "Attitudes De Ditto and De Se" (in this volume)
may wonder how well I have learned my own lesson. There I taught that desire is
a relation of wanting-to-have—take this as indivisible—that the subject bears to a
property. Why can't C, and C2 bear the very same wanting-to-have relation to the
very same property of surviving, so that they think the very same thought, and yet
each thereby desire his own survival? But recall that the subject that wants-to-have
2

(New York: Ballantine, 1980).

76

Ontology

properties was taken to be a stage, not a continuant. (See pages 143, 146.) Under
this analysis, my point is that S's wanting-to-have the property
being such that the unique continuant of which it is a stage survives
is an unsatisfiable desire. That is so whether we think of it as a desire of S's or,
more naturally, as a desire of C, and C2. S had better want survival on behalf of
C, and C2 by wanting to have a different property:
being such that some continuant of which it is a stage survives.
This is the satisfied desire for survival that C, and C2 share.)

B. IN DEFENSE OF STAGES3
Some would protest that they do not know what I mean by "more or less momentary person-stages, or time-slices of continuant persons, or persons-at-times". Others do know what I mean, but don't believe there are any such things.
The first objection is easy to answer, especially in the case where the stages are
less momentary rather than more. Let me consider that case only; though I think
that instantaneous stages also are unproblematic, I do not really need them. A
person-stage is a physical object, just as a person is. (If persons had a ghostly part
as well, so would person-stages.) It does many of the same things that a person
does: it talks and walks and thinks, it has beliefs and desires, it has a size and shape
and location. It even has a temporal duration. But only a brief one, for it does not
last long. (We can pass over the question how long it can last before it is a segment
rather than a stage, for that question raises no objection of principle.) It begins to
exist abruptly, and it abruptly ceases to exist soon after. Hence a stage cannot do
everything that a person can do, for it cannot do those things that a person does
over a longish interval.
That is what I mean by a person-stage. Now to argue for my claim that they
exist, and that they are related to persons as part to whole. I do not suppose the
doubters will accept my premises, but it will be instructive to find out which they
choose to deny.
First: it is possible that a person-stage might exist. Suppose it to appear out of
thin air, then vanish again. Never mind whether it is a stage o/any person (though
in fact I think it is). My point is that it is the right sort of thing.
Second: it is possible that two person-stages might exist in succession, one right
after the other but without overlap. Further, the qualities and location of the second
at its appearance might exactly match those of the first at its disappearance. Here
3

On this topic I am much indebted to discussions with Saul Kripke and with Denis Robinson. Kripke's
views on related matters were presented in his lectures on "Identity through Time," given at Princeton
in 1978 (and elsewhere); Robinson's in "Re-Identifying Matter," Philosophical Review (forthcoming).

Survival and Identity

17

I rely on a patchwork principle for possibility: if it is possible that X happen intrinsically in a spatiotemporal region, and if it is likewise possible that Y happen in a
region, then also it is possible that both X and Y happen in two distinct but adjacent regions. There are no necessary incompatibilities between distinct existences.
Anything can follow anything.
Third: extending the previous point, it is possible that there might be a world
of stages that is exactly like our own world in its point-by-point distribution of
intrinsic local qualities over space and time.
Fourth: further, such a world of stages might also be exactly like our own in its
causal relations between local matters of particular fact. For nothing but the distribution of local qualities constrains the pattern of causal relations. (It would be
simpler to say that the causal relations supervene on the distribution of local qualities, but I am not as confident of that as I am of the weaker premise.)
Fifth: then such a world of stages would be exactly like our own simpliciter.
There are no features of our world except those that supervene on the distribution
of local qualities and their causal relations.
Sixth: then our own world is a world of stages. In particular, person-stages exist.
Seventh: but persons exist too, and persons (in most cases) are not person-stages.
They last too long. Yet persons and person-stages, like tables and table-legs, do
not occupy spatiotemporal regions twice over. That can only be because they are
not distinct. They are part-identical; in other words, the person-stages are parts of
the persons.
Let me try to forestall two misunderstandings. (1) When I say that persons are
maximal R-interrelated aggregates of person-stages, I do not claim to be reducing
"constructs" to "more basic entities". (Since I do not intend a reduction to the
basic, I am free to say without circularity that person-stages are R-interrelated
aggregates of shorter person-stages.) Similarly, I think it is an informative necessary
truth that trains are maximal aggregates of cars interrelated by the ancestral of the
relation of being coupled together (count the locomotive as a special kind of car).
But I do not think of this as a reduction to the basic. Whatever "more basic" is
supposed to mean, I don't think it means "smaller." (2) By a part, I just mean a
subdivision. I do not mean a well-demarcated subdivision that figures as a unit in
causal explanation. Those who give "part" a rich meaning along these lines 4 should
take me to mean less by it than they do.

'Such as D. H. Mellor, in his Real Time (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981), chapter 8.

S I X

How To Define
Theoretical Terms

Most philosophers of science agree that, when a newly proposed scientific theory
introduces new terms, we usually cannot define the new terms using only the old
terms we understood beforehand. On the contrary, I contend that there is a general
method for defining the newly introduced theoretical terms.
Most philosophers of science also agree that, in order to reduce one scientific
theory to another, we need to posit bridge laws: new laws, independent of the
reducing theory, which serve to identify phenomena described in terms of the
reduced theory with phenomena described in terms of the reducing theory. On the
contrary, I deny that the bridge laws must be posited independently. They may
follow from the reducing theory, via the definitions of the theoretical terms of the
reduced theory. In such cases it would be wrong to think that theoretical reduction
is done voluntarily, for the sake of parsimony, when the reduced and reducing
theories are such as to permit it. Sometimes reduction is not only possible but
unavoidable.
F. P. Ramsey proposed that theoretical terms might be eliminated in favor of
existentially quantified bound variables. Rudolf Carnap, in his most recent discussions of theoretical terms, has used Ramsey's method to split any term-reducing
theory into two parts: an analytic postulate to partially interpret the theoretical
terms, and a synthetic postulate in which these terms do not occur. My proposal
will be in the spirit of Ramsey's and Carnap's.
My proposal could be called an elimination of theoretical terms, if you insist:
for to define them is to show how to do without them. But it is better called a

78

How To Define Terms

79

vindication of theoretical terms; for to define them is to show that there is no good
reason to want to do without them. They are no less fully interpreted and no less
well understood than the old terms we had beforehand.
I am not planning to define theoretical terms within an observation language,
whatever that is. Some statements report observations, and some do not; but I do
not know of any special compartment of our language that is reserved for the
reporting of observations. I do not understand what it is just to be a theoretical
term, not of any theory in particular, as opposed to being an observational term
(or a logical or mathematical term).1 I believe I do understand what it is to be a
T-term: that is, a theoretical term introduced by a given theory T at a given stage
in the history of science. If so, then I also understand what it is to be an 0-term:
that is, any other term, one of our original terms, an old term we already understood
before the new theory T with its new T-terms was proposed. An 0-term can have
any epistemic origin and priority you please. It can belong to any semantic or syntactic category you please. Any old term can be an 0-term, provided we have somehow come to understand it. And by "understand" I mean "understand"—not
"know how to analyze."
I am also not planning to "dispense with theoretical entities." Quite the opposite. The defining of theoretical terms serves the cause of scientific realism. A term
correctly defined by means of other terms that admittedly have sense and denotation can scarcely be regarded as a mere bead on a formal abacus. If it purports to
name something, then if the theory that introduced it is true it does name something. I suppose a theoretical entity is something we believe in only because its
existence, occurrence, etc. is posited by some theory—especially some recent, esoteric, not-yet-well-established scientific theory. Theoretical entities might better be
called (as they sometimes are called) hypothetical entities. Theoretical terms need
not name theoretical entities: consider 'H 2 O'. Theoretical entities need not be
named by theoretical terms: consider "living creature too small to see." Theoretical
entities need not be invisible, intangible, etc.: consider the dark companions of
stars. Theoretical entities are not entities of a special category, but entities we know
of (at present) in a special way.

I. THE POSTULATE OF T
Suppose the best scientific explanation we can devise for some body of data includes
a new theory T, formulated by means of a postulate in which there occur some
new terms T, . . . T n) terms we have never used before. We shall call these newly
introduced terms the theoretical terms of T, or just T-terms; and we shall call all the
'My reasons are more or less those discussed by Hilary Putnam in "What Theories Are Not," Logic,
Methodology and Philosophy of Science (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1962), ed. by E. Nagel, P.
Suppes, and A. Tarski.

80

Ontology

other terms of our scientific vocabulary 0-terms. We shall accordingly call any sentence of our language that is free of T-terms an 0-sentence. Let us assume that the
0-terms have conventionally established standard interpretations, well known to
us. The T-terms, on the other hand, are unfamiliar. Our only clue to their meaning
is the postulate of T that introduced them. We are accustomed to say that it
implicitly defines them; but we would prefer explicit definitions.
We may stipulate that the postulate of T is a single sentence; if it was a set of
sentences, take their conjunction. If it was a finite set, we can take their conjunction
within ordinary logic. If it was a decidably infinite set, we must introduce devices
for infinite conjunction—to do so would be bothersome, but not problematic.
We may stipulate that our T-terms are names, not predicates or functors. No
generality is lost, since names can purport to name entities of any kind: individuals,
species, states, properties, substances, magnitudes, classes, relations, or what not.
Instead of a T-predicate 'F
', for instance, we can use '
has F-hood';
'P'-hood' is a T-name purporting to name a property, and '—•
has
'
is an 0-predicate. It is automatic to reformulate all T-terms as names, under the
safe assumption that our 0-vocabulary provides the needed copulas:
has the property
——
is in the state
at time
has
to degree
and the like. We will replace T-terms by bound variables; by making the T-terms
grammatically uniform, we avoid the need to introduce variables of diverse types.
We must assume that all occurrences of T-terms in the postulate of T are purely
referential, open to existential generalization and to substitution by Leibniz's law.
We need not assume, however, that the language of T is an extensional language.
Among the 0-terms there may be nonextensional operators, for instance 'it is a
law that
'; nonextensional connectives, for instance '
because
'; and so on.
We must assume, finally, that the postulate of T will be false in case any of the
T-terms is denotationless. This is not a legitimate assumption for sentences in general: "There is no such substance as phlogiston" is true just because 'phlogiston' is
denotationless. However, it does seem to be a legitimate assumption for the postulate of a term-introducing theory. The postulate of T will therefore imply, for
each T-term T,, the sentence '(3x)(x = T,)', which says that r, names something.
Such sentences sometimes count as logical truths. Many systems of logic avoid
the difficulties of denotationless names by stipulating that an otherwise denotationless name is deemed artificially to name some arbitrarily chosen "null" individual.
We must be able to take seriously the possibility of denotationless T-terms; it is
worth the trouble to use a system of logic designed to tolerate them. Such a system
has been given by Dana Scott;2 its salient features are as follows.
z

"Existence and Description in Formal Logic," in Berlraad Russell: Philosopher of the Century (London:
Alien & Unwin, 1967), ed. by Ralph Schoenman.

How To Define Terms

81

(1) Improper descriptions and other denotationless terms are really denotationless: they name nothing in the domain of discourse. (The domain itself serves as a
null individual for technical convenience; but it is not in the domain, and no term
literally names it.)
(2) Atomic sentences containing denotationless terms are either true or false,
depending on the predicate and other terms involved; we might, but need not,
stipulate that they are always false.
(3) Identities containing denotationless terms on both sides are true; identities
containing a denotationless term on one side only are false.
(4) Denotationless terms are interchangeable salva ventate in extensional contexts; necessarily denotationless names are interchangeable salva ventate even in
intensional contexts.

II. THE RAMSEY AND CARNAP SENTENCES OF T
Let us write the postulate of our theory T in a way that exhibits the occurrences of
T-terms therein: 'T[r, . . . T,}'.
If we replace the T-terms uniformly by variables x} . . . x, respectively (distinct
variables that do not occur there already), we get a formula which we may call the
realization formula of T: T[x, . . . x,]'.
Any «-tuple of entities that satisfies this formula, under the fixed standard interpretations of its 0-terms, may be said to realize, or to be a realization of, the theory
T.
Therefore we recognize the postulate of T as the sentence that says that T is
realized by the »-tuple of entities denoted, respectively, by the T-terms T, . . . T,.
If so, then a fortiori Tis realized. We can write another sentence, called the Ramsey
sentence of T, which says only that Tis realized: ' 3 x , . . . x,TO, . . . *„]'.
We can write a third sentence, called the Carnap sentence of T, which is neutral
as to whether T is realized, but says that if T is realized, then the »-tuple of entities
named respectively by T, . . . r, is one realization of T. The Carnap sentence is the
conditional of the Ramsey sentence and the postulate:

Our three sentences are related as follows: (1) The postulate is logically equivalent to the conjunction of the Ramsey sentence and the Carnap sentence. (2) The
Ramsey sentence and the postulate logically imply exactly the same 0-sentences.
(3) The Carnap sentence logically implies no 0-sentences except logical truths.
Therefore, insofar as the theory T serves as a device for systematizing 0-sentences, the Ramsey sentence of T will do the job as well as the postulate itself. That
was Ramsey's observation.3 The Ramsey sentence can obviously do nothing to help
'"Theories," The foundations of Mathematics (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1930, ed. by R. B.
Btaithwaite.

82

Ontology

interpret the T-terms, since they do not occur in it. The Carnap sentence, on the
other hand, does nothing to help systematize 0-sentences; but it does contain the
T-terms, and it does seem to do as much toward interpreting them as the postulate
itself does. And the Ramsey and Carnap sentences between them do exactly what
the postulate does.
Accordingly, Carnap proposes4 to take the Ramsey sentence as the synthetic postulate of T and the Carnap sentence as the analytic postulate of T. They divide the
labor of the original postulate, which both systematized 0-sentences and partially
interpreted the T-terms. (Here and henceforth, when I speak of Carnap's proposal
it should be understood that I mean Carnap's proposal minus Carnap's stipulation
that the 0-terms belong to an observation language.)

III. THE INTERPRETATION OF T-TERMS
Let us see whether we want to agree that the Carnap sentence does specify the
appropriate interpretations of the T-terms, insofar as appropriate interpretations can
be specified at all. Put aside, for the time being, Carnap's idea that the Ramsey
and Carnap sentences in partnership should be a perfect substitute for the original
postulate.
It is important to separate three cases. T may have precisely one realization, or
no realization, or more than one realization.
In case T is uniquely realized, the Carnap sentence clearly gives exactly the right
specification. It says that the T-terms name the entities in the »-tuple that is the
unique realization of T. The first T-term, T,, names the first component of the
unique realization of T; T2 names the second component; and so on.
In case T is not realized, the Carnap sentence says nothing about the denotation
of the T-terms. But this modesty seems to be uncalled for. The T-terms were introduced on the assumption that T was realized, in order to name components of a
realization of T. There is no realization of T. Therefore they should not name anything. 'Phlogiston' presumably is a theoretical term of an unrealized theory; we say
without hesistation that there is no such thing as phlogiston. What else could we
possibly say? Should we say that phlogiston is something or other, but (unless
phlogiston theory turns out to be true after all) we have no hope of finding out
what?
Let us say, then, that the theoretical terms of unrealized theories do not name
anything. That will do very well, at least in the case of a theory like phlogiston
* Philosophical Foundations of Physics (New York: Basic Books, 1966), ed. by Martin Gardner, ch. 28;
"Replies and Systematic Expositions," in The Philosophy of Rudolf Carnap (La Salle, 111.; Open Court,
1963), ed. by P. A. Schilpp, section 24D; "On the Use of Hilbert's e-Operator in Scientific Theories,"
in Essays on [he Foundations of Mathematics, Dedicated to A, A. Fraenkel on His Seventieth Anniversary
(Jerusalem: Magnes Press, 1961), ed. by Y. Bar-Hillel et a/.; "Beobachtungssprache und theoretische
Sprache," Logica: Sludia Paul Bernays dedicata (Neuchatel: Griffon, 1959).

How To Define Terms

83

theory which comes nowhere near being realized. It will not do so well in the case
of unrealized theory with a (unique) »«<zr-realization: that is, an w-tuple that does
not realize the original theory, but does realize some theory obtained from it by a
slight weakening or a slight correction. We might want to say that the theoretical
terms name the components of whichever n-tuple comes nearest to realizing the
theory, if it comes near enough. We will ignore this complication, in part for the
sake of simplicity and in part because we might hope to handle it as follows. Given
a theory T, we might find a slightly weaker T*, implied by but not implying T,
such that an w-tuple is a realization of T' if and only if it is a near-realization of
T. Then we could say that T', not T, is the real term-introducing theory; everything
we have been saying about T really ought to be taken as applying to T instead. T
itself may be recovered as the conjunction of T* with further hypotheses containing
the theoretical terms already introduced by T.
There remains the case in which T is multiply realized. In this case, the Carnap
sentence tells us that the T-terms name the components of some realization or
other. But it does not tell us which; and there seems to be no nonarbitrary way to
choose one of the realizations. So either the T-terms do not name anything, or they
name the components of an arbitrarily chosen one of the realizations of T, Either
of these alternatives concedes too much to the instrumentalist view of a theory as
a mere formal abacus. Neither does justice to our naive impression that we understand the theoretical terms of a true theory, and without making any arbitrary
choice among realizations. We should not accept Catnap's treatment in this case if
we can help it. Can we?
We might say instead that the theoretical terms of multiply realized theories do
not name anything. If multiple realization is a defect that theorists can reasonably
hope to avoid, then we can afford to treat multiply realized theories as failures: call
them false, and call their theoretical terms denotationless. But if multiple realization is inevitable, we cannot afford to disdain multiply realized theories. We can
have denotations arbitrarily chosen, or no denotations at all.
A uniquely realized theory is, other things being equal, certainly more satisfactory than a multiply realized theory. We should insist on unique realization as a
standard of correctness unless it is a standard too high to be met. Is there any reason
to think that we must settle for multiply realized theories? I know of nothing in
the way scientists propose theories which suggests that they do not hope for unique
realization. And I know of no good reason why they should not hope for unique
realization. Therefore I contend that we ought to say that the theoretical terms of
multiply realized theories are denotationless.
Many philosophers do seem to think that unique realization is an extravagant
hope, unlikely in scientific practice or even impossible in principle. Partly, this is
professional skepticism; partly it is skepticism derived from confusions that I shall
try to forestall.
In the first place, I am not claiming that scientific theories are formulated in
such a way that they could not possibly be multiply realized. I am claiming only
that it is reasonable to hope that a good theory will not in fact be multiply realized.

84

Ontology

In the second place, I am not claiming that there is only one way in which a
given theory could be realized; just that we can reasonably hope that there is only
one way in which it is realized.
Finally, I should say again that we are talking only about realizations that make
Ttrue under a fixed interpretation of all of its 0-vocabulary. And this 0-vocabulary
may be as miscellaneous as you please; in practice it is likely to be very miscellaneous indeed. An 0-term is any term, of any character, which we already understood before the new theory T came along. It does not have to belong to an observation language. If anyone hopes to adapt my proposals to the task of interpreting
theoretical terms using only an observation language—if there is any such thing—
I would not be at all surprised if he ran into trouble with multiple realizations.
But his project and his troubles are not mine.
John Winnie has announced a proof that scientific theories cannot be uniquely
realized.' Though his proof is sound, it goes against nothing I want to say. Most
of Winnie's multiple realizations of a given theory—all but one, perhaps—are not
what I call realizations of the theory. I am concerned only with realizations under
a fixed interpretation of the 0-vocabulary; whereas Winnie permits variation in the
interpretation of certain 0-terms from one realization to another, provided that the
variation is confined to theoretical entities. For instance, he would permit variation
in the extension of the 0-predicate '
is bigger than
' so long as the
extension among observational entities remained fixed. Winnie's proof does not
show that a theory is multiply realized in my sense unless the postulate of the
theory is free of "mixed" 0-terms: 0-predicates whose extension includes theoretical entities, and the like. I would claim that mixed 0-terms are omnipresent, and
that there is no reason not to grant them a fixed interpretation even as applied to
theoretical entities.
Perhaps another reason to think that theories cannot be uniquely realized comes
from the idea that theoretical terms are somehow partially interpreted. It seems
that the stronger a theory is, the better its theoretical terms are interpreted. If the
postulate of the theory is a tautology, for instance, the theoretical terms are not
interpreted at all. It is tempting to explain this by saying that the stronger theory
has fewer realizations. Since no consistent theory interprets its terms so well that it
could not have done better if it had been still stronger, it seems that unique realization—perfect interpretation—is a limit we can never reach. But this is a mistake. The stronger theory may have fewer actual realizations or it may not; but it
must have less risk of multiple realization, and that is enought to explain why
strength seems to make for better interpretation. On the other hand, the stronger
theory must also have more risk of nonrealization.
Let us conclude, therefore, that the T-terms ought to name the components of
the unique realization of T if there is one, and ought not to name anything oth'"The Implicit Definition of Theoretical Terms," British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 18 (1967):
223-29.

How To Define Terms

85

erwise. We can record our conclusion by laying down three meaning postulates.
The first

says that if T is uniquely realized, then it is realized by the entities named, respectively, by T,. . .r,. It is logically implied by the Carnap sentence of T. The second

says that, if T is not realized, then T,. . .T, do not name anything. It is logically
independent of the Carnap sentence. The third

says that, if T is mutiply realized, then, again, T,. . .r, do not name anything. It
disagrees with the Carnap sentence, inasmuch as the third postulate and the Carnap
sentence together imply that T has at most one realization, but that conclusion
ought not to follow from meaning postulates.
Now we have specified the denotations of the T-terms. What about their senses?
We have specified their senses already. For we have specified their denotations in
any possible world, not just here in our actual world. In any possible world, they
are to name the components of whatever uniquely realizes T in that world, and
they are to name nothing in that world unless T is uniquely realized there. We
know what it is for an »-tuple of entities to realize T in an arbitrary possible world
w. namely, the »-tuple satisfies the realization formula of T in the model determined jointly by the state of affairs in the possible world w and by the fixed interpretation of the 0-vocabulary.
Here I rely on, but do not argue for, a doctrine of senses due originally to Carnap.6 I am supposing that the sense of a name—at least, of a name that cannot be
decomposed into constituents—is given in full by specifying what (if anything) it
names in each possible world. If we like, we can say that a sense is a function from
(some or all) possible worlds to named entities. The most important objection to
this doctrine is that possible worlds and their unactualized inhabitants are occult;
I have argued elsewhere7 that they are no more occult than the infinite sets we have
learned to live with, and just as useful in systematic philosophy.
Putnam, arguing against Carnap's notation of partial interpretation, has objected
that "theories with false observational consequences have no interpretation (since
they have no model that is 'standard' with respect to the observation terms). This
certainly flies in the face of our usual notion of an interpretation, according to which
^Meaning and Necessity, 2nd ed. (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1956), pp. 181-82.
''Convention (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1969), p. 208.

86

Ontology

such a theory is wrong, not senseless."* The objection is mistaken. The theoretical
terms of such a theory are not senseless, just denotationless. Their sense is given by
their denotation in those possible worlds in which the theory is uniquely realized
and, therefore, does not have false consequences. They have just as much sense as
the denotationless term 'Santa Claus'.
A logically determinate name is one which names the same thing in every possible world. Its sense is a constant function. Numerals, for instance, seem to be
logically determinate names of numbers. But 'the number of solar planets' is a
logically indeterminate name of a number. Here in our actual world it happens to
name the number 9. Elsewhere it may name other numbers, or nothing at all.
Anything can have a logically indeterminate name—even a property. (This should
have been obvious, but wasn't.) Take the name 'the physical property detected by
means of the instrument with catalog number 12345 in so-and-so catalog' (filling
in the name of a catalog). This happens, perhaps, to name the property of fluorescing in the ultraviolet. But if the catalog numbers had been different, it would have
named some other property, or none.
We should notice that T-terms purporting to name properties will normally turn
out to be logically indeterminate names of properties. Likewise for other jT-terms;
but let us stick to the special case. Suppose r, is a T-term purporting to name a
property. More precisely: T is formulated in such a way that the postulate of T
cannot be true unless T, names a property. It follows that if any »-tuple of entities
uniquely realizes T in any possible world, the first component of that w-tuple is a
property. But unless T is a very special theory, different «-tuples with different first
components will uniquely realize T in different possible worlds. The sense of T,
will not be a constant function.
The logical indeterminacy of T, makes for subtle equivocation in any context in
which possible worlds other than our actual world are under discussion, either
explicitly or implicitly. For instance, there will be trouble whenever r, occurs in
the scope of a modal operator, in the scope of a nomological operator, in the scope
of an epistemic operator, or in a subjunctive conditional. We have to keep track of
when r, names the first component of the unique realization of T (if any) in our
actual world, and when T, instead names the first component of the unique realization of T (if any) in some other possible world under discussion.
For instance, someone might plausibly object that, on my account, it is impossible for T to have a unique realization but for the first component thereof not to
be the property named by T,. But that does seem to be possible. Just consider the
property named by T { . Fix your attention on that property, whatever it is. Now
surely T could have a unique realization in which that property was not the first
component! So what is impossible according to me is really possible. I reply that
the objection commits a fallacy of equivocation. What I assert is this: for no possible world w is it the case that T has a unique realization in w but that the first
component thereof is not the property named by T, in the world w. What the
""What Theories Are Not," p. 247.

How To Define Terms

87

objector properly denies is this: for no possible world w is it the case that T has a
unique realization in w but that the first component thereof is not the property
named by T, in our actual world. Unfortunately, what I assert and what he properly
denies can both be expressed by this ambiguous sentence: "It is impossible for T
to have a unique realization but for the first component thereof not to be the property named by T,."
A similar difficulty arises over the name 'the property of having T,'. This name
purports to name a property. We would suppose offhand that it names the same
property as r, itself. Indeed, we would suppose it has the same sense as T,. But at
least on one reading it and TI do not name the same property, neither in our actual
world nor in any other possible world.
I take it that a property is identified when, and only when, we have specified
exactly which things have it in every possible world. And I take it that a name of
the form 'the property of doing so-and-so' names the property that belongs, in any
world w, to exactly those things which, in the world w, do so-and-so. For instance,
'the property of having T,' names the property that belongs, in any world w, to
exactly those things which, in the world w, have the property named by T,.
Now we can see the problem. Do we mean: (1) the property that belongs, in
any world w, to exactly those things which, in the world w, have the property
named by T, in our actual world? That, of course, is just the same property which
is named by T, in our actual world. On this first reading, 'the property of having
T,' and T, do both name the same property.
Or do we rather mean: (2) the property that belongs, in any world w, to exactly
those things which, in the world w, have the property named by T, in the world
w? On this second—and, I believe, better—reading, 'the property of having T,' is
a logically determinate name of a certain property, which we may call the diagonalized seme of T,. The sense of T, may be prepresented by a function 11 T, 11 which
assigns to any world w a property || T, || „. A property in turn may be represented
by a function P which assigns to any world w the set Pv of things which, in the
world w, have the property. Then the diagonalized sense of T, is the property whose
representing function assigns to any world w the set of things (| T, || „)„. It is not
named by T, in any world, unless T is a very peculiar theory. Neither is it the sense
of T,; that is not a property at all, but rather a function from worlds to properties.

IV. THE DEFINITIONS OF T-TERMS
Given our conclusion that the T-terms T,. . .T, denote the components of the
unique realization of T if there is one, and should not denote anything otherwise,
it is natural to define the T-terms by means of definite descriptions as follows.

SS

Ontology

These are to be our definition sentences for the theory T. The first, for instance, says
that T, names that entity which, followed by some n—1 entities, comprises an
n-tuple identical with all and only w-tuples that realize T. That is to say, T, names
the first component of the unique realization of T.
These definitions work properly, under the treatment of denotationless terms we
have chosen. They are valid: true in any model in which the T-terms are interpreted
as specified in the previous section, whether or not T is uniquely realized therein.
They are jointly equivalent to the set of meaning postulates we put forth to replace
the Carnap sentence of T. They do not imply any 0-sentences except logical truths.
We can see now why it was worth the trouble to adopt Dana Scott's treatment
of denotationless names rather than its more familiar alternatives.9 Under Russell's
theory of descriptions, the definition sentences are disguised existential quantifications, false unless Tis uniquely realized. Under the truth-value-gap theory of Frege
and Strawson, atomic contexts of denotationless names or descriptions have no
truth value; so the definition sentences are neither true nor false unless T is uniquely
realized. Either way, the definition sentences would not be valid identities, true
whether or not T is uniquely realized. We would be forced to regard them as
metalinguistic assertions of synonymy, or something of the sort. Under the chosenindividual theory of Frege and Carnap, improper descriptions name some arbitrarily chosen individual. So do the theoretical terms of unrealized or multiply realized
theories, if the definition sentences are to be valid. But suppose T is multiply realized, and suppose the »-tuple consisting of the chosen individual taken n times
over happens to be one of the realizations of T. In this case, by accident, the postulate of T turns out to be true, contrary to our decision that multiply realized
theories should be false.
V. THE EXPANDED POSTULATE OF T
Given our definitions, we can eliminate T-terms in favor of the definite descriptions
whereby we have defined them. Replacing each T-term by its definiens throughout
the postulate of T, we obtain an 0-sentence which we may call the (definitionally)
expanded postulate of T. It says T is realized by the «-tuple consisting of the first,
second, . . . , nth components of the unique realization of T. The expanded postulate is, of course, definitionally equivalent to the postulate. That is, the postulate
together with the definition sentences is logically equivalent to the expanded postulate together with the definition sentences.
The expanded postulate says that Tis uniquely realized. It is logically equivalent
to a shorter 0-sentence that says so in a more straightforward way; we may call this
the unique-realization sentence of T:
'For a survey of the alternatives, see David Kaplan, "What Is Russell's Theory of Descriptions?" Physics,
Logic, and History (New York: Plenum, 1969), ed. by Wolfgang Yourgrau.

How To Define Terms

89

Thus the postulate is definitionally equivalent to the unique-realization sentence.
That is what we should expect, given our decision—contra Carnap—to interpret
the T-terms in such a way that the postulate is true if and only if T is uniquely
realized.
Still we may have misgivings. The expanded postulate is an 0-sentence stronger
than the Ramsey sentence of T, which said merely that T had at least one realization. Yet if the definition sentences are part of T, the expanded postulate is an
0-theorem of T. So the definitions are giving us 0-theorems that could not have
been derived without them. That means that the definitions themselves, unlike the
Carnap sentence, are not logically implied by the postulate.
Therefore, if I want to contend that the definition sentences of T are correct
definitions, I must give up the idea that the theorems of T are all and only the
logical consequences of the postulate of T. I am quite willing to give up that idea.
I contend that the theorist who proposed T by asserting the postulate of T explicitly, labeling it as the postulate of a term-introducing theory, has also implicitly
asserted the definition sentences of T. I contend that his audience will take him to
have implicitly asserted the definition sentences of T. That is an empirical hypothesis about the conventional semantics of our language. To test it, we should find
out what would happen if the audience came to think that T was multiply realized.
If they would thereupon call T a false theory, that confirms my account of the
interpretation and definitions of the T-terms. If they would call T a true theory,
that refutes my account and confirms Carnap's. What if they would be unable to
decide which to say? Then my account and Carnap's are rival proposals for rational
reconstruction within the range of free choice left open by our conventions. My
proposal has the advantage that it permits theoretical terms to be fully interpreted
and explicitly defined. Carnap's proposal has the advantage that it lets us live with
multiply realized theories. But I see no reason why we need to be able to live with
multiply realized theories.
The expanded postulate (and its logical equivalent, the unique-realization sentence) are not by any means the only interesting definitional equivalents of the
postulate of T. For any T-term ri: consider the sentence that says rt names something: '(3x)(x = T y )'. This sentence is definitionally equivalent to the postulate of
T and to the expanded postulate of T (but logically equivalent to neither). That is
what we should expect: T is uniquely realized if and only if there is something
which is the zth component of the unique realization of T.
Therefore the postulate and expanded postulate of T are definitionally implied
by any sentence which contains T-terms and which comes out false in case any of
its T-terms are denotationless. There are many such sentences. Let T,, T2, and r 3 be
T-terms purporting to name, respectively, a property, a relation, and a function;
and let f and TJ be 0-terms purporting to name individuals. Let v be an 0-term
naming a real number. Now consider such sentences as: 'f has the property T,', 'f
bears the relation T2 to 77', or 'the value of the function r 3 for the argument f is

90

Ontology

v'. Clearly each of these sentences should be false if its T-term is denotationless.
Therefore each of them defnitionally implies the postulate and expanded postulate
ofT.
We would probably say, at first sight, that sentences such as these purport to
state particular facts. Yet the theoretical postulates they imply—or some conjuncts
thereof—will usually purport to state laws of nature, perhaps even laws of unrestricted universality. Therefore it is possible that a particular fact might be
explained by a covering-law explanatory argument in which the explanans contains
no explicit statement of any law! The required covering laws would be available by
implication from certain particular-fact premises in the explanans. It seems that, if
my account of theoretical terms is correct, the covering-law analysis of scientific
explanation is in need of a slight reformulation. Take one of Hempel's definitions
of deductive-nomological explanation:
. . . deductive arguments whose conclusion is the explandum sentence . . . ;
and whose premiss-set, the explanans, consists of general laws . . . , and of
other statements . . . , which make assertions about particular facts.10
I contend we ought rather to say:
. . . deductive arguments whose conclusion is the explanandum sentence; and
whose premiss-set, the explanans, consists of statements which make assertions about particular facts and perhaps also of statements which assert general
laws; and whose premiss-set implies statements which assert general laws.
I am confident that my objection goes against the letter, not the spirit, of Hempel's
covering-law analysis.

VI. DERIVED BRIDGE LAWS FOR T
We can safely assume that there is a period, after the new theory T has been proposed, during which the T-terms retain the interpretations they received at the time
of their introduction. At least for a while, our definition sentences for T remain
valid. Suppose that, during this period, T is reduced by means of some other
accepted scientific theory 7*. Let this be a reduction in which T survives intact;
not, what is more common, a simultaneous partial reduction and partial falsification of T by T*. We shall consider how this reduction might take place.
The reducing theory 7* need not be what we would naturally call a single theory; it may be a combination of several theories, perhaps belonging to different
sciences. Parts of 7* may be miscellaneous unsystematized hypotheses which we
^Philosophy of Natural Science (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall 1966), p. 51.

How To Define Terms

91

accept, and which are not properly called theories at all. Different parts of T* may
have been proposed or accepted at different times, either before or after T itself was
proposed.
The most interesting case, however, is that in which T* is well systematized,
and at least part of T* is newer than T. It is in that case that the reduction of T
by means of 7* is likely to be an important advance toward the systematization of
all empirical knowledge.
T*, or parts of T*, may introduce theoretical terms; if so, let us assume that
these T*-terms have been introduced by means of the same 0-vocabulary which
was used to introduce the theoretical terms of T. This is possible regardless of the
order in which T and T* were proposed. Any term that is either an 0-term or a
T*-term may be called an 0*-term; so at the time T is reduced, the relevant part
of our scientific vocabulary is divided into the T-vocabulary and the 0*-vocabulary.
Suppose the following 0*-sentence is a theorem of T*; we may call it a reduction
premise for T: 'T{p,. . ,p, ]'. The terms p,. . .p, are to be names belonging to the
0*-vocabulary. They may be elementary expressions and belong to the 0*-vocabulary in their own right, or they may be compound expressions—for instance, definite descriptions—whose ultimate constituents belong to the 0*-vocabulary. The
reduction premise says that T is realized by an >z-tuple of entities named, respectively, by the 0*-terms p,. . .p,. Notice that it cannot be true if any of those 0*names are denotationless.
A reduction premise for T does not imply the postulate of T either logically or
definitionally; nor conversely. But the postulate does follow logically from the
reduction premise together with a set of bridge laws for T, as follows:
P\ = T\.
P, = T,

The bridge laws serve to identify phenomena described in terms of the reduced
theory T with phenomena described in terms of the reducing theory T* (including
the 0-vocabulary); and via these identifications, T can be derived from T*.
But where do we get the bridge laws? The usual view" is that they are separate
empirical hypotheses, independent of the reducing theory T*. When T* yields a
reduction premise for T, we have the opportunity to choose between two rival
bodies of theory. We may choose T* augmented with bridge laws; if so, we can
derive T, so we do not have to posit it. Or we may choose T* without bridge laws,
in which case we will have to posit T separately. Given this choice, we take whichever body of theory is better—more systematized, parsimonious, simple, credible,
or what have you. We must decide whether the gain in systematization from reducH

Reviewed in the first two sections of John Kemeny and Paul Oppenheim, "On Reduction," Philosophical Studies, 1 (1956): 6-13. Since Kemeny and Oppenheim take the theoretical terms as predicates, their bridge laws are universally closed biconditionals father than identities.

92

Ontology

ing T is worth the loss of systematization from adding bridge laws. If it is, we
choose to accept the bridge laws and perform the reduction.
The usual view assumes that it is impossible to derive the bridge laws from the
unaugmented reducing theory T*, since the bridge laws contain essential occurrences of the T-terms and these do not occur in T*. But consider the definitionally
expanded bridge laws: the sentences obtained from the bridge laws when we replace
the T-terms by definite descriptions, according to our definition sentences for T.

The definitionally expanded bridge laws are 0*-sentences. No incompatibility of
vocabulary prevents them from being theorems of T*. Yet they are definitional
equivalents of the bridge laws; so if they are theorems of T*, then T* definitionally
implies the bridge laws. There is no need for any empirical hypothesis other than
theorems of T*.
If T* yields as theorems a reduction premise for T, and also a suitable set of
definitionally expanded bridge laws for T, then T*—without the aid of any other
empirical hypothesis—reduces T. For T* definitionally implies the postulate of T,
as well as a set of bridge laws. Once T* is accepted, there is no choice whether or
not to reduce T. The reduction of T does not need to be justified by considerations
of parsimony (or whatever) over and above the considerations of parsimony that
led us to accept T* in the first place.
It is useful to observe that the set of definitionally expanded bridge laws is logically implied by the following 0*-sentence, which we may call an auxiliary reduction premise for T:

It says that, unless one of the terms p,. . .p, is denotationless, Tis uniquely realized
by an »-tuple of entities named, respectively, by p,. . .p,. Hence the reduction
premise and the auxiliary reduction premise together say just this: T is uniquely
realized by an »-tuple of entities named, respectively, by pt. . .p,. That is what T*
must imply in order to reduce T by means of derived bridge laws. In that case,
indeed, we can by-pass the bridge laws. T* definitionally implies T by an alternate
route. Since T* guarantees that T is uniquely realized, T* logically implies the
unique realization sentence of T, which is logically equivalent to the expanded
postulate of T and definitionally equivalent to the postulate of T.
Let us briefly examine two examples of reduction by means of derived bridge
laws.
(1) Let T be a theory explaining the operation of a machine by means of transition laws of the form: when the machine is in state T,, so-and-so input causes it
to go into state T; and produce such-and-such output. The T-terms are T,. . . T,,
purporting to name states of the machine. Later we obtain T*: an account, pur-

How To Define Terms

93

porting to be complete, of the internal structure of the machine and the principles
on which it works. Then, unless T* falsifies T, we should be able to form statenames p, • • • p, in the mechanical vocabulary of T*, such that T* implies that the
states thus named are related to one another, and to the appropriate inputs and
outputs, by the given transition laws. Thus T* would yield a reduction premise for
T. But also, since T* purports to be a complete account of the working of the
machine, we can reasonably expect T* to leave no room for a second realization of
T. T* could imply that every w-tuple of states describable in its mechanical vocabulary, except for the »-tuple named by p.. . .pn, disobeys the given transition laws;
and according to the completeness claimed by T*, no states not so describable need
be considered in explaining the input-output relations of the machine. (For
instance, what we think we know about ordinary electromechanical machines seems
to imply that the only states causally responsible for outputs are states describable
in terms of positions and momenta of moving parts, currents, and voltages.) If so,
T* yields an auxiliary reduction premise for T; hence T* together with the definitions of the state-names T,. . .r, suffices to imply the bridge laws: 'r^p- .
(2) Let T be a theory explaining the regulation of certain biological processes by
positing hormones T,. . .T,: chemical substances of unspecified composition,
secreted by specified cells under specified conditions and regulating the rates of
specified chemical reactions in a specified way. The T-terms T,. . .r,, in this case,
purport to name substances. Let T* comprise our body of biochemical knowledge
at some later time; T* might imply that certain substances named by chemical
formulas p,. . .p, realized T, and that they alone did so. To exclude multiple realization of T, T* would have to contain the information that, e.g., a certain gland
secretes nothing but the substance with formula p,; but we often do have such
knowledge.
Not only is it possible for a theory to be reduced by means of derived bridge
laws; we can even regard all possible reduction of theories as working in this way.
Instead of saying that in some cases the bridge laws are posited independently of
the reducing theory, we may rather say that in some cases the reducing theory must
be strengthened ad hoc before it yields the bridge laws we want.
Suppose we want to reduce our theory T; and we accept a theory T* which yields
as a theorem some reduction premise for T, but does not yield the corresponding
set of definitionally expanded bridge laws. Let T** be the theory obtained from T*
by providing these definitionally expanded bridge laws. T* does not reduce T by
means of derived bridge laws, but only by means of bridge laws posited independently of T*. T**, a theory obtained by suitable strengthening of 7*, does reduce
T by means of derived bridge laws. How shall we describe what happens when we
add bridge laws to T* in order to reduce T? If we say that 7* is the reducing
theory, we must say that T* reduces T by means of independently posited bridge
laws. But we could just as well say that T** was the reducing theory, and that we
strengthened T* to T** in order that T** might reduce T by means of derived
bridge laws. Of course, it does not matter very much which we say. Either way,

94

Ontology

the bridge laws have been posited ad hoc in return for the reduction of T; for T**
is definitionally equivalent to T* plus the bridge laws.
Still, I think it best to say that the strengthening of the reducing theory is a
precondition, not a part, of the reduction. For that will remind us that strengthening is not necessarily needed. A body of theory already accepted before we
thought of using it to reduce T may already be strong enough, without any more
strengthening ad hoc, to reduce T by means of derived bridge laws. I do not know
whether most cases of theoretical reduction are of this sort; but we should at least
leave the possibility open, as the usual account of reduction does not.

VII. LATER REVISIONS OF T
So far, we have discussed the interpretation of T-terms at the time of their introduction, the time when their parent theory T is first proposed. It remains to ask
what happens later when T is amended and extended. This matters especially in
connection with reduction, since theories do not often survive reduction intact.
More often the original theory is falsified while a corrected version is reduced. If T
is thus partially reduced and partially falsified, or revised for any other reason, do
the T-terms retain their meanings?
We might say that the T-terms should always be defined using the currently
accepted version of T. As Tis corrected, modified, extended, or perhaps even when
we accept miscellaneous hypotheses that contain T-terms but do not belong integrally to any version of T, the T-terms gradually change their meaning. In particular, they change their meanings in the revisions preparatory to partial reduction
of T.12 But these are very peculiar changes of meaning—so peculiar that this position seems to change the meaning of 'change the meaning of. They occur continually, unnoticed, without impeding communication. We might try saying that a
small enough change of meaning is not really a change of meaning, but that would
imply that enough nonchanges in meaning could add up to a change in meaning.
The position has other problems. How are we to define the theoretical terms of
defunct or never-accepted theories? Should we use the best-known version, or what?
What if different scientists accept slightly different versions of T, disagreeing, say,
on the exact value of some physical constant? We ought not to say they give the
T-terms different meanings. What do the T-terms mean if we have suspended
judgment between two slightly different versions of T!
We might therefore prefer to say that the T-terms keep the meanings they
received at their first introduction. They should still be defined using the original
version of T even after it has been superseded by revised versions.
12

As suggested by Paul Feyerabend, "Explanation, Reduction, and Empiricism," Minnesota Studies in
the Philosophy of Science 3 (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1962), ed. by H. Feigl and
G. Maxwell,

How To Define Terms

95

This position will work only if we permit the T-terms to name components of
the nearest near-realization of T, even if it is not a realization of T itself. For after
T has been corrected, no matter how slightly, we will believe that the original
version of T is unrealized. We will want the T-terms to name components of the
unique realization (if any) of the corrected version of T. They can do so without
change of meaning if a realization of the corrected version is also a near-realization
of the original version.
According to this position, we may be unable to discover the meanings of theoretical terms at a given time just by looking into the minds of the most competent
language-users at that time. We will need to look at the past episodes of theoryproposing in which those terms were first introduced into their language. The
working physicist is the expert on electrons; but the historian of physics knows
more than he about the meaning of 'electron', and hence about which things could
truly have been called electrons if the facts had been different. If we were ignorant
of history, we could all be ignorant or mistaken about the meanings of words in
common use among us. This situation is surprising, but it has precedent: a parallel
doctrine about proper names has recently been defended. 13 To know what 'Moses'
means among us it is not enough to look into our minds; you must look at the
man who stands at the beginning of the causal chain leading to our use the word
'Moses'.
I do not wish to decide between these alternatives. Either seems defensible at
some cost. I hope the truth lies in between, but I do not know what an intermediate
position would look like.

"See David Kaplan, "Quantifying In," Synthese, 19 (1968): 178-214.

This page intentionally left blank

PART TWO

Philosophy of Mind

This page intentionally left blank

SEVEN

An Argument
for the
Identity Theory

I. INTRODUCTION
The (Psychophysical) Identity Theory is the hypothesis that—not necessarily but
as a matter of fact—every experience1 is identical with some physical state.2 Specifically, with some neurochemical state. I contend that we who accept the materialistic working hypothesis that physical phenomena have none but purely physical
explanations must accept the identity theory. This is to say more than do most
friends of the theory, who say only that we are free to accept it, and should for the
sake of some sort of economy or elegance. I do not need to make a case for the
Experiences herein are to be taken in general as universals, not as abstract particulars. I am concerned,
for instance, with pain, an experience that befalls many people at many times; or with pain of some
definite sort, an experience which at least might be common to different people at different times. Both
are universals, capable of repeated instantiation. The latter is a narrower universal than the former, as
crimson of some definite shade is narrower than red, but still a universal. I am not concerned with the
particular pain of a given person at a given time, an abstract entity which cannot itself recur but can
only be similar—at best, exactly similar—to other particular pains of other people or at other times,
We might identify such abstract particulars with pairs of a universal and a single concrete particular
instance thereof; or we might leave them as unanalyzed, elementary beings, as in Donald C. Williams,
"On the Elements of Being," Review of Metaphysics 1 (1953): 3-18 and 171-92. [All but the first
sentence of this note was added in October 1969.)
2
States also are to be taken in general as universals. I shall not distinguish between processes, events,
phenomena, and states in a strict sense.
99

100

Philosophy of Mind

identity theory on grounds of economy,3 since I believe it can and should rest on a
stronger foundation.
My argument is this: The definitive characteristic of any (sort of) experience as
such is its causal role, its syndrome of most typical causes and effects. But we
materialists believe that these causal roles which belong by analytic necessity to
experiences belong in fact to certain physical states. Since those physical states possess the definitive characteristics of experience, they must be the experiences.
My argument parallels an argument which we will find uncontroversial. Consider cylindrical combination locks for bicycle chains. The definitive characteristic
of their state of being unlocked is the causal role of that state, the syndrome of its
most typical causes and effects: namely, that setting the combination typically
causes the lock to be unlocked and that being unlocked typically causes the lock
to open when gently pulled. That is all we need know in order to ascribe to the
lock the state of being or of not being unlocked. But we may learn that, as a matter
of fact, the lock contains a row of slotted discs; setting the combination typically
causes the slots to be aligned; and alignment of the slots typically causes the lock
to open when gently pulled. So alignment of slots occupies precisely the causal role
that we ascribed to being unlocked by analytic necessity, as the definitive characteristic of being unlocked (for these locks). Therefore alignment of slots is identical
with being unlocked (for these locks). They are one and the same state.

II. THE NATURE OF THE IDENTITY THEORY
We must understand that the identity theory asserts that certain physical states are
experiences, introspectible processes or activities, not that they are the supposed
intentional objects that experiences are experiences of. If these objects of experience
really exist separate from experiences of them, or even as abstract parts thereof, they
may well also be something physical. Perhaps they are also neural, or perhaps they
are abstract constituents of veridically perceived surroundings, or perhaps they are
something else, or nothing at all; but that is another story. So I am not claiming
that an experience of seeing red, say, is itself somehow a red neural state.
Shaffer has argued that the identity theory is impossible because (abstract particular) experiences are, by analytic necessity, unlocated, whereas the (abstract particular) neural events that they supposedly are have a location in part of the subject's nervous system.4 But I see no reason to believe that the principle that
experiences are unlocated enjoys any analytic, or other, necessity. Rather it is a
metaphysical prejudice which has no claim to be respected. Or if there is, after all,

3

I am therefore invulnerable to Brandt's objection that the identity theory is not clearly more economical
than a certain kind of dualism. "Doubts about the Identity Theory," in Dimensions of Mind, Sidney
Hook, ed. (New York: NYU Press, 1960), pp. 57-67.
4
"Could Mental States Be Brain Processes?" Journal of Philosophy 58, no. 26 (Dec. 21, 1961): 813-22.

An Argument for the Identity Theory

101

a way in which it is analytic that experiences are unlocated, that way is irrelevant:
perhaps in our presystematic thought we regard only concreta as located in a primary sense, and abstracta as located in a merely derivative sense by their inherence
in located concreta. But this possible source of analytic unlocatedness for experiences does not meet the needs of Shaffer's argument. For neural events are abstracta
too. Whatever unlocatedness accrues to experiences not because they are mental
but because they are abstract must accrue as much to neural events. So it does not
discriminate between the two.
The identity theory says that experience-ascriptions have the same reference as
certain neural-state-ascriptions: both alike refer to the neural states which are experiences. It does not say that these ascriptions have the same sense. They do not;
experience-ascriptions refer to a state by specifying the causal role that belongs to
it accidentally, in virtue of causal laws, whereas neural-state-ascriptions refer to a
state by describing it in detail. Therefore the identity theory does not imply that
whatever is true of experiences as such is likewise true of neural states as such, nor
conversely. For a truth about things of any kind as such is about things of that
kind not by themselves, but together with the sense of expressions by which they
are referred to as things of that kind.5 So it is pointless to exhibit various discrepancies between what is true of experiences as such and what is true of neural states
as such. We can explain those discrepancies without denying psychophysical identity and without admitting that it is somehow identity of a defective sort.
We must not identify an experience itself with the attribute that is predicated
of somebody by saying that he is having that experience.6 The former is whatever
state it is that occupies a certain definitive causal role; the latter is the attribute of
being in whatever state it is that occupies that causal role. By this distinction we
'Here I have of course merely applied to states Frege's doctrine of sense and reference. See "On Sense
and Reference," in Translations from the Philosophical Writings of Gottlah Frege, ed. by Peter Geach
and Max Black. (New York: Oxford University Press, 1960), pp. 56-78.
6
Here I mean to deny all identities of the form ra is identical with the attribute of having of where a
is an experience-name definable as naming the occupant of a specified causal role. I deny, for instance,
that pain is identical with the attribute of having pain. On my theory, 'pain' is a contingent name—
that is, a name with different denotations in different possible worlds—since in any world, 'pain' names
whatever state happens in that world to occupy the causal role definitive of pain. If state X occupies
that role in world V while another state Y (incompatible with X) occupies that role in world W, then
'pain' names X in V and Y in W. I take 'the attribute of having pain', on the other hand, as a noncontingent name of that state or attribute Z that belongs, in any world, to whatever things have pain
in that world—that is, to whatever things have in that world the state named in that world by 'pain'.
(I take states to be attributes of a special kind: attributes of things at times.) Thus Z belongs in V to
whatever things have X in V, and in W to whatever things have Y in W; hence 7. is identical neither
with X nor with Y.
Richard Montague, in "On the Nature of Certain Philosophical Entities," Monist 53 (1969): 17273, objects that I seem to be denying a logical truth having as its instances all identities of the form
'a is identical with the attribute of having of1 where a is a non-contingent name of a state which is
(either contingently or necessarily) an experience. I would agree that such identities are logically true;
but those are not the identities I mean to deny, since I claim that our ordinary experience-names—
'pain' and the like—are contingent names of states. [This note was added in October 1969.]

102

Philosophy of MM

can answer the objection that, since experience-ascriptions and neural-state-descriptions are admittedly never synonymous and since attributes are identical just in case
they are predicated by synonymous expressions, therefore experiences and neural
states cannot be identical attributes. The objection does establish a nonidentity, but
not between experiences and neural states. (It is unfair to blame the identity theory
for needing the protection of so suspiciously subtle a distinction, for a parallel
distinction is needed elsewhere. Blue is, for instance, the color of my socks, but
blue is not the attribute predicated of things by saying they are the color of my
socks, since ' ... is blue' and . . . is the color of my socks' are not synonymous.)

III. THE FIRST PREMISE: EXPERIENCES DEFINED BY CAUSAL ROLES
The first of my two premises for establishing the identity theory is the principle
that the definitive characteristic of any experience as such is its causal role. The
definitive causal role of an experience is expressible by a finite7 set of conditions
that specify its typical causes and its typical effects under various circumstances. By
analytic necessity these conditions are true of the experience and jointly distinctive
of it.
My first premise is an elaboration and generalization of Smart's theory that
avowals of experience are, in effect, of the form 'What is going on in me is like
what is going on in me when . . .' followed by specification of typical stimuli for,
or responses to, the experiences.8 I wish to add explicitly that . . . may be an elaborate logical compound of clauses if necessary; that . . . must specify typical causes
or effects of the experience, not mere accompaniments; that these typical causes and
effects may include other experiences; and that the formula does not apply only to
first-person reports of experience.
This is not a materialist principle, nor does it ascribe materialism to whoever
speaks of experiences. Rather it is an account of the parlance common to all who
believe that experiences are something or other real and that experiences are efficacious outside their own realm. It is neutral between theories—or a lack of any
theory—about what sort of real and efficacious things experiences are: neural states
or the like, pulsations of ectoplasm or the like, or just experiences and nothing else.
It is not neutral, however, between all current theories of mind and body. Epiphenomenalist and parallelist dualism are ruled out as contradictory because they
7

It would do no harm to allow the ser of conditions to be infinite, so long as it is recursive. But I doubt
the need for this relaxation.
^Philosophy and Scientific Realism (New York: Humanities Press, 1963), ch. 5. Smart's concession that
his formula does not really translate avowals is unnecessary. It results from a bad example: 'I have a
pain' is not translatable as 'What is going on in me is like what goes on when a pin is stuck into me',
because the concept of pain might be introduced without mention of pins. Indeed; but the objection
is no good against the translation 'What is going on in me is like what goes on when (i.e. when and
because) my skin is damaged'.

An Argument for the Identity Theory

103

deny the efficacy of experience. Behaviorism as a thoroughgoing dispositional analysis of all mental states, including experiences,9 is likewise ruled out as denying the
reality and a fortiori the efficacy of experiences. For a pure disposition is a fictitious
entity. The expressions that ostensibly denote dispositions are best construed as
syncategorematic parts of statements of the lawlike regularities in which (as we say)
the dispositions are manifest.
Yet the principle that experiences are denned by their causal roles is itself behaviorist in origin, in that it inherits the behaviorist discovery that the (ostensibly)
causal connections between an experience and its typical occasions and manifestations somehow contain a component of analytic necessity. But my principle
improves on the original behavioristic embodiment of that discovery in several
ways:
First, it allows experiences to be something real and so to be the effects of their
occasions and the causes of their manifestations, as common opinion supposes them
to be.
Second, it allows us to include other experiences among the typical causes and
effects by which an experience is defined. It is crucial that we should be able to do
so in order that we may do justice, in defining experiences by their causal roles, to
the introspective accessibility which is such an important feature of any experience.
For the introspective accessibility of an experience is its propensity reliably to cause
other (future or simultaneous) experiences directed intentionally upon it, wherein
we are aware of it. The requisite freedom to interdefine experiences is not available
in general under behaviorism; interdefinition of experiences is permissible only if
it can in principle be eliminated, which is so only if it happens to be possible to
arrange experiences in a hierarchy of definitional priority. We, on the other hand,
may allow interdefinition with no such constraint. We may expect to get mutually
interdefined families of experiences, but they will do us no harm. There will be no
reason to identify anything with one experience in such a family without regard to
the others—but why should there be? Whatever occupies the definitive causal role
of an experience in such a family does so by virtue of its own membership in a
causal isomorph of the family of experiences, that is, in a system of states having
the same pattern of causal connections with one another and the same causal connections with states outside the family, viz., stimuli and behavior. The isomorphism guarantees that if the family is identified throughout with its isomorph then
the experiences in the family will have their definitive causal roles. So, ipso facto,
the isomorphism requires us to accept the identity of all the experiences of the
family with their counterparts in the causal isomorph of the family. 10
9

Any theory of mind and body is compatible with a dispositional analysis of mental states other than
experiences or with so-called "methodological behaviorism."
10
Putnam discusses an analogous case for machines: a family of ("logical" or "functional") stares defined
by their causal roles and mutually interdefined, and a causally isomorphic system of ("structural")
states otherwise defined. He does not equate the correlated logical and structural states. "Minds and
Machines," in Dimensions of Mind, pp. 148-79.

104

Philosophy of Mind

Third, we are not obliged to define an experience by the causes and effects of
exactly all and only its occurrences. We can be content rather merely to identify
the experience as that state which is typically caused in thus-and-such ways and
typically causes thus-and-such effects, saying nothing about its causes and effects
in a (small) residue of exceptional cases. A definition by causes and effects in typical
cases suffices to determine what the experience is, and the fact that the experience
has some characteristics or other besides its definitive causal role confers a sense
upon ascriptions of it in some exceptional cases for which its definitive typical
causes and effects are absent (and likewise upon denials of it in some cases for which
they are present). Behaviorism does not acknowledge the fact that the experience
is something apart from its definitive occasions and manifestations, and so must
require that the experience be defined by a strictly necessary and sufficient condition
in terms of them. Otherwise the behaviorist has merely a partial explication of the
experience by criteria, which can never give more than a presumption that the
expreience is present or absent, no matter how much we know about the subject's
behavior and any lawlike regularities that may govern it. Relaxation of the requirement for a strictly necessary and sufficient condition is welcome. As anybody who
has tried to implement behaviorism knows, it is usually easy to find conditions
which are almost necessary and sufficient for an experience. All the work—and all
the complexity which renders it incredible that the conditions found should be
known implicitly by every speaker—comes in trying to cover a few exceptional
cases. In fact, it is just impossible to cover some atypical cases of experiences behavioristically: the case of a perfect actor pretending to have an experience he does not
really have; and the case of a total paralytic who cannot manifest any experience
he does have (both cases under the stipulation that the pretense or paralysis will
last for the rest of the subject's life no matter what happens, in virtue of regularities
just as lawlike as those by which the behaviorist seeks to define experiences).
It is possible, and probably good analytic strategy, to reconstrue any supposed pure
dispositional state rather as a state defined by its causal role. The advantages in
general are those we have seen in this case: the state becomes recognized as real and
efficacious; unrestricted mutual interdefinition of the state and others of its sort
becomes permissible; and it becomes intelligible that the state may sometimes
occur despite prevention of its definitive manifestations."
I do not offer to prove my principle that the definitive characteristics of experiences as such are their causal roles. It would be verified by exhibition of many
suitable analytic statements saying that various experiences typically have thus-andsuch causes and effects. Many of these statements have been collected by behaviorists; I inherit these although I explain their status somewhat differently. Behaviorism is widely accepted. I am content to rest my case on the argument that my
n

Quine advocates this treatment of such dispositional states as are worth saving in Word and Object
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, and New York: Wiley, I960), pp. 222-25. "They are conceived as
built-in, enduring structural traits."

An Argument for the Identity Theory

105

principle can accommodate what is true in behaviorism and can escape attendant
difficulties.

IV. THE SECOND PREMISE: EXPLANATORY ADEQUACY OF PHYSICS
My second premise is the plausible hypothesis that there is some unified body of
scientific theories, of the sort we now accept, which together provide a true and
exhaustive account of all physical phenomena (i.e. all phenomena describable in
physical terms). They are unified in that they are cumulative: the theory governing
any physical phenomenon is explained by theories governing phenomena out of
which that phenomenon is composed and by the way it is composed out of them.
The same is true of the latter phenomena, and so on down to fundamental particles
or fields governed by a few simple laws, more or less as conceived of in presentday theoretical physics. I rely on Oppenheim and Putnam for a detailed exposition
of the hypothesis that we may hope to find such a unified physicalistic body of
scientific theory and for a presentation of evidence that the hypothesis is credible.12
A confidence in the explanatory adequacy of physics is a vital part, but not the
whole, of any full-blooded materialism. It is the empirical foundation on which
materialism builds its superstructure of ontological and cosmological doctrines,
among them the identity theory. It is also a traditional and definitive working
hypothesis of natural science—what scientists say nowadays to the contrary is
defeatism or philosophy. I argue that whoever shares this confidence must accept
the identity theory.
My second premise does not rule out the existence of nonphysical phenomena;
it is not an ontological thesis in its own right. It only denies that we need ever
explain physical phenomena by nonphysical ones. Physical phenomena are physically explicable, or they are utterly inexplicable insofar as they depend upon chance
in a physically explicable way, or they are methodologically acceptable primitives.
All manner of nonphysical phenomena may coexist with them, even to the extent
of sharing the same space-time, provided only that the nonphysical phenomena are
entirely inefficacious with respect to the physical phenomena. These coexistent nonphysical phenomena may be quite unrelated to physical phenomena; they may be
causally independent but for some reason perfectly correlated with some physical
phenomena (as experiences are, according to parallelism); they may be epiphenomena, caused by some physical phenomena but not themselves causing any (as experiences are, according to epiphenomenalism). If they are epiphenomena they may
even be correlated with some physical phenomena, perfectly and by virtue of a
causal law.
12

"Unity of Science as a Working Hypothesis," in Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science 2
(Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press, 1958), Herbert Feigl, Michael Scriven, and Grover Maxwell,
eds., pp. 3-36.

106

Philosophy of MM

V. CONCLUSION OF THE ARGUMENT
But none of these permissible nonphysical phenomena can be experiences. For they
must be entirely inefficacious with respect to all physical phenomena. But all the
behavioral manifestations of experiences are (or involve) physical phenomena and
so cannot be effects of anything that is inefficacious with respect to physical phenomena. These behavioral manifestations are among the typical effects definitive of
any experience, according to the first premise. So nothing can be an experience that
is inefficacious with respect to physical phenomena. So nothing can be an experience
that is a nonphysical phenomenon of the sort permissible under the second premise.
From the two premises it follows that experiences are some physical phenomena or
other.
And there is little doubt which physical phenomena they must be. We are far
from establishing positively that neural states occupy the definitive causal roles of
experiences, but we have no notion of any other physical phenomena that could
possibly occupy them, consistent with what we do know. So if nonphysical phenomena are ruled out by our confidence in physical explanation, only neural states
are left. If it could be shown that neural states do not occupy the proper causal
roles, we would be hard put to save materialism itself.
A version of epiphenomenalism might seem to evade my argument: let experiences be nonphysical epiphenomena, precisely correlated according to a causal law
with some simultaneous physical states which are themselves physically (if at all)
explicable. The correlation law (it is claimed) renders the experiences and their
physical correlates causally equivalent. So the nonphysical experiences have their
definitive physical effects after all—although they are not needed to explain those
effects, so there is no violation of my second premise (since the nonphysical experiences redundantly redetermine the effects of their physical correlates). I answer
thus: at best, this position yields nonphysical experiences alongside the physical
experiences, duplicating them, which is not what its advocates intend. Moreover,
it is false that such a physical state and its epiphenomenal correlate are causally
equivalent. The position exploits a flaw in the standard regularity theory of cause.
We know on other grounds that the theory must be corrected to discriminate
between genuine causes and the spurious causes which are their epiphenomenal
correlates. (The "power on" light does not cause the motor to go, even if it is a
lawfully perfect correlate of the electric current that really causes the motor to go.)
Given a satisfactory correction, the nonphysical correlate will be evicted from its
spurious causal role and thereby lose its status as the experience. So this epiphenomenalism is not a counterexample.
The dualism of the common man holds that experiences are nonphysical phenomena which are the causes of a familiar syndrome of physical as well as nonphysical effects. This dualism is a worthy opponent, daring to face empirical refutation, and in due time it will be rendered incredible by the continuing advance of
physicalistic explanation. I have been concerned to prevent dualism from finding a

An Argument for the Identity Theory

107

safe fall-back position in the doctrine that experiences are nonphysical and physically inefficacious. It is true that such phenomena can never be refuted by any
amount of scientific theory and evidence. The trouble with them is rather that they
cannot be what we call experiences. They can only be the nonphysical epiphenomena or correlates of physical states which are experiences. If they are not the experiences themselves, they cannot rescue dualism when it is hard-pressed. And if they
cannot do that, nobody has any motive for believing in them. Such things may
be—but they are of no consequence.

EIGHT

Radical Interpretation

Imagine that we have undertaken the task of coming to know Karl as a person.
We would like to know what he believes, what he desires, what he means, and
anything else about him that can be explained in terms of these things. We seek a
two-fold interpretation: of Karl's language, and of Karl himself. And we want to
know his beliefs and desires in two different ways. We want to know their content
as Karl could express it in his own language, and also as we could express it in our
language. (For instance, we want to know whether 'owsnay isyay itewhay' is a sentence that Karl could use to express something or other that he believes; and also
whether Karl believes that, as we would put it, snow is white. Of course, Karl's
language just might turn out to be the same as ours—that is part of what we want
to find out—but the two questions are independent even so.)
Imagine also that we must start from scratch. At the outset we know nothing
about Karl's beliefs, desires, and meanings. Whatever we may know about persons
in general, our knowledge of Karl in particular is limited to our knowledge of him
as a physical system. But at least we have plenty of that knowledge—in fact, we
have all that we could possibly use. Now, how can we get from that knowledge to
the knowledge we want?
I can diagram the problem of radical interpretation as follows. Given P, the
facts about Karl as a physical system, solve for the rest.
P, our ultimate data base, gives us the whole truth about Karl as a physical
system. It tells us how Karl moves, what forces he exerts on his surroundings, what
light or sound or chemical substances he absorbs or emits. It tells us the same
108

109

Radical Interpretation

P Karl as a physical
system

Ao Karl's attitudes:
beliefs and desires,
as expressed in
our language

Ak Karl's attitudes:
beliefs and desires,
as expressed in
Karl's language

M Karl's meanings:
truth conditions of
his full sentences
(and denotations, etc.
of constituents of
sentences)

things about all of Karl's material parts, great or small, permanent or temporary.
It tells us all the masses and charges of the particles that compose him, and all the
magnitudes and directions of the fields and potentials and radiation that pervade
him. It tells us not only his present physical state but also his physical history; and
not only the actual particular physical facts but also the nomic or counterfactual or
causal dependences among them. It tells us higher order facts, if need be: as that
there exist some or other states of Karl, of unspecified character, that realize suchand-such patterns of causal relations to one another and to such-and-such specified
physical states. And in case the material parts of Karl interact with any psionic
fields, astral bodies, entelechies, or what-not, then P must tell us the physics and
the physical states of those things as well.
Both Ao and Ak are to be specifications of Karl's propositional attitudes—in
particular, of Karl's system of beliefs and desires. (I limit my attention to these
attitudes in the hope that all others will prove to be analyzable as patterns of belief
and desire, actual or potential; but if not, then whatever attitudes resist such analysis also should be included in Ao and Ak.) To specify the propositional content
of Karl's beliefs and desires, we may specify how to express the believed or desired
proposition, in some language, by a sentence in a context. Ao specifies Karl's beliefs
and desires as expressed in our language; Ak specifies them as expressed in Karl's
language; until we find out what the sentences of Karl's language mean, the two
sorts of information are different. We take Karl's beliefs and desires to admit of

UO

Philosophy of Mind

degree, with the zero and unit of desire fixed arbitrarily. Also we allow them to
vary with time. Thus Ao and Ak will consist of ascriptions of the form:
believes \
Karl j
.
, to degree a, at time t, the proposition expressed, in context c, by the
desires

sentence '

' of

our

: language. Take this, if you wish, as a single relation

Karl s J

between Karl, a degree (i.e. a number), a time, a context, and a sentence of our
language or Karl's. I would prefer to take the seeming reference to a proposition
at face value: Karl is related (to a degree, at a time) to a proposition, and that
proposition in turn is related (in a context) to a sentence. For if our interest is in
the philosophy of mind and of language, then the pursuit of ontological parsimony
seems to me an unnecessary distraction. Propositions may be dispensable or they
may not, but at least they seem harmless. True, Quine has rightly warned us againt
the question-begging myth of the museum;' but the myth begs questions not
because it countenances propositions or other abstract entities, but rather because
it uncritically takes for granted that our mental and semantic relations to these
entities are determinate and need no explanation.
M, the third component of our desired interpreation of Karl, is to be a specification, in our language, of the meanings of expressions of Karl's language. Primarily, M specifies the truth conditions of full sentences of Karl's language (perhaps relative to contexts of utterance). I leave it open, here, just what a 'truth
condition' is; in particular, whether it should specify only the actual truth value of
the sentence, or whether it should also specify what the truth value would be in
various counterfactual situations not too remote from actuality, or whether it
should specify the truth value at all possible worlds whatever. Secondarily, M specifies a way of parsing the sentences of Karl's language, the denotation or sense or
comprehension or what-not of the constituents from which sentences may be compounded, and the way that the denotation (or whatever) of a compound depends
on that of its constituents. In short, it specifies the syntactic and semantic rules of
a grammar capable of generating Karl's sentences plus the truth conditions thereof.
It should be obvious by now that my problem of radical interpretation is not
any real-life task of finding out about Karl's beliefs, desires, and meanings. I am
not really asking how we could determine these facts. Rather: how do the facts
determine these facts? By what constraints, and to what extent, does the totality of
physical facts about Karl determine what he believes, desires, and means? To speak
of a mighty knower, who uses his knowledge of these constraints to advance from
omniscience about the physical facts P to omniscience about the other facts determined thereby, is a way of dramatizing our problem—safe enough, so long as we
can take it or leave it alone. The real-life knower has all the problems of our fic-

1

W. V. Quine, Ontological Relativity and Other Essays (New York: Columbia University Press, 1969),
pp. 27-29.

Radical Interpretation

111

titious knower, and more besides: he does not have all of P to draw on, and he
may be limited in endurance, intelligence, or memory. (On the other hand, he does
not aspire to omniscience about Ao, Ak, and M.) But these further obstacles to
his investigation are irrelevant to our real topic.
If I ask how P determines all the rest, my question requires the presupposition
that P does determine all the rest. Or, at least, that P determines all the rest to the
extent that anything does—that where determination by P leaves off, there indeterminacy begins. In other words, I am presupposing that there cannot possibly be
two Karls exactly alike with respect to P but differing somehow with respect to
Ao, Ak, or M. (It does not matter that there might be two equally correct ways
to resolve some mental or semantic indeterminacy, so long as both ways are available for both Karls. The two Karls still do not differ.) This basic presupposition of
our enterprise is a sort of minimal materialism. 'Minimal', first, because we have
allowed P to include the physics of astral bodies or what-not if need be; and second,
because even if all the mental and semantic facts about Karl are determined by the
physical facts, it does not follow that they can be stated in the langauge of physics.
(I think they can be, if the language of physics is taken fairly broadly, but that is
another story.)
What are the constraints by which the problem of radical interpretation is to be
solved? Roughly speaking, they are the fundamental principles of our general theory of persons. They tell as how beliefs and desires and meanings are normally
related to one another, to behavioral output, and to sensory input.
The general theory of persons serves as a schema for particular theories of particular persons. A particular theory of Karl, for instance, may be constructed by
ascribing particular beliefs, desires, and meanings to him. That is: by filling in Ao,
Ak, and M. But not just any filling-in will do. The relations of Ao, Ak, and M
to one another and to P must conform—for the most part, more or less—to the
principles of the general theory. Else the particular theory of Karl is inconsistent.
In this way, the general theory provides the constraining power to make radical
interpretation possible.
Our general theory of persons, like a term-introducing scientific theory, has a
mixed character. On the one hand, it implicitly defines its key theoretical concepts:
in particular, the concepts of belief, desire, and meaning. On the other, it uses these
concepts to make an empirical claim about human beings—a claim so well confirmed that we take it quite for granted. If we disentangle the definitional content
and the empirical content, we have something roughly like this. Definitional content: something may count as a person's system of beliefs, desires, and meanings if
and only if it is a system that more or less conforms to the principles of the theory.
Empirical content: for any human being (with certain exceptions) there will exist a
system of beliefs, desires, and meanings correctly so-called—that is, one that conforms to the principles. That is: almost whatever P may be, within the limits of
human possibility, the problem of radical interpretation should have a solution.
The concepts of belief, desire, and meaning are common property. The theory

112

Philosophy of Mind

that implicitly defines them had better be common property too. It must amount
to nothing more than a mass of platitudes of common sense, though these may be
reorganized in perspicuous and unfamiliar ways. Esoteric scientific findings that go
beyond common sense must be kept out, on pain of changing the subject.
I have said, rather loosely, that the fundamental principles of our common-sense
theory of persons implicitly define such concepts as belief, desire, and meaning.
Actually, I would like to claim something stronger: that the implicit definitions
can be made explicit,2 and that the explicit definitions so obtained would be analytic. If so, then our constraining principles would themselves have a status akin
to analyticity: Karl might have no beliefs, desires, or meanings at all, but it is
analytic that if he does have them then they more or less conform to the constraining principles by which the concepts of belief, desire, and meaning are defined. But
it would not be appropriate to press this claim here. For the question of whether
analyticity is a legitimate notion is part of the broader question of the extent to
which semantic facts are determinate, and that question is part of the very problem
of radical interpretation that we are right now considering. I do not think I need
to claim analyticity; it is enough that the constraining principles should be very
firmly built into our common system of belief.
The principles that I would like to put forward as constraints on radical interpretation are the following six. They are not independent, and some may be entirely
redundant given the others. On the other hand, I may well have overlooked important ones that should have been listed.
The Principle of Charity constrains Ao, or the relation between Ao and P: Karl
should be represented as believing what he ought to believe, and desiring what he
ought to desire. And what is that? In our opinion, he ought to believe what we
believe, or perhaps what we would have believed in his place; and he ought to
desire what we desire, or perhaps what we would have desired in his place. (But
that's only our opinion! Yes. Better we should go by an opinion we don't hold?) A
crude version of the Principle of Charity might just require that, so far as other
constraints allow it, the beliefs and desires ascribed to Karl by Ao should be the
same as our own beliefs and desires. "We will try for a theory that finds him
consistent, a believer of truths, and a lover of the good (all by our own lights, it
goes without saying)" as Davidson puts it. 3 But it would be more charitable to
make allowances for the likelihood that Karl's circumstances—his life history of
evidence and training, recounted in physical terms in our data base P—may have
led him understandably into error. We should at least forbear from ascribing to
Karl those of our beliefs and desires which, according to P and our notions of
In the way I suggest in "An Argument for the Identity Theory," and "How To Define Theoretical
Terms," both in this volume; and in my "Psychophysical and Theoretical Identifications," Australasian
Journal of Philosophy 50(1972): 249-58.
3
Donald Davidson, 'Mental Events,' in Essays on Actions and Events (Clatendon Press: Oxford, 1980),
pp. 207-25.

Radical Interpretation

113

reason, he has been given no reason to share. We should even ascribe to him those
errors which we think we would have made, or should have made, if our evidence
and training had been like his. Perhaps an improved Principle of Charity would
require Karl's beliefs and ours to be related as follows: there must exist some common inductive method M which would lead to approximately our present systems
of belief if given our life histories of evidence, and which would likewise lead to
approximately the present system of beliefs ascribed to Karl by Ao if given Karl's
life history of evidence according to P. As for desires: there must exist some common underlying system of basic intrinsic values 11 which would yield approximately our systems of desires if given our systems of beliefs, and which would
likewise yield approximately the system of desires ascribed to Karl by Ao if given
the system of beliefs ascribed to Karl by Ao. Diagrammatically: there must exist
M and 11 such that:

approximately. That 'approximately' is important: our common-sense theory of
persons tells us that Karl's beliefs and desires may differ from ours not just because
of Karl's different evidence, but also because of the effects of Karl's different training on his underlying inductive method and basic intrinsic values. He may or may
not have learned to beware of hasty generalization, or to like raw eel. If our common-sense theory (without benefit of esoteric scientific knowledge) told us just what
these effects of training were, we could build them into a still better version of the
Principal of Charity. But if not, we must idealize them away, and then not apply
the idealized Principle too stringently.
The Rationalization Principle constrains the relation between Ao and P: Karl
should be represented as a rational agent; the beliefs and desires ascribed to him
by Ao should be such as to provide good reasons for his behavior, as given in
physical terms by P. Thus if it is in P that Karl's arm goes up at a certain time,
Ao should ascribe beliefs and desires according to which it is a good thing for his
arm to go up then. I would hope to spell this out in decision-theoretic terms, as
follows. Take a suitable set of mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive propositions about Karl's behavior at any given time; of these alternatives, the one that
comes true according to P should be the one (or: one of the ones) with maximum
expected utility according to the total system of beliefs and desires ascribed to Karl
at that time by Ao. A precondition: those ascribed beliefs and desires should be

114

Philosophy of Mind

coherent enough to permit the comparison of expected utilities of alternative ways
of behaving.'1
Would such use of the machinery of decision theory go against my requirement
that the constraining principles should come from our common-sense theory of
persons, not from esoteric science? I think not. Decision theory (at least, if we omit
the frills) is not esoteric science, however unfamiliar it may seem to an outsider.
Rather, it is a systematic exposition of the consequences of certain well-chosen platitudes about belief, desire, preference, and choice. It is the very core of our common-sense theory of persons, dissected out and elegantly systematized. The same
goes for my previous mention of underlying inductive methods and systems of
basic intrinsic values: to the extent that unfamiliar theories are involved, they are
not scientific theories but philosophical systematizations of parts of the commonsense theory of persons. The machinery derived from such systematizations is common property, whether or not the accompanying jargon is.
There is an ambiguity in the term 'behavior'. Note that I am using it to refer
to raw behavior—body movements and the like-—given by P alone; not to refer
to behavior specified partly in terms of the agent's intentions. The latter is given
jointly by P and Ao. That Karl's fingers move on certain trajectories and exert
certain forces is what I call 'behavior'; that he signs a check is not. If anyone prefers,
however, we could restate the Rationalization Principle in terms of the second sense
of 'behavior': the beliefs and desires ascribed to Karl by Ao should be such as to
provide good reasons—preferably, decision-theoretic explanations—for his nonraw
behavior as given jointly by P and Ao.5
The Principle of Truthfulness constrains the relation between Ao and M: Some
of the beliefs and desires ascribed to Karl by Ao—in particular, some of those that
pertain to speech behavior or responses to it on the part of Karl and his usual
partners in conversation—should constitute Karl's part of the pattern of attitudes
that I have elsewhere6 called a convention of truthfulness in Karl's language, under
the truth conditions assigned by M to sentences thereof. For instance, if M assigns
to Tonlay!' the truth condition that a lion is present, then some of the beliefs and
desires ascribed to Karl by Ao should be as follows: (1) a desire not to utter
'lonlay!' unless a lion is present; (2) a belief that his partners have a like desire; (3)
a belief that a lion is present, at times when he hears Tonlay!' uttered; (4) a belief
that his partners respond in the same way to utterances of 'lonlay!'; (5) a belief that
his partners expect him to have the beliefs and desires (1)—(4), or at least that
4

See, for instance, the exposition of decision theory in Richard Jeffrey, The Logic of Decision (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1965); or the less formal account of rationalization of behavior in Donald Davidson,
"Actions, Reasons, and Causes," in Essays on Actions and Events (Clarendon Press: Oxford, 1980), pp.
3-21.
5
This second version would fit better the account of rationalization in Donald Davidson, "Actions,
Reasons, and Causes."
6
David Lewis, Convention: A Philosophical Study (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1969)
and "Languages and Language"m this volume.

Radical Interpretation

115

they have no contrary expectations about him; (6) a belief that they expect him
also to have the belief (5), or at least that they have no contrary expectations; and
so on.7
The Principle of Generativity constrains M:M should assign truth conditions to
the sentences of Karl's language in a way that is at least finitely specifiable, and
preferably also reasonably uniform and simple. Perhaps we may add that it should
do so by means of syntactic and semantic rules that fit some standardized format:
the format of a Tarski-style truth theory, as proposed by Davidson;8 or a categorically based transformational grammar with intensional semantic functions, as I
have proposed;9 or the sort of semantically based grammar proposed by some transformational grammarians, with some sort of specification of truth conditions for
the base structures.
The Manifestation Principle constrains the relation between P and Ak, and to a
slight extent also Ao: Karl's beliefs, as expressed in his own language, should normally be manifest in his dispositions to speech behavior. The sentences (in context)
that he could be made to utter should normally be among those that express propositions that he believes to a high degree. So unless Ao ascribes to Karl some special
reason for deception or secrecy, it should be possible to read off the beliefs in Ak
from the dispositions-to-utter given in P. (I do not see quite how to state a companion Manifestation Principle for the desires in Ak, but I rather think that there
should be one.)
The Triangle Principle constrains the three-way relation between Ao, M, and
Ak: Karl's beliefs and desires should be the same whether expressed in his language
or in ours. Suppose that M assigns a certain truth condition to a sentence s (in
context f) in Karl's language, and suppose that a sentence / (in context c') of our
language has the same truth condition. Then if M is correct (and assigns truth
conditions of a sufficiently rich sort), we ought to be entitled to regard s (in c) and
/ (in /) as expressing the same propositions in their respective languages. If so,
the status of s (in c) in Ak should be the same as that of / (in /), in Ao: if Ak
ascribes to Karl a certain degree of belief in the proposition expressed by j (in c),
then Ao should ascribe to him the same degree of belief in the proposition
expressed by / (in c'), and likewise for Karl's degrees of desire.
How might we use these six constraining principles to solve the problem of
radical interpretation? (I still mean the unreal problem of advancing from omniscience about P alone to omniscience also about Ao, Ak, and M.) I should like to
contrast three rather different methods.
Method 1 is meant to borrow as much as possible from discussions of radical
7

Rather similar constraints on the relations between Karl's attitudes and his meanings could be taken
from the discussions of meaning in H. P, Grice, "Meaning," Philosophical Review 66 (1957): 37788; Stephen Schiffer, Meaning (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1972); or Erik Stenius, "Mood and
Language-Game," Synthese 17 (1967): 254-74.
8
In Donald Davidson, "Truth and Meaning," Syntbese 17 (1967): 304-33, and elsewhere.
9
In "General Semantics" in this volume.

116

Philosophy of MM

interpretation by Davidson.10 Davidson's problem of radical interpretation is not
the same as mine, but can be treated as a sub-problem of mine. Given Karl's beliefs
as expressed in his own language (part of Ak), Davidson asks how to solve both
for Karl's beliefs as expressed in our language (part of Ao) and for the truth conditions of full sentences of Karl's language (part of M). As a by-product we may
also get parsings of Karl's sentences and some sort of meanings for their constituents (the rest of M), since these are needed to play an auxiliary role in generating
the truth conditions of the full sentences. Davidson's suggested method of attacking this sub-problem (which he regards as only a sketch of the main features of a
fully adequate method) is to fill in the beliefs in Ao and the truth conditions (and
auxiliary machinery) in M simultaneously, subject to three constraints: the Triangle
Principle, and the Principles of Charity and Generativity. We must strike a balance
as best we can between the demands of Charity on Ao and the demands of Generativity on M; it is not to be expected that we can satisfy both constraints perfectly.
To incorporate Davidson's method of solving the sub-problem into a method
for solving my problem of radical interpretation, we must first use the Manifestation Principle to fill in the beliefs in Ak. But for that we need some input from
Ao: so we must proceed by successive approximations. Method 1 goes as follows.
First step: fill in Ao, tentatively, by means of the Principle of Charity. We may
or may not draw on P at this point; it depends on which version of the Principle
of Charity we use.
Second step: using the tentative filling-in of Ao to exclude the cases in which
Karl seems to have reason for deception or secrecy, and using Karl's dispositions
to speech behavior as given in P, fill in the beliefs in Ak by means of the Manifestation Principle. This brings us up to the beginning of Davidson's sub-problem.
Third step: simultaneously revise the beliefs in Ao and fill in M, in such a way
that the Triangle Principle is satisfied and a satisfactory balance is struck between
the demands of the Principle of Charity on the beliefs in Ao and the demands of
the Principle of Generativity on M.
Fourth step: using Karl's behavior of all sorts, as given in P, and using the revised
beliefs in Ao, revise the desires in Ao by means of the Rationalization Principle.
Then fill in the desires in Ak by means of the Triangle Principle. This gives a
complete, but tentative, solution.
Fifth step: see whether the subsequent revision of Ao would have made any
difference to the outcome of the second step. If so, start over at the second step
using the revised Ao; if not, a stable solution has been reached. If the outcome at
the second step is not too sensitive to the details of Ao, and if the revision of Ao
at the third and fourth steps is not too great, then we may hope for a stable solution
after not too many rounds of iteration.
lo

ln Donald Davidson, "Mental Events," in Essays on Actions and Events, pp. 207-25; idem, the Locke
Lectutes, given at Oxford University, 1970; idem, "Conceptual Relativism," two lectures given at the
University of London, 1971.

Radical Interpretation

111

I doubt the adequacy of Method 1; mostly because it wastes the constraining
power of the Principle of Truthfulness, but also because it fails to constrain the
ascribed beliefs in Ao, as well as the desires, by means of the Rationalization Principle. Too much emphasis goes to language as a vehicle for manifestation of belief
and belief as manifest in langauge; not enough either to language as a social practice
or to belief as manifest in non-linguistic behavior. It may well be that my full
problem of radical interpretation (for Karl, or in general) does have a fairly determinate solution by virtue of the constraints that are left out of Method 1, and yet
that Davidson's sub-problem—the problem that has to be solved as the third step
of Method 1—is severely indeterminate if taken by itself.
Method 2, the method I am inclined to favor, is almost opposite to Method 1
in its plan of attack. The idea is to start by securing Ao, go on to M, and fill in
Ak only at the end. If we proceed in that order, Davidson's sub-problem never
arises. Two other sub-problems arise instead: the problem of determining Karl's
attitudes (as expressed in our language) on the basis of certain of the physical facts
about him, and then the problem of determining his meanings on the basis of
certain of these attitudes. I hope that these are sub-problems that can safely be
taken by themselves, without loss of determinacy. Method 2 goes as follows.
First step: using P both as a source of information on Karl's behavior and as a
source of information on his life history of evidence, fill in Ao completely by means
of the Rationalization Principle and the Principle of Charity. No special attention
is given to Karl's language at this step; his speech behavior is merely included along
with all the rest of his behavior to be rationalized.
Second step: using Ao to give information about those of Karl's attitudes that
pertain to speech behavior, fill in M in such a way that, first, the relation of these
attitudes to the truth conditions of the full sentences conforms to the Principle of
Truthfulness; and second, the demands of the Principle of Generativity on the truth
conditions and auxiliary apparatus of M are satisfied as well as they can be.
Third step; given Ao and M, fill in Ak by means of the Triangle Principle. (The
Manifestation Principle should then be satisfied automatically; it is redundant,
given the Principle of Truthfulness, the Rationalization Principle as applied to
speech behavior, and the Triangle Principle.) This completes the solution.
Method 3, finally, is the obvious holistic non-method: try to fill in Ao, Ak, and
M all at once, satisfying all six of our constraining principles or balancing them off
as best we can. That is the method we would have to fall back on if we decided
that no sub-problem could be separated out without loss of some determinacy, and
hence gave up hope of solving the full problem step by step. That would be no
great defeat. Our fictitious mighty knower will not mind trying all possible complete solutions to find out which are the ones that fit the constraints! After all, we
are not really interested in a practical method of finding out anything; we are interested in the determination of the mental and semantic facts by the physical facts
via the constraining principles. Plans of attack and the determinacy of various subproblems are side issues.

118

Philosophy of Mind

The things that matter are: (1) what the problem of radical interpretation is; (2)
the set of constraints by which it is solved, and the source of their constraining
power; (3) the presupposition that the physical facts determine the mental and
semantic facts, somehow, to the extent that anything does; and (4) the extent of
the determinacy.
As regards the extent of determinacy, all that I have said so far is meant to be
neutral between optimism and pessimism. I have only tried to say what a solution
to the problem of radical interpretation is—namely, a filling-in of Ao, Ak, and
M—and what constraints it must satisfy to be correct. That leaves it open whether
there is one correct solution or many; and, if many, how different two correct solutions can be.
Indeterminacy might come in more or less virulent forms. It is worth distinguishing, for the worst sort is also the least credible—by my lights, always far less
credible than the hypothesis that we have misconceived the whole problem!
It seems hopeless to deny, in the face of such examples as have been offered by
Quine," that the truth conditions of full sentences in M do not suffice to determine
the rest of M: the parsings and the meanings of the constituents of sentences. At
least, that is so unless there is something more than our Principle of Generativity
to constrain this auxiliary syntactic and semantic apparatus.
It also seems hard to deny that a more general indeterminacy can arise because
no solution fits all the constraints perfectly, and many different ways to strike a
balance give many different compromise solutions. The 'unsharp analyticity' of
some so-called definitions in physics, or the confused desires of a compulsive thief,
might exemplify this indeterminacy of compromise.
Grant these two sorts of indeterminacy, and set them aside. Could indeterminacy
of beliefs, desires, and truth conditions also arise because two different solutions
both fit all the constraints perfectly? Here is the place to hold the line. This sort of
indeterminacy has not been shown by convincing examples, and neither could it
be shown—to me—by proof. Credo: if ever you prove to me that all the constraints
we have yet found could permit two perfect solutions, differing otherwise than in
the auxiliary apparatus of M, then you will have proved that we have not yet found
all the constraints.

"in Ontological Relativity and Other Essays (New York: Columbia University Press, 1969).

Radical Interpretation

119

Postscripts to
"Radical Interpretation"
A. KARL AND OTHERS OF HIS KIND
I stated my problem in an unduly individualistic way: given the facts about Karl
as a physical system, solve for the facts about him as a person—his beliefs, desires,
and meanings. If Karl were a unique being, this would be the right question to
ask. If not—if he is, for instance, human—it is not. In "Mad Pain and Martian
Plain" (in this volume), I argued that a "madman" might be in pain not because
his state occupied the causal role of pain in him but rather because that state occupies that role, for the most part, in members of the kind to which he belongs. The
same possibility should be recognized for attitudes as well. Karl might believe
himself a fool, and might desire fame, even though the best interpretation of Karl
considered in isolation might not assign those attitudes to him. For the best interpretation of Karl's kind generally might be one that interprets two states respectively as belief that one is a fool and as desire for fame, and Karl might be in those
two states.
Compare a less controversial case. We have a certain kind of mass-produced
calculator: the Texas Instruments 58C, let us say. A certain hardware state S of the
58C is the state of having the number 6099241494 stored in register 17. The state
S is to be thus interpreted because of its causal role in the functional organization
of the 58C. Now suppose that one 58C comes out defective. It still is a 58C, and
the defect is not such as to prevent it from ever being in state S; but the defect
does mean that the role of S in this calculator differs from the normal role of S in
the 58C. Considering the defective calculator in isolation, there is no reason to
interpret S as the state of having 6099241494 in register 17. But that is how we
interpret S for the 58C generally, so that is what S is for any 58C—even the defective one. We would say, and rightly so, that when the defective 58C is in state S,
then it does have 6099241494 in register 17.
An interpretation just of Karl at the present moment need only specify his attitudes and his meanings. But an interpretation of Karl's kind generally—or even
of Karl himself as he is at various times, or as he might have been under various
different circumstances—must be something more complicated. It must be a
scheme of interpretation specifying the attitudes and meanings as a function of the
momentary total physical state. On the basis of such states, the scheme assigns
interpretations to individuals at times. (Indeed it might—and should, I think—
do this simply by identifying certain attitudes with certain (partial) physical states.)

120

Philosophy of Mind

The best scheme is the one that does the best job overall of conforming to the
constraining principles, taking one individual and time with another. (The individuals in question being not only Karl and others of his kind as they actually are,
but also some of their might-have-been counterparts.) The best interpretation for
Karl is the one assigned to him by the scheme of interpretation that does best
overall, even if it does not do so well in his exceptional case. And the best scheme
is ipso facto correct: to believe that one is a fool, or to desire fame, is to be such
that the best scheme for your kind assigns these attitudes to you.
(What if there is no unique best scheme? Suppose there are several that beat the
rest, these are tied or incomparable, and they yield conflicting assignments of attitudes and meanings. Then to the extent that there is conflict, Karl's attitudes and
meanings are indeterminate. And what if it is not clear which of all the broader
and narrower kinds Karl belongs to should be taken as "his kind" in determining
the best scheme of interpretation for his kind? 1 As I noted in "Mad Pain and Martian Pain," we cannot rely on our criteria of selection to settle hard cases unequivocally. If they do not, and if different choices favor schemes that assign conflicting
attitudes and meanings to Karl, we have here a further source of indeterminacy.
Given indeterminacy, there are two natural senses in which we may nevertheless
speak of Karl's attitudes and meanings. (1) We may take only what is agreed upon
between the conflicting eligible schemes. Or, more daringly, (2) we may take him
to have all the attitudes and meanings assigned by all the conflicting eligible
schemes. The problem resembles that of truth in inconsistent fiction, discussed in
Postscript B to "Truth in Fiction" (in this volume), and the alternative proposed
solutions to the problems are parallel.
Any broadly functionalist theory of mind is under intuitive pressure from two
directions. On the one hand, it seems wrong to make it invariable or necessary that
the mental states occupy their definitive causal roles. Couldn't there be occasional
exceptions, comparable to the case of the defective calculator? On the other hand,
the mental states of Karl seem intrinsic to him. Why should whether he now feels
pain—or believes himself to be a fool, or desires fame—depend on what causes
what in the case of someone else? I do not see any acceptable way to respect both
intuitions in their full strength. Individualistic functionalism respects the second at
the expense of the first. I have tried to strike a more credible compromise, one that
grants some of the force of each. The first intuition is respected to this extent:
indeed it is possible that there be exceptional cases in which a mental state fails
entirely to occupy its definitive role. However, such cases must be exceptional, such
failures cannot be too common. The second intuition is respected to this extent:

'It might indeed turn out that humans have such vast differences in hardware from one to the next
(unlike 58C calculators) that the salient kind does after all contain only Karl and some of his counterparts. If so, the correction I have been advocating will turn out to make little difference. Still, I do not
think we should adopt an individualistic approach to interpretation on principle, even if we should be
prepared to have it forced on us by the facts of individual difference.

Radical Interpretation

121

one's mental states are intrinsic states that one is in. However, what makes one's
states be the mental states they are—what makes them occupy the role they do—
is not entirely intrinsic. To a limited extent it concerns others of one's kind. But
that extent is limited since, necessarily, most cases are not exceptional.

B. THE SYSTEMS OF ATTITUDES
In view of my arguments in "Attitudes De Dicto and De Se" (in this volume), of
course I must withdraw my statement that Ao and Ak are to be specifications of
Karl's prepositional attitudes. His egocentric, irreducibly de se attitudes should not
be left out, although these are not (in my sense of the word) prepositional. But
even these might be expressed, in context, by sentences of our language, or of
Karl's:2 we must use first-person sentences, and we must regard these as expressing
properties rather than propositions. Thus Karl may believe (to a certain degree, at
a certain time) that he is a fool; this belief is expressed in our language by "I am
a fool", but only if this is regarded as expressing the property of being a fool rather
than the proposition that Karl is a fool. (What if Karl thinks that he himself is a
fool and Karl isn't, from which he concludes that he must not be Karl?) There is
of course a good sense in which a first-person sentence does express a proposition,
but this sort of expression is beside the point for our present purposes.
The ascriptions of belief that comprise Ao will not much resemble the belief
sentences of ordinary language. (Likewise mutatis mutandis for the ascriptions of
desire.) For our object is to specify belief in a narrowly psychological sense: the
belief that governs behavior, the belief that is "in the head", determined by brain
states and their causal roles. But our ordinary belief sentences often are not narrowly
psychological. Take the case of puzzling Pierre. 3 He believes that the city he has
heard of under the name of Londres is pretty—this much is narrow psychology and
belongs in Ao. The city he has heard of under that name is London—that is not
a psychological matter at all. Thanks to this mixed situation, only partly psychological, an ordinary belief sentence is true: Pierre believes that London is pretty.
This is not an ascription that belongs in Ao. If Pierre had been just the same psychologically, but otherwise situated, the city he had heard of as Londres might have
been Bristol. Then he would have believed that Bristol, not London, was pretty.
But the beliefs assigned to him in our interpretation should have been just the
same.

2

Here I am simplifying matters by assuming what may well be false: that the languages have resources
adequate to describe the complex shapes, tunes, etc. that may figure in Karl's attitudes.
'Discussed in Saul Kripke, "A Puzzle about Belief," in Avishai Margalit, ed., Meaning and Use (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1979); and in my "What Puzzling Pierre Does Not Believe," Australasian Journal of
Philosophy 59 (1981): 283-89.

NINE

Mad Pain
and
Martian Pain

There might be a strange man who sometimes feels pain, just as we do, but whose
pain differs greatly from ours in its causes and effects. Our pain is typically caused
by cuts, burns, pressure, and the like; his is caused by moderate exercise on an
empty stomach. Our pain is generally distracting; his turns his mind to mathematics, facilitating concentration on that but distracting him from anything else.
Intense pain has no tendency whatever to cause him to groan or writhe, but does
cause him to cross his legs and snap his fingers. He is not in the least motivated to
prevent pain or to get rid of it. In short, he feels pain but his pain does not at all
occupy the typical causal role of pain. He would doubtless seem to us to be some
sort of madman, and that is what I shall call him, though of course the sort of
madness I have imagined may bear little resemblance to the real thing.
I said there might be such a madman. I don't know how to prove that something is possible, but my opinion that this is a possible case seems pretty firm. If
I want a credible theory of mind, I need a theory that does not deny the possibility
of mad pain. I needn't mind conceding that perhaps the madman is not in pain in
quite the same sense that the rest of us are, but there had better be some straightforward sense in which he and we are both in pain.
This paper was presented at a conference on mind-body identity held at Rice University in April 1978.
I am grateful to many friends, and especially to Patricia Kitcher, for valuable discussions of the topic.

122

Mad Pain and Martian Pain

123

Also, there might be a Martian who sometimes feels pain, just as we do, but
whose pain differs greatly from ours in its physical realization. His hydraulic mind
contains nothing like our neurons. Rather, there are varying amounts of fluid in
many inflatable cavities, and the inflation of any one of these cavities opens some
valves and closes others. His mental plumbing pervades most of his body—in fact,
all but the heat exchanger inside his head. When you pinch his skin you cause no
firing of C-fibers—he has none—but, rather, you cause the inflation of many smallish cavities in his feet. When these cavities are inflated, he is in pain. And the
effects of his pain are fitting: his thought and activity are disrupted, he groans and
writhes, he is strongly motivated to stop you from pinching him and to see to it
that you never do again. In short, he feels pain but lacks the bodily states that
either are pain or else accompany it in us.
There might be such a Martian; this opinion too seems pretty firm. A credible
theory of mind had better not deny the possibility of Martian pain. I needn't mind
conceding that perhaps the Martian is not in pain in quite the same sense that we
Earthlings are, but there had better be some straightforward sense in which he and
we are both in pain.

II
A credible theory of mind needs to make a place both for mad pain and for Martian
pain. Prima facie, it seems hard for a materialist theory to pass this two-fold test.
As philosophers, we would like to characterize pain a priori. (We might settle for
less, but let's start by asking for all we want.) As materialists, we want to characterize pain as a physical phenomenon. We can speak of the place of pain in the
causal network from stimuli to inner states to behavior. And we can speak of the
physical processes that go on when there is pain and that take their place in that
causal network. We seem to have no other resources but these. But the lesson of
mad pain is that pain is associated only contingently with its causal role, while the
lesson of Martian pain is that pain is connected only contingently with its physical
realization. How can we characterize pain a priori in terms of causal role and physical realization, and yet respect both kinds of contingency?
A simple identity theory straightforwardly solves the problem of mad pain. It
goes just as straightforwardly wrong about Martian pain. A simple behaviorism or
functionalism goes the other way: right about the Martian, wrong about the madman. The theories that fail our twofold test so decisively are altogether too simple.
(Perhaps they are too simple ever to have had adherents.) It seems that a theory
that can pass our test will have to be a mixed theory. It will have to be able to tell
us that the madman and the Martian are both in pain, but for different reasons:
the madman because he is in the right physical state, the Martian because he is in
a state rightly situated in the causal network.
Certainly we can cook up a mixed theory. Here's an easy recipe: First, find a

124

Philosophy of Mind

theory to take care of the common man and the madman, disregarding the Martian—presumably an identity theory. Second, find a theory to take care of the common man and the Martian, disregarding the madman—presumably some sort of
behaviorism or functionalism. Then disjoin the two: say that to be in pain is to be
in pain either according to the first theory or according to the second. Alternatively,
claim ambiguity: say that to be in pain in one sense is to be in pain according to
the first theory, to be in pain in another sense is to be in pain according to the
second theory.
This strategy seems desperate. One wonders why we should have a disjunctive
or ambiguous concept of pain, if common men who suffer pain are always in pain
according to both disjuncts or both disambiguations. It detracts from the credibility
of a theory that it posits a useless complexity in our concept of pain—useless in
application to the common man, at least, and therefore useless almost always.
I don't object to the strategy of claiming ambiguity. As you'll see, I shall defend
a version of it. But it's not plausible to cook up an ambiguity ad hoc to account
for the compossibility of mad pain and Martian pain. It would be better to find a
widespread sort of ambiguity, a sort we would believe in no matter what we
thought about pain, and show that it will solve our problem. That is my plan.

Ill
A dozen years or so ago, D. M. Armstrong and I (independently) proposed a materialist theory of mind that joins claims of type-type psychophysical identity with a
behaviorist or functionalist way of characterizing mental states such as pain. 1 I
believe our theory passes the twofold test. Positing no ambiguity without independent reason, it provides natural senses in which both madman and Martian are in
pain. It wriggles through between Scylla and Charybdis.
Our view is that the concept of pain, or indeed of any other experience or mental
state, is the concept of a state that occupies a certain causal role, a state with certain
typical causes and effects. It is the concept of a state apt for being caused by certain
stimuli and apt for causing certain behavior. Or, better, of a state apt for being
caused in certain ways by stimuli plus other mental states and apt for combining
with certain other mental states to jointly cause certain behavior. It is the concept
of a member of a system of states that together more or less realize the pattern of
causal generalizations set forth in commonsense psychology. (That system may be
'D. M. Armstrong, A Materialist Theory of the Mind (London: Routledge, 1968); "The Nature of
Mind," in C. V. Borst, ed., The Mind/Brain Identity Theory (London: Macmillan, 1970), pp. 67-97;
"The Causal Theory of the Mind," Neue Heft fur Philosophic, no. 11 (Vendenhoek & Ruprecht, 1977),
pp. 82-95. David Lewis, "An Argument for the Identity Theory," in this volume; review of Art,
Mind, and Religion, Journal of Philosophy 66 (1969): 22-27', particularly pp. 23-25; "Psychophysical
and Theoretical Identifications," Australasian Journal of Philosophy 50 (1972): 249-58; "Radical
Interpretation," in this volume.

Mad Pain and Martian Pain

125

characterized as a whole and its members characterized afterward by reference to
their place in it.)
If the concept of pain is the concept of a state that occupies a certain causal role,
then whatever state does occupy that role is pain. If the state of having neurons
hooked up in a certain way and firing in a certain pattern is the state properly apt
for causing and being caused, as we materialists think, then that neural state is
pain. But the concept of pain is not the concept of that neural state. ("The concept
of . . ." is an intensional functor.) The concept of pain, unlike the concept of that
neural state which in fact is pain, would have applied to some different state if the
relevant causal relations had been different. Pain might have not been pain. The
occupant of the role might have not occupied it. Some other state might have
occupied it instead. Something that is not pain might have been pain.
This is not to say, of course, that it might have been that pain was not pain and
nonpain was pain; that is, that it might have been that the occupant of the role
did not occupy it and some nonoccupant did. Compare: "The winner might have
lost" (true) versus "It might have been that the winner lost" (false). No wording
is entirely unambiguous, but I trust my meaning is clear.
In short, the concept of pain as Armstrong and I understand it is a nonrigid
concept. Likewise the word "pain" is a nonrigid designator. It is a contingent matter what state the concept and the word apply to. It depends on what causes what.
The same goes for the rest of our concepts and ordinary names of mental states.
Some need hear no more. The notion that mental concepts and names are nonrigid, wherefore what is pain might not have been, seems to them just self-evidently
false.2 I cannot tell why they think so. Bracketing my own theoretical commitments, I think I would have no opinion one way or the other. It's not that I don't
care about shaping theory to respect naive opinion as well as can be, but in this
case I have no naive opinion to respect. If I am not speaking to your condition, so
be it.
If pain is identical to a certain neural state, the identity is contingent. Whether
it holds is one of the things that varies from one possible world to another. But
take care. I do not say that here we have two states, pain and some neural state,
that are contingently identical, identical at this world but different at another. Since
I'm serious about the identity, we have not two states but one. This one state, this
neural state which is pain, is not contingently identical to itself. It does not differ
from itself at any world. Nothing does.3 What's true is, rather, that the concept
and name of pain contingently apply to some neural state at this world, but do not
2

For instance, see Saul A. Kripke, "Naming and Necessity," in Gilbert Harman and Donald Davidson,
eds., Semantics of Natural Language (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1972), pp. 253-355, 763-69, particularly
pp. 335-36. Note that the sort of identity theory that Kripke opposes by argument, rather than by
appeal to self-evidence, is not the sort that Armstrong and I propose.
3
The closest we can come is to have something at one world with twin counterparts at another. See my
"Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic," in this volume. That possibility is irrelevant to
the present case.

126

Philosophy of Mind

apply to it at another. Similarly, it is a contingent truth that Bruce is our cat, but
it's wrong to say that Bruce and our cat are contingently identical. Our cat Bruce
is necessarily self-identical. What is contingent is that the nonrigid concept of being
our cat applies to Bruce rather than to some other cat, or none.

IV
Nonrigidity might begin at home. All actualities are possibilities, so the variety of
possibilities includes the variety of actualities. Though some possibilities are thoroughly otherworldly, others may be found on planets within range of our telescopes. One such planet is Mars.
If a nonrigid concept or name applies to different states in different possible
cases, it should be no surprise if it also applies to different states in different actual
cases. Nonrigidity is to logical space as other relativities are to ordinary space. If
the word "pain" designates one state at our actual world and another at a possible
world where our counterparts have a different internal structure, then also it may
designate one state on Earth and another on Mars. Or, better, since Martians may
come here and we may go to Mars, it may designate one state for Earthlings and
another for Martians.
We may say that some state occupies a causal role for a population. We may say
this whether the population is situated entirely at our actual world, or partly at our
actual world and partly at other worlds, or entirely at other worlds. If the concept
of pain is the concept of a state that occupies that role, then we may say that a
state is pain for a population. Then we may say that a certain pattern of firing of
neurons is pain for the population of actual Earthlings and some but not all of our
otherworldly counterparts, whereas the inflation of certain cavities in the feet is pain
for the population of actual Martians and some of their otherworldly counterparts.
Human pain is the state that occupies the role of pain for humans. Martian pain
is the state that occupies the same role for Martians.
A state occupies a causal role for a population, and the concept of occupant of
that role applies to it, if and only if, with few exceptions, whenever a member of
that population is in that state, his being in that state has the sort of causes and
effects given by the role.
The thing to say about Martian pain is that the Martian is in pain because he is
in a state that occupies the causal role of pain for Martians, whereas we are in pain
because we are in a state that occupies the role of pain for us.

V
Now, what of the madman? He is in pain, but he is not in a state that occupies
the causal role of pain for him. He is in a state that occupies that role for most of

Mad Pain and Martian Pain

127

us, but he is an exception. The causal role of a pattern of firing of neurons depends
on one's circuit diagram, and he is hooked up wrong.
His state does not occupy the role of pain for a population comprising himself
and his fellow madmen. But it does occupy that role for a more salient population—mankind at large. He is a man, albeit an exceptional one, and a member of
that larger population.
We have allowed for exceptions. I spoke of the definitive syndrome of typical
causes and effects. Armstrong spoke of a state apt for having certain causes and
effects; that does not mean that it has them invariably. Again, I spoke of a system
of states that comes near to realizing commonsense psychology. A state may therefore occupy a role for mankind even if it does not at all occupy that role for some
mad minority of mankind.
The thing to say about mad pain is that the madman is in pain because he is in
the state that occupies the causal role of pain for the population comprising all
mankind. He is an exceptional member of that population. The state that occupies
the role for the population does not occupy it for him.

VI
We may say that X is in pain simpliciter if and only if X is in the state that
occupies the causal role of pain for the appropriate population. But what is the
appropriate population? Perhaps (1) it should be us; after all, it's our concept and
our word. On the other hand, if it's X we're talking about, perhaps (2) it should
be a population that X himself belongs to, and (3) it should preferably be one in
which X is not exceptional. Either way, (4) an appropriate population should be a
natural kind—a species, perhaps.
If X is you or I—human and unexceptional—all four considerations pull
together. The appropriate population consists of mankind as it actually is, extending into other worlds only to an extent that does not make the actual majority
exceptional.
Since the four criteria agree in the case of the common man, which is the case
we usually have in mind, there is no reason why we should have made up our
minds about their relative importance in cases of conflict. It should be no surprise
if ambiguity and uncertainty arise in such cases. Still, some cases do seem reasonably clear.
If X is our Martian, we are inclined to say that he is in pain when the cavities
in his feet are inflated; and so says the theory, provided that criterion (1) is outweighed by the other three, so that the appropriate population is taken to be the
species of Martians to which X belongs.
If X is our madman, we are inclined to say that he is in pain when he is in the
state that occupies the role of pain for the rest of us; and so says the theory, provided that criterion (3) is outweighed by the other three, so that the appropriate
population is taken to be mankind.

128

Philosophy of Mind

We might also consider the case of a mad Martian, related to other Martians as
the madman is to the rest of us. If X is a mad Martian, I would be inclined to say
that he in pain when the cavities in his feet are inflated; and so says our theory
provided that criteria (2) and (4) together outweigh either (1) or (3) by itself.
Other cases are less clear-cut. Since the balance is less definitely in favor of one
population or another, we may perceive the relativity to population by feeling genuinely undecided. Suppose the state that plays the role of pain for us plays instead
the role of thirst for a certain small subpopulation of mankind, and vice versa.
When one of them has the state that is pain for us and thirst for him, there may
be genuine and irresolvable indecision about whether to call him pained or
thirsty—that is, whether to think of him as a madman or as a Martian. Criterion
(1) suggests calling his state pain and regarding him as an exception; criteria (2)
and (3) suggest shifting to a subpopulation and calling his state thirst. Criterion
(4) could go either way, since mankind and the exceptional subpopulation may
both be natural kinds. (Perhaps it is relevant to ask whether membership in the
subpopulation is hereditary.)
The interchange of pain and thirst parallels the traditional problem of inverted
spectra. I have suggested that there is no determinate fact of the mattet about
whether the victim of interchange undergoes pain or thirst. I think this conclusion
accords well with the fact that there seems to be no persuasive solution one way or
the other to the old problem of inverted spectra. I would say that there is a good
sense in which the alleged victim of inverted spectra sees red when he looks at
grass: he is in a state that occupies the role of seeing red for mankind in general.
And there is an equally good sense in which he sees green: he is in a state that
occupies the role of seeing green for him, and for a small subpopulation of which
he is an unexceptional member and which has some claim to be regarded as a
natural kind. You are right to say either, though not in the same breath. Need
more be said?
To sum up. Armstrong and I claim to give a schema that, if filled in, would
characterize pain and other states a priori. If the causal facts are right, then also we
characterize pain as a physical phenomenon. By allowing for exceptional members
of a population, we associate pain only contingently with its causal role. Therefore
we do not deny the possibility of mad pain, provided there is not too much of it.
By allowing for variation from one population to another (actual or merely possible) we associate pain only contingently with its physical realization. Therefore we
do not deny the possibility of Martian pain. If different ways of filling in the relativity to population may be said to yield different senses of the word "pain," then
we plead ambiguity. The madman is in pain in one sense, or relative to one population. The Martian is in pain in another sense, or relative to another population.
(So is the mad Martian.)
But we do not posit ambiguity ad hoc. The requisite flexibility is explained
simply by supposing that we have not bothered to make up our minds about
semantic niceties that would make no difference to any commonplace case. The

Mad Pain and Martian Pain

129

ambiguity that arises in cases of inverted spectra and the like is simply one instance
of a commonplace kind of ambiguity—a kind that may arise whenever we have
tacit relativity and criteria of selection that sometimes fail to choose a definite relatum. It is the same kind of ambiguity that arises if someone speaks of relevant
studies without making clear whether he means relevance to current affairs, to spiritual well-being, to understanding, or what.

VII

We have a place for commonplace pain, mad pain, Martian pain, and even mad
Martian pain. But one case remains problematic. What about pain in a being who
is mad, alien, and unique? Have we made a place for that? It seems not. Since he
is mad, we may suppose that his alleged state of pain does not occupy the proper
causal role for him. Since he is alien, we may also suppose that it does not occupy
the proper role for us. And since he is unique, it does not occupy the proper role
for others of his species. What is left?
(One thing that might be left is the population consisting of him and his unactualized counterparts at other worlds. If he went mad as a result of some improbable accident, perhaps we can say that he is in pain because he is in the state that
occupies the role for most of his alternative possible selves; the state that would
have occupied the role for him if he had developed in a more probable way. To
make the problem as hard as possible, I must suppose that this solution is unavailable. He did not narrowly escape being so constituted that his present state would
have occupied the role of pain.)
I think we cannot and need not solve this problem. Our only recourse is to deny
that the case is possible. To stipulate that the being in this example is in pain was
illegitimate. That seems credible enough. Admittedly, I might have thought offhand that the case was possible. No wonder; it merely combines elements of other
cases that are possible. But I am willing to change my mind. Unlike my opinions
about the possibility of mad pain and Martian pain, my naive opinions about this
case are not firm enough to carry much weight.

VIII
Finally, I would like to try to preempt an objection. I can hear it said that I have
been strangely silent about the very center of my topic. What is it like to be the
madman, the Martian, the mad Martian, the victim of interchange of pain and
thirst, or the being who is mad, alien, and unique? What is the phenomenal character of his state? If it feels to him like pain, then it is pain, whatever its causal
role or physical nature. If not, it isn't. It's that simple!
Yes. It would indeed be a mistake to consider whether a state is pain while

130

Philosophy of Mind

ignoring what it is like to have it. Fortunately, I have not made that mistake.
Indeed, it is an impossible mistake to make. It is like the impossible mistake of
considering whether a number is composite while ignoring the question of what
factors it has.
Pain is a feeling.4 Surely that is uncontroversial. To have pain and to feel pain
are one and the same. For a state to be pain and for it to feel painful are likewise
one and the same. A theory of what it is for a state to be pain is inescapably a
theory of what it is like to be in that state, of how that state feels, of the phenomenal character of that state. Far from ignoring questions of how states feel in the
odd cases we have been considering, I have been discussing nothing else! Only if
you believe on independent grounds that considerations of causal role and physical
realization have no bearing on whether a state is pain should you say that they have
no bearing on how that state feels.

Postscript to

"Mad Pain
and
Martian Pain"
KNOWING WHAT IT'S LIKE
The most formidable challenge to any sort of materialism and functionalism comes
from the friend of phenomenal qualia. He says we leave out the phenomenal aspect
of mental life: we forget that pain is a feeling, that there is something it is like to
hold one's hand in a flame, that we are aware of something when we suffer pain,
that we can recognize that something when it comes again. . . . So far, our proper
reply is the one sketched in Section VIII: we deny none of that! We say to the
friend of qualia that, beneath his tendentious jargon, he is just talking about pain
and various aspects of its functional role. We have already said what we take pain
to be; and we do not doubt that part of its causal role is to give rise to judgments
that one is in pain, and part is to enable one to recognize pain (the same realizer
of the same role) when it comes again.
"Occurrcnt pain, that is. Maybe a disposition that sometimes but not always causes occurrent pain might
also be called "pain."

Mad Pain and Martian Pain

131

So far, so good. But if he persists, the friend of qualia can succeed in escaping
our unwelcome agreement; and when he does, we must reverse our strategy. Suppose he makes his case as follows.1
You have not tasted Vegemite (a celebrated yeast-based condiment). So you
do not know what it is like to taste Vegemite. And you never will, unless you
taste Vegemite. (Or unless the same experience, or counterfeit traces of it, are
somehow produced in you by artificial means.) No amount of the information
whereof materialists and functionalists speak will help you at all. But if you
taste Vegemite, then you will know what it is like. So you will have gained
a sort of information that the materialists and functionalists overlook entirely.
Call this phenomenal information. By qualia I mean the special subject matter
of this phenomenal information.
Now we must turn eliminative. We dare not grant that there is a sort of information we overlook; or, in other words, that there are possibilities exactly alike in
the respects we know of, yet different in some other way. That would be defeat.
Neither can we credibly claim that lessons in physics, physiology, . . . could teach
the inexperienced what it is like to taste Vegemite. Our proper answer, I think, is
that knowing what it's like is not the possession of information at all. It isn't the
elimination of any hitherto open possibilities. Rather, knowing what it's like is the
possession of abilities: abilities to recognize, abilities to imagine, abilities to predict
one's behavior by means of imaginative experiments. (Someone who knows what
it's like to taste Vegemite can easily and reliably predict whether he would eat a
second helping of Vegemite ice cream.) Lessons cannot impart these abilities—who
would have thought that they could? There is a state of knowing what it's like,
sure enough. And Vegemite has a special power to produce that state. But phenomenal information and its special subject matter do not exist.2
Imagine a smart data bank. It can be told things, it can store the information it
is given, it can reason with it, it can answer questions on the basis of its stored
information. Now imagine a pattern-recognizing device that works as follows.
When exposed to a pattern it makes a sort of template, which it then applied to
patterns presented to it in future. Now imagine one device with both faculties,

'This is the "knowledge argument" of Frank Jackson, "Epiphenomenal Qualia," Philosophical Quarterly 32 (1982): 127-36. It appears also, in less purified form, in Thomas Nagel, "What Is It Like
To Be a Bat?" Philosophical Review 83 (1974): 435-50, and in Paul Meehl, "The Compleat
Autocerebroscopist," in Paul Feyerabend and Grover Maxwell, eds., Mind, Matter, and Method: Essays
in Philosophy and Science in Honor of Herbert Feigl (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1966).
2
This defense against the knowledge argument is presented in detail in Laurence Nemirow, Functionalum and the Subjective Quality of Experience (Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford University, 1979), chapter
2; and more briefly in his review of Thomas Nagel's Mortal Question-!, Philosophical Review 89 (1980):
473-77.

132

Philosophy of Mind

rather like a clock radio. There is no reason to think that any such device must
have a third faculty: a faculty of making templates for patterns it has never been
exposed to, using its stored information about these patterns. If it has a full description about a pattern but no template for it, it lacks an ability but it doesn't lack
information. (Rather, it lacks information in usable form.) When it is shown the
pattern it makes a template and gains abilities, but it gains no information. We
might be rather like that.

TEN

Attitudes De Dicto
and De Se

i
If I hear the patter of little feet around the house, I expect Bruce. What I expect
is a cat, a particular cat. If I heard such a patter in another house, I might expect
a cat but no particular cat. What I expect then seems to be a Meinongian incomplete cat. I expect winter, expect stormy weather, expect to shovel snow, expect
fatigue—a season, a phenomenon, an activity, a state. I expect that someday mankind will inhabit at least five planets. This time what I expect is a state of affairs.
If we let surface grammar be our guide, the objects of expectation seem quite a
miscellany. The same goes for belief, since expectation is one kind of belief. The
same goes for desire: I could want Bruce, want a cat but no particular cat, want
winter, want stormy weather, want to shovel snow, want fatigue, or want that
someday mankind will inhabit at least five planets. The same goes for other attitudes to the extent that they consist partly of beliefs or desires or lacks thereof.
But the seeming diversity of objects might be an illusion. Perhaps the objects of
attitudes are uniform in category, and it is our ways of speaking elliptically about
these uniform objects that are diverse. That indeed is our consensus. We mostly
think that the attitudes uniformly have propositions as their objects. That is why
we speak habitually of "prepositional attitudes."
When I hear a patter and expect Bruce, for instance, there may or may not be
some legitimate sense in which Bruce the cat is an object of my attitude. But, be
that as it may, according to received opinion my expectation has a prepositional
133

134

Philosophy of Mind

object. It is directed upon a proposition to the effect that Bruce is about to turn
up. If instead I expect a cat but no particular cat, then the object of my expectation
is a different proposition to the effect that some cat or other is about to turn up.
Likewise for our other examples.
The case of expecting a cat shows one advantage of our policy of uniformly
assigning prepositional objects. If we do not need a Meinongian incomplete cat as
object of this attitude, then we dodge the problem of saying what manner of strange
cat that might be. That problem (and others like it) may be worth dodging, even
if not beyond hope of solution.
There is a second advantage. When we assign a propositional object rather than,
say, a Meinongian incomplete cat, we characterize the attitude more fully. If I want
a cat, most likely what I want is that I enjoy the company of some cat. But my
want might involve some other relationship; for instance, I might want that I be
the legal owner of some cat. Saying just that I want a cat leaves it unclear which
of these wants I have. Assigning a propositional object makes it clear.
(There is a genuinely unspecific want, namely wanting that I either own or enjoy
the company of some cat. But to say that I want a cat is not to ascribe this unspecific
want; it is to ascribe an underspecified want which may be this one, but more likely
isn't.)
The third advantage is most important. Our attitudes fit into a causal network.
In combination, they cause much of our behavior; they are caused in part by the
stimuli we receive from our surroundings and in part by one another. In attempting
to systematize what we know about the causal roles of attitudes, we find it necessary
to refer to the logical relations among the objects of the attitudes. Those relations
will be hard to describe if the assigned objects are miscellaneous. Uniform propositional objects, on the other hand, facilitate systematic common-sense psychology.
I fully support the policy of assigning objects of uniform category. But I think
we have not chosen the right category. Rather than standardizing on propositions, I
think we should standardize on properties. I want to make a case for two theses.
(1) When propositional objects will do, property objects also will do. (2) Sometimes property objects will do and propositional objects won't.

II

The general agreement that the objects of the attitudes are propositions is to some
extent phony. Not everyone means the same thing by the word "proposition." I
mean a set of possible worlds, a region of logical space. Others mean something
more like a sentence, something with indexicality and syntactic structure but taken
in abstraction from any particular language. Such a thing might be regarded as a
sentential meaning. 1 My target in this paper is the view, until recently my own,
'As in my "General Semantics," in this volume.

Attitudes DC Dicto and De Sc

135

that the objects of attitudes are propositions in the sense of sets of worlds. I need
not quarrel with the view that they are propositions in some other sense.
You may think it goes without saying that the objects of attitudes are not sets
of worlds because, for instance, believing that 2 4- 2 = 4 is not the same as
believing that 123 + 456 = 579 though both equations hold at exactly the same
worlds—namely, all. I know perfectly well that there is such a thing as ignorance
of noncontingent matters. I do not know what is the proper treatment of such
ignorance; several very different strategies have been proposed. They depart to different degrees, and in different directions, from the assignment of sets of possible
worlds as prepositional objects. My hunch is that this problem cuts across the issues
I want to discuss, so I shall ignore it. If you wish, you may take it that I hope to
cast some indirect light on our own attitudes by talking about the attitudes of
imaginary hyper-rational creatures.
The word "property" also is used in many senses. I mean a set: the set of exactly
those possible beings, actual or not, that have the property in question. That means
that I shall confine myself to properties that things have or lack simpliciter. For
instance I shall not speak of a property that a road has in some counties but not in
others, or of a property that a person has at some times of his life but not at others;
instead I shall speak of properties that segments of the road or the person simply
have or lack. Apart from that, I am using the word "property" broadly. I do not
limit myself to natural properties, as opposed to gruesome gerrymanders. Nor do
I limit myself to intrinsic properties like size or shape; I include also properties
that things have in virtue of their relations to other things. Thus I include the
property of being taller than any Swede ever was or ever will be; the property of
inhabiting a country where the 7'Yt" gauge once flourished; and even the property
of inhabiting a possible world where someday mankind will inhabit at least five
planets.
More generally: to any set of worlds whatever, there corresponds the property of
inhabiting some world in that set. In other words, to any proposition there corresponds the property of inhabiting some world where that proposition holds. These
properties that correspond to propositions may not be intrinsic properties, but they
count as properties in the broader sense I have in mind.
Note that if a property corresponds to any proposition, it corresponds to exactly
one. Else the property of inhabiting some world where X holds would be the property of inhabiting some world where Y holds, for two propositions X and Y. Since
X and Fare two, there is a world where one holds but not both; then an inhabitant
of that world both has and lacks the property, which is impossible. (I take it that
the world in question is inhabited, on the grounds that every world is a part (an
improper part), and hence an inhabitant, of itself.)
Now I am ready to defend my first thesis: when prepositional objects of attitudes
will do, property objects also will do. Since I construe properties broadly, this thesis
is not very bold. We have a one-one correspondence between all propositions and
some properties. Whenever it would be right to assign a proposition as the object

736

Philosophy of Mind

of an attitude, I shall simply assign the corresponding property. Since the correspondence is one-one, no information is lost and no surplus information is added.
The attitude is equally well characterized either way. And since it is easy to go back
and forth, there can be no significant difference in convenience.
The exercise would be pointless if we stopped here. It gets its point from my
second thesis: sometimes property objects will do and prepositional objects won't.
Remember that our correspondence runs from all propositions to only some properties: if a property belongs to some but not all inhabitants of some world, it corresponds to no proposition and cannot replace a prepositional object. But once we
switch from prepositional objects to the corresponding properties, then the way is
open for expansion. We can include other properties also as objects for attitudes,
without losing the categorial uniformity of objects. It remains to be shown that
such an expansion serves any purpose.

Ill
First I hope to persuade you that there is an arbitrary restriction built into the view
that the objects of attitudes are sets of worlds. Consider the subjects of attitudes.
These are spread out. Some are here, some are in New Zealand. But not only are
they spread out through space; also they are spread out through time. Some live
now, others live in the 14th century. Admittedly, when we quantify over them we
often omit all but our contemporaries. But that is a restriction we can drop at will,
as when we say that few of the great philosophers are now alive.
But not only are the subjects of attitudes spread out through time and space;
also they are spread out through logical space. Some live here at our actual world,
others live at other possible worlds. Admittedly, when we quantify over them we
often omit all but our worldmates. But that again is a restriction we can drop at
will. 2
I shall assume that each subject of attitudes inhabits only one world. He may
have counterparts to stand in for him at other worlds, related to him by bonds of
similarity, but he himself is not there.3 I need not quarrel, here, with those who
say that Adam is a vast aggregate, partly in each of many worlds. But this vast
2

I can. Some say they can't. They say their understanding is limited to what can be expressed by modalities and world-restricted quantifiers. I have no help to offer these unfortunates, since it is known that
the expressive power of a language that quantifies actoss worlds outruns that of the sort of language
they understand. See, for instance, Allen Hazen, "Expressive Completeness in Modal Language," Journal of Philosophical Logic 5 (1976): 25-46. His examples of theses inexpressible by modalities and
world-restricted quantifiers alone are notable for their seeming intelligibility.
3
See my "Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic" and "Counterparts of Persons and Their
Bodies," both in this volume; and section 1.9 of Counter/actuals (Oxford: Blackweil, 1973).

Attitudes De Dicto and De Se

137

Adam—if we may call him chat—consists of many causally isolated parts each
with attitudes of its own. The vast Adam is surely not a single subject of attitudes.
So, putting aside our occasional indulgences in tacitly restricted quantification,
we have an enormous population spread out through space, through time, and
through the worlds. That sets the stage. Now, what happens when one member of
this scattered population has a prepositional attitude, rightly so called? Take belief.
What happens when he believes a proposition, say the proposition that cyanoacrylate glue dissolves in acetone?
Answer: he locates himself in a region of logical space. There are worlds where
cyanoacrylate dissolves in acetone and worlds where it doesn't. He has a belief
about himself: namely, that he inhabits one of the worlds where it does. Thereby
he ascribes to himself the property of inhabiting one of the worlds included in the
set which is the proposition that cyanoacrylate dissolves in acetone. This property
that he self-ascribes is exactly the property that corresponds to the proposition that
cyanoacrylate dissolves in acetone.
So it is in general. To believe a proposition is to self-ascribe the corresponding
property. The property that corresponds to a proposition is a locational property:
it is the property that belongs to all and only the inhabitants of a certain region of
logical space.
We could just as well think of it a little differently. A proposition divides the
populace. Some are privileged to inhabit worlds where cyanoacrylate dissolves in
acetone, others are not. (I seem to be one of the unlucky ones.) Someone who
believes a proposition, and thereby locates himself in logical space, also places himself within the divided population. He has a partial opinion as to who he is: he is
one of this class, not one ot that class. To believe a proposition is to identify oneself
as a member of a subpopulation comprising the inhabitants of the region of logical
space where the proposition holds. Note that the boundaries of such a subpopulation follow the borders between world and world. Either all the inhabitants of a
world belong, or none do. To place oneself in such a subpopulation is to self-ascribe
the property that distinguishes it from the rest of the population. And that, of
course, is the property that corresponds to the believed proposition. It comes to the
same in the end.
If you are willing to view our topic from the modal realist perspective just set
forth, you will see why there is something arbitrary about taking the objects of
belief always as sets of worlds. We are scattered not only through logical space, but
also through ordinary time and space. We can have beliefs whereby we locate ourselves in logical space. Why not also beliefs whereby we locate ourselves in ordinary
time and space? We can self-ascribe properties of the sort that correspond to propositions. Why not also properties of the sort that don't correspond to propositions?
We can identify ourselves as members of subpopulations whose boundaries follow
the borders of the worlds. Why not also as members of subpopulations whose
boundaries don't follow the borders of the worlds?

138

Philosophy of Mind

IV
Why not? No reason! We can and we do have beliefs whereby we locate ourselves
in ordinary time and space; whereby we self-ascribe properties that don't correspond to propositions; and whereby we identify ourselves as members of subpopulations whose boundaries don't follow the borders of the worlds. These beliefs are
attitudes whose objects might better be taken as self-ascribed properties than as
believed-true propositions, 4 They show that sometimes property objects will do and
prepositional objects won't.
Let us begin with an example of John Perry's: the case of Lingens lost in the
library. 5
An amnesiac, Rudolf Lingens, is lost in the Stanford library. He reads a number of
things in the library, including a biography of himself, and a detailed account of the
library in which he is lost. . . . He still won't know who he is, and where he is, no
matter how much knowledge he piles up, until that moment when he is ready to say,
"This place is aisle five, floor six, of Main Library, Stanford. / am Rudolf Lingens."
It seems that the Stanford library has plenty of books, but no helpful little maps
with a dot marked "location of this map." Book learning will help Lingens locate
himself in logical space. The more he reads, the more he finds out about the world
he lives in, so the fewer worlds are left where he may perhaps be living. The more
he reads, the more propositions he believes, and the more he is in a position to
self-ascribe properties of inhabiting such-and-such a kind of world. But none of
this, by itself, can guarantee that he knows where in the world he is. He needs to
locate himself not only in logical space but also in ordinary space. He needs to selfascribe the property of being in aisle five, floor six, of Main Library, Stanford; and
this is not one of the properties that corresponds to a proposition. He needs to
identify himself as a member of a subpopulation whose boundaries don't follow
the borders of the worlds—a subpopulation whose sole member at Lingen's own
world is Lingens himself.
Book learning will help, no doubt, but only because Lingens has more than book
learning. He is in a position to self-ascribe the property of being in a certain perceptual situation. This is a property that does not correspond to any proposition,
since there are worlds where some have it and others do not. Book learning may
eventually convince Lingens that he inhabits a world where exactly one person is
in that perceptual situation, and where that one is Rudolf Lingens, who is in aisle
five, floor six, of Main Library, Stanford. Then his problem is solved. But not
"Brian Loar, "The Semantics of Singular Terms," Philssofhical Studies 30 (1976): 353-77, suggests
analy/.ing certain exceptional beliefs as self-ascription of properties (or "prepositional functions"). My
suggestion is that Loar's analysis works not only in exceptional cases but in general, thus giving us a
uniform treatment.
^From John Perry, "Frege on Demonstratives," Philosophical Kevteu' 86 (1977): 474-97.

Attitudes De Dicto and De Se

139

because he has managed to conjure nonpropositional belief out of prepositional
belief. He relied on his perceptual belief, and that was already nonpropositional.
Nonpropositional plus prepositional belief can give more nonpropositional belief.
That is how Lingens can find out who and where in the world he is.
We can imagine a more difficult predicament. Consider the case of the two gods.
They inhabit a certain possible world, and they know exactly which world it is.
Therefore they know every proposition that is true at their world. Insofar as knowledge is a propositional attitude, they are omniscient. Still I can imagine them to
suffer ignorance: neither one knows which of the two he is. They are not exactly
alike. One lives on top of the tallest mountain and throws down manna; the other
lives on top of the coldest mountain and throws down thunderbolts. Neither one
knows whether he lives on the tallest mountain or on the coldest mountain; nor
whether he throws manna or thunderbolts.
Surely their predicament is possible. (The trouble might perhaps be that they
have an equally perfect view of every part of their world, and hence cannot identify
the perspectives from which they view it.) But if it is possible to lack knowledge
and not lack any propositional knowledge, then the lacked knowledge must not be
propositional. If the gods came to know which was which, they would know more
than they do. But they wouldn't know more propositions. There are no more to
know. Rather, they would self-ascribe more of the properties they possess. One of
them, for instance, would correctly self-ascribe the property of living on the tallest
mountain. He has this property and his worldmate doesn't, so self-ascribing this
property is not a matter of knowing which is his world.
I think these examples suffice to establish my second thesis: sometimes property
objects will do and propositional objects won't. Some belief and some knowledge
cannot be understood as propositional, but can be understood as self-ascription of
properties.
When there is a propositional object, we are accustomed to speak of an attitude
de dicto. Self-ascription of properties might suitably be called belief or knowledge
de se. My thesis is that the de se subsumes the de dicto. but not vice versa. A general
account of belief or knowledge must therefore be an account of belief or knowledge
de se.
I am greatly indebted to Perry (op. cit.) and he in turn acknowledges a debt to
several papers by Hector-Neri Castaneda.6 Castaneda argues that the "he" (or "he
himself") that appears for instance in "The editor of Sou! knows that he is a millionaire" is ineliminable. As I would put it, this typical attribution of knowledge
de se is not equivalent to any attribution of knowledge de dicto. To support this
claim, we need only find a case in which the editor knows well enough which of
6

The first is "'He': A Study in the Logic of Self-Consciousness," Ratio 8 (1966): 130-57. The best
introduction is "On the Logic of Attributions of Self-Knowledge to Others," Journal of Philosophy 65
(1968): 439-56. Similar arguments are found also in Peter Geach "On Beliefs about Oneself," Analysis 18 (1957): 23-24; and in Arthur N. Prior, "On Spurious Egocentricity," Philosophy 42 (1967):
326-35.

140

Philosophy of Mind

the worlds is his without knowing whether he is among the millionaires of his
world: suppose, for instance, that the god on the tallest mountain is the editor of
Soul, and is a millionaire, but that the god on the coldest mountain is not a millionaire. Castaneda concerns himself with the logic of knowledge de se; Perry and
I are concerned instead with the problem of rinding appropriate objects for such
knowledge.
Perry distinguishes believing Fregean thoughts from what he calls "self-locating
belief." The former is belief de die to, near enough. (Perry is not committed to any
analysis of Fregean thoughts in terms of worlds; and he might wish to endow them
with something like syntactic structure, and thereby to distinguish between equivalent thoughts.) The latter is what I call belief irreducibly de se, exemplified by
that which Lingens can't get from books. I reject Perry's terminology: I say that all
belief is "self-locating belief." Belief de dicto is self-locating belief with respect to
logical space; belief irreducibly de se is self-locating belief at least partly with
respect to ordinary time and space, or with respect to the population. I propose
that any kind of self-locating belief should be understood as self-ascription of properties. Perry has a different proposal, which we shall consider later.

V
Some people, called Haecceitists, 7 may find even the case of the two gods unconvincing. They might analyze that case as follows.
The gods inhabit a world W; there is another world V, which is qualitatively
just like W but which differs in that the gods have traded places. The god on
the tallest mountain in W and the god on the coldest mountain in V, though
not qualitative counterparts, are united by a primitive bond that somehow
makes them one. (Likewise for the god on the coldest mountain in W and
the god on the tallest mountain in V.) If the god on the tallest mountain in
W does not know whether he is on the tallest or the coldest mountain, he
must not really know quite which world is his. He may know everything
qualitative that there is to know about his world, but not know whether his
world is W or V. If he knew that, he would know every proposition that
holds at his world. But it seems there is one he doesn't know: the proposition
he would express if he said, in English, "I am on the tallest mountain." If
his pronoun "I" applies both to him and to his brother in Haecceity on the
coldest mountain in V, then indeed this proposition holds at W but not at
7

For discussions of Haecceitism, see David Kapian, "How To Russell a Frege-Church," Journal of
Philosophy 72 (1975): 716-29; and Robert M. Adams, "Primitive Thisness and Primitive identity,"
journal of Philosophy 76 (1979): 5-26. I do not mean to suggest, however, that Kaplan or Adams
would endorse the whole of the Haecceitist analysis here considered.

Attitudes De Dicto and De Se

141

V. If he knew this proposition, would he not know that he is on the tallest
mountain?
I would be well content to discover what I ought to believe about the objects of
the attitudes, and leave the Haecceitists to sort out their affairs for themselves. But
I can't resist the urge to meddle. Should you be a Haecceitist, I advise you to spit
out the analysis I've put into your mouth. Haecceitism or no, there is a kind of
ignorance that cannot be remedied by any amount of self-location in logical space.
Let's grant, briefly, that the world IF of the gods has its qualitative duplicate V
in which the gods have traded places. Let the god on the tallest mountain know
that his world is W, not V. Let him be omniscient about all propositions, not only
qualitative ones. How does that help? Never mind V, where he knows he doesn't
live. There are still two different mountains in W where he might, for all he knows,
be living.
What about the proposition he would express if he said "I am on the tallest
mountain"? Doesn't he know it? Of course he does—he knows all the propositions
that hold at W, and this is one of them. Doesn't he therefore know that he is on
the tallest mountain?
No. That doesn't follow. Since he is the god on the tallest mountain, his sentence
expresses a certain proposition, one true at W but not V, one that he knows to be
true. Had he been the god on the coldest mountain—as he might be, for all he
knows—his sentence would have expressed a different proposition, one true at V
but not W, one that he knows to be false. If he doesn't know which he is, he
doesn't know which proposition his sentence expresses and he doesn't know
whether his sentence expresses a truth. He knows the proposition that he would in
fact express by "I am on the tallest mountain," but that doesn't mean that he
knows whether he is on the tallest mountain.

VI
Perry (op. cit.) considers the case of the mad Heimson, who falsely believes himself
to be David Hume. The case poses two problems for those who think of belief as
a propositional attitude. Both problems vanish when we rather think of Heimson's
mad belief as the mistaken self-ascription of a property he does not possess.
The first problem is that Heimson couldn't be Hume. If he believes the proposition that holds at just those worlds where he is Hume, then he believes the empty
proposition that holds at no worlds. In the first place, there is no world where
Heimson and Hume are literally identical. Suppose there were; then from the
standpoint of that world, their difference at this world would be a difference
between Hume and Hume, which is absurd. At most they could be vicariously
identical, by having a common counterpart at some world. (Or if, as some think,
Hume and Heimson are aggregates spread over many worlds, there could be some

142

Philosophy of Mind

world such that the Hume-part and the Heimson-part that inhabit that world are
identical. But if these aggregates are unified by a counterpart relation, this is simply
a reclescnption of the vicarious identify just considered,) But in the second place,
there is not even any world where Heimson and Hume are vicariously identical.
For let me stipulate that they have precious little in common. Their origins don't
match at all, neither do their noteworthy attributes and deeds. That stops them
from having a common counterpart, under any reasonable counterpart relation, but
does not at all hinder mad Heimson from believing that he is Hume.
The proposition that Heimson is Hume, even if charitably reconstrued as a matter of vicarious identity, is the empty proposition, hence unfit to be believed.
(Admittedly, we who are not hyper-rational do seemingly believe the empty proposition in some of its guises, as when we get our sums wrong; but Heimson's
mistake seems nothing like that.) Yet Heimson does believe that he is Hume. How
can that be? I reply that the property of being Hume is a perfectly possible property. Hume actually had it. Heimson couldn't possibly have this property (not even
vicariously); but that doesn't stop him from self-ascribing it, and that is what he
does. The empty proposition doesn't enter into it.
The second problem arises when we ask why Heimson is wrong. He believes he
is Hume. Hume believed that too. Hume was right. If Hume believed he was
Hume by believing a proposition, that proposition was true. Heimson believes just
what Hume did. But Hume and Heimson are worldmates. Any proposition true
for Hume is likewise true for Heimson. So Heimson, like Hume, believes he is
Hume by believing a true proposition. So he's right. But he's not right. He's
wrong, because he believes he's Hume and he isn't.
There are two ways out. (1) Heimson does not, after all, believe what Hume
did. Or (2) Heimson does believe what Hume did, but Heimson believes falsely
what Hume believed truly.
Doubtless it is true in some sense that Heimson does not believe what Humedid. But there had better also be a central and important sense in which Heimson
and Hume believe alike. For one thing, the predicate "believes he is Hume"
applies alike to both: Heimson believes he is Hume and Hume believes he is
Hume. Do not say that I equivocate, and that what is true is only that Heimson
believes that he (Heimson) is Hume and Hume believes that he (Hume) is Hume.
Everyone believes that Hume is Hume, but not everyone believes that he—he
himself—is Hume. There is a genuine, univocal predicate, which appears for
instance in "Not everyone believes that he is Hume," and that is the predicate that
applies alike to Heimson and Hume.
What is more important, Heimson may have got his head into perfect match
with Hume's in every way that is at all relevant to what he believes. If nevertheless
Heimson and Hume do not believe alike, then beliefs ain't in the head! They
depend partly on something else, so that if your head is in a certain state and you're
Hume you believe one thing, but if your head is in that same state and you're
Heimson you believe something else. Not good. The main purpose of assigning

Attitudes De Dicto and De Sc

143

objects of attitudes is, I take it, to characterize states of the head; to specify their
causal roles with respect to behavior, stimuli, and one another. If the assignment
of objects depends partly on something besides the state of the head, it will not
serve this purpose. The states it characterizes will not be the occupants of the causal
roles.
(The New Theory of Reference teaches that meanings ain't in the head. That
may be right—it depends on which of the many sorts of semantic values that new
theorists of reference must distinguish best deserve the name "meanings." If it is
right, it applies inter alia to the sentences whereby we express our beliefs to others
and to ourselves. But the proper moral is not that beliefs ain't in the head. The
proper moral is that beliefs are ill-characterized by the meanings of the sentences
that express them. Hilary may express one of his beliefs by the sentence "Elms are
threatened by disease," although the meaning of this sentence, in some sense of
"meaning," depends on more than is in his head. But if so, then it seems that what
Hilary believes and what his sentence means cannot be quite the same.)
Mean what you will by "object of an attitude." But if you mean something that
is not determined by the state of the head, and that cannot do the job of characterizing states of the head by their causal roles, then I think you had better introduce something else that can do that job. I would prefer to reserve the term "object
of an attitude" for that something else.
If we can agree that beliefs are in the head, so that Heimson and Hume may
indeed believe alike, then the first way out is shut. We must take the second.
Heimson's belief and Hume's have the same object, but Heimson is wrong and
Hume is right. Then the object of their shared belief is not a proposition. Else it
would be a proposition that either does or doesn't hold at their common world,
making them either both right or both wrong. The solution is that the object is
not a proposition at all. It is a property: the property of being Hume. Hume selfascribes this property; he has it; he is right. Heimson, believing just what Hume
does, self-ascribes the very same property; he lacks it; he is wrong.

VII
So far, I have regarded the subjects of attitudes as ordinary people, or the like. And
people are continuants, extended through time. But some cases of belief de se can
be better understood if we take the believer not as a continuant but as a more-orless momentary time-slice thereof. Earlier I assumed that each subject of attitudes
inhabits only one world, even if, as some think, persons are extended across the
worlds. Now I make a parallel assumption with respect to extension through time.
Consider the insomniac. Tonight, as most nights, he lies awake for hours. While
he lies awake, his state of mind changes little. He does not keep track of the time.
So all through the night he wonders what time it is.
To wonder is to lack knowledge, but what relevant knowledge does he lack?

144

Philosophy of Mind

Not prepositional knowledge; he knows, well enough, what sort of world is his.
And not self-ascription of properties to his continuant self; he knows, well enough,
what locus through space and time he occupies and what his various segments are
like. He knows, for instance, that he spends the night of 13-14 February 1978
lying awake and wondering what time it is.
To understand how he wonders, we must recognize that it is time-slices of him
that do the wondering. A slice of the insomniac may locate the whole of the insomniac well enough in logical space and space and time. Yet that slice may fail to
locate itself in space, in time, and in the population of slices of the well-located
continuant insomniac. The slice at 3:49 A.M. may self-ascribe the property of being
one slice of an insomniac who lies awake all night on such-and-such date at suchand-such place at such-and-such a kind of world, and yet may fail to self-ascribe
the property of being at 3:49 A.M. That is how this slice may be ignorant, and
wonder what time it is, without failing in any relevant way to locate the continuant
to which it belongs. It is the slice, not the continuant, that fails to self-ascribe a
property.

VIII
Some say, condescendingly, that scientific knowledge of our world is all very well
in its place; but it ignores something of the utmost importance. They say there is
a kind of personal, subjective knowledge that we have or we seek, and it is altogether different from the impersonal, objective knowledge that science and scholarship can provide.
Alas, I must agree with these taunts, in letter if not in spirit. Lingens has studied
the encyclopedias long and hard. He knows full well that he needs a kind of knowledge they do not contain. Science and scholarship, being addressed to all the world,
provide knowledge of the world; and that is knowledge de ditto, which is not the
whole of knowledge de se.
But distinguo! I admit that knowledge de dicto is incomplete; but not that it is
in any way misleading or distorted by its incompleteness. A map that is incomplete
because the railways are left off is faulty indeed. By a misleading omission, it gives
a distorted representation of the countryside. But if a map is made suitable for
portable use by leaving off the "location of this map" dot, its incompleteness is
not at all misleading. It cannot be said to misrepresent or distort the countryside
at all, though indeed there is something that cannot be found out from it. A signpost that tells you where you are is none the worse for not being a clock that tells
you when you are. An encyclopedia that tells you where in logical space you are is
none the worse for being neither signpost nor clock. Knowledge de dicto is not the
whole of knowledge de se. But there is no contradiction, or conflict, or unbridgeable
gap, or even tension, between knowledge de dicto and the rest. They fit together as
nicely as you please.

Attitudes De Dicto and De Se

145

IX

My title concerns attitudes in general. Yet so far I've concentrated on belief and
knowledge (without heeding the difference between them). Now I shall argue that
my two theses hold for desire as well. When prepositional objects of desire can be
assigned, property objects also will do; but sometimes property objects will do and
prepositional objects won't. Desire de se subsumes desire de dicto, but not vice
versa.
If my theses hold for belief and knowledge and desire, then also they hold for
any attitude which amounts to lack of belief or knowledge or desire. Further, they
hold for any attitude that is at least in part a combination of suitably related beliefs
or unbeliefs, bits of knowledge or of ignorance, desires or indifferences. Now we
have a broad class indeed, and I think the generality of my title is well justified.
I'm not sure anything is left out—perhaps some ill-understood attitudes of imagining, conceiving, contemplating, or entertaining a thought.
Typical cases of desire de se are wanting to be healthy, wealthy, and wise; wanting to visit Swindon; wanting not to read admissions folders. Each of these desires
can be understood as a relation of the subject to some property he desires to possess.
Prepositional objects of desire may be traded in for the corresponding properties.
Wishing that cyanoacrylate dissolved in acetone is wishing to have the property of
inhabiting a world where it does. More often, however, we desire properties that
do not correspond to propositions. All those listed in the previous paragraph, for
instance, belong to some but not all inhabitants of our world.
But that does not yet establish that desire de se outruns desire de dicto. Is it so,
perhaps, that anyone who desires a property X thereby desires a proposition Y; and
hence also desires the property of inhabiting a world where Y holds, which need
not be the same as the original property X? To refute this conjecture, we may return
to the case of the two gods. Imagine that besides knowing exactly which world is
theirs, they see all of that world and behold, it is very good. So they want to inhabit
exactly that world, and no other. So far as wanting de dicto goes, they are as choosy
as can be. But they are not quite as choosy as can be, for neither god cares much
which of the two he is. The want they lack cannot be a prepositional want, since
they are not indifferent to any proposition. For every proposition that holds at their
world, they want it to hold; for every other proposition, they want it not to hold.
But when it comes to living on the tallest mountain and throwing down manna,
they can take it or leave it. If instead one of them did want to be the god on the
tallest mountain, then he would want more than he does. But he would not want
another proposition.
Or take lost Lingens. Doubtless he wants to find his way out. We might say
that he likes those worlds where he finds his way out and dislikes those where he
doesn't. (He or one of his counterparts, as the case may be.) But that is too simple.
There are worlds where some are lost in libraries and find their way out and others
are lost in libraries and don't. And there are some of these worlds where Lingens

146

Philosophy of Mind

is unable to locate himself either among the winners or among the losers. That is,
some worlds have winners with all the properties that Lingens self-ascribes and also
have losers with all those properties. What does Lingens think of these worlds?
Does he want to inhabit them? Yes and no—he wants to inhabit such a world as
one of its winners, but not as one of its losers. He does not like or dislike that
world as such. Rather, he likes the lot of some of its inhabitants who might for all
he knows be he, and he dislikes the lot of others. He wants a property that some
but not all of them have. His liking for certain locations in certain worlds is not
simply a liking for certain worlds. His want de se is not equivalent to any want de
dicto,
I suppose I might want to be a poached egg. (An ordinary poached egg—not
an eggy creature that walks and talks.) Would 1 then want to inhabit one of the
worlds where I am a poached egg? That's not it. I take it there are no such worlds.
No poached egg is a counterpart of mine! If the object of my want is a proposition,
it is the empty proposition. How could I want the empty proposition, in such a
guise that I recognize it for what it is? But if the object is a property, it is nonempty.
It is a property that plenty of poached eggs actually have.
As I write this, I know that next Wednesday evening I will be done with graduate admissions for the year. Afterwards I'll go home and sit down by the fire, and
I'll think "Thank goodness that's over!"8 I will be content. There is something—namely, for that to be over—that I want now and will still want then, and I will
then take it that I have what I want. What is this thing—a proposition? No. My
contented time-slice will not be especially pleased about inhabiting a world where
the chore of graduate admissions goes on at certain times and not at others. What's
good about that? After all, there are plenty of other time-slices of me whose tastes
are no different, and who also know that they inhabit such a world, but who are
most discontented because the chore is not yet over. The contented time-slice will
not be especially fortunate in its location in logical space, but rather will take
delight in its location in time. What it will want, and what it will take itself to
have, is the property of being located after the end of graduate admissions.
I note an analogy.9 The saintly crusader, who would like to live in a world
without avoidable misery, is something like the snob who would like to live in a
better part of town. Each wants a locational property. The crusader wants to be in
a nice part of logical space, whereas the snob wants to be in a nice part of ordinary
space. I trust the analogy redounds more to the credit of the snob than to the
discredit of the crusader.

8

See Arthur N. Prior's paper of that name, Philosophy 34 (1959): 12-17. Prior uses the example of
saying "Thank goodness that's over" to argue that not all we say can be expressed with a timeless
copula and dates. It doesn't mean: "Thank goodness that's over before 11 P.M., 22 February 1978." I
am echoing Prior, but in the material mode.
9
At this point I am indebted to Robert M. Adams, "Theories of Actuality," Nous 8 (1974): 211-31
and especially pp. 215-16; and to discussion with Adams.

Attitudes De Dicto and De Se

147

X

Quine once defended something very close to my present account of desire de se.M
He considers a cat, chased by a dog, who wants to get on to a roof. He considers
attitudes de dicto,
What the cat wants, then, is the state of affairs that is the class of all possible worlds
in which he is on that roof. What he fears is the class of all possible worlds in which
the dog has him.

Then he finds trouble. After discussing the familiar problem of identity across
worlds for Catiline and for the Great Pyramid, he returns to the cat.
In a possible world with many similar cats and dogs and roofs, which cat is to be he?
One of these possible worlds will have a cat like him on a roof like his, and another
cat like him in the dog's jaws; does it belong to both the desired state of affairs and
the feared one?

He therefore suggests that we take centered possible worlds—in. effect, pairs of a
world and a designated space-time point therein—and regard the wanted or feared
state of affairs as a class of centered worlds. A centered world is centered on a cat
therein if and only if the designated point is in the midst of the cat—more precisely, is the center of gravity of the cat's pineal gland. The cat wants a class of
centered worlds that are centered on a cat safely on a roof. He fears a class of
centered worlds that are centered instead on a cat in the jaws of a dog. No centered
world belongs to both classes. A problematic world with many similar cats is a
world that belongs to the wanted class under some centerings and to the feared
class under other centerings.
(Quine does not in the end adopt the theory just stated. He prefers a divided
theory, on which the objects of some "primitive" attitudes are classes of stimulation
patterns, whereas the objects of less primitive attitudes are linguistic. I protest that
the advantages of uniform objects are not to be lightly forsaken.)
A class of centered worlds corresponds to a property. Most directly it corresponds
to a property of space-time points, but also it corresponds to a property of cats. Let
X be a class of centered worlds; there corresponds to it the property of being a cat
on which some member of X is centered. Let Y be a property; there corresponds
to it the class of exactly those centered worlds that are centered on a cat having the
property Y. (Here I assume that one centered world cannot be centered on two
different cats, cats who occupy the same place at the same time. To avoid that
assumption, as perhaps we should, we might redefine centered worlds as pairs of a
world and a designated inhabitant thereof.) By centering the worlds, Quine has in
effect replaced propositions by properties as objects of the attitudes.
'""Prepositional Objects," in W. V. Quine, Ontological Relativity and Other Essays (New York: Columbia University Press, 1969).

148

Philosophy of Mind

I am not sure how far Quine's reasons are the same as mine. Insofar as he was
dealing with the problem of a world with many similar cats, our reasons are the
same. But insofar as he was trying to avoid all need for a counterpart relation, as
is suggested by his discussion of Catiline and the Great Pyramid, our reasons are
not the same. If I thought it could be done, I would be glad to rescue the doctrine
of prepositional objects by means of a counterpart relation. I would regard all that
depended on the counterpart relation as infected with vagueness, but would not
worry unduly about that.
I haven't yet mentioned one big difference between Quine's treatment and mine.
By "possible worlds" I simply mean certain big concrete particulars, of which this
world of ours is one. Quine rather means certain abstract entities—certain classes
of classes of quadruples of real numbers, as it happens. I trust that he distinguishes
the concrete world we're part of from that one of his abstract ersatz worlds that
represents it. Call that one the "actualized ersatz world" to distinguish it from the
world itself. Up to a point it makes little difference whether you believe as I do in
a multitude of concrete worlds of which ours is one, or whether instead you believe
as Quine does11 in a multitude of abstract ersatz worlds, of which one is special in
that it represents the one and only concrete world. Most analyses involving possible
worlds go through equally well either way. (Further, as has been rightly emphasized by Stalnaker (op. cit.), a view of other worlds as abstract accords better than
mine with the tendency of ordinary usage to speak of possibilities as "ways things
might have been." That phrase certainly does suggest that possibilities are
abstract.) All the same, I think that Quine's view, or any similarly moderate version
of modal realism, comes to grief in the end. The actualized ersatz world is special,
since it alone represents the one concrete world. And it is special not just from its
own standpoint, but from the standpoint of any world. So it is noncontingently
special, since contingency is variation from world to world. But it is part of the
theory that the actualized ersatz world is the special one. So it seems to turn out
to be a noncontingent matter which of the ersatz worlds is actualized. That is
wrong, and needs explaining away.

XI

I think that common-sense psychology implicitly defines the attitudes—they are
whatever states occupy the causal roles it sets forth' 2 —and I think common-sense
"And many others. Abstract ersatz worlds are ably defended, for instance, in Adams, "Theories of
Actuality," and in Robert Stalnaker, "Possible Worlds," Nous 10 (1976): 65-75. Adams, Stalnaker,
and Quine differ about the exact nature of the ersatz worlds, but all regard them as abstract entities
of some sort.
l2
See my "An Argument for the Identity Theory," in this volume; "Psychophysical and Theoretical
Identifications," Australasian journal of Philosophy 50 (1972): 249-58; and "Radical Interpretation,"
in this volume.

Attitudes De Dicto and De Se

149

psychology, systematized, should look a lot like Bayesian decision theory. Then it
is interesting to ask what happens to decision theory if we take all attitudes as de
se. Answer: very little. We replace the space of worlds by the space of centered
worlds, or by the space of all inhabitants of worlds. All else is just as before. Whatever the points of the space of possibilities may be, we have probability distributions over the space and assignments of utility values to the points. For any rational
agent at any time there is a pair of a probability distribution and a utility assignment. The probabilities change under the impact of his perception; the probabilities and utilities jointly goven his action. His degrees of belief at a time are got by
taking the total probability of regions of the space; his degrees of desirability are
got by integrating the point-by-point utilities, weighted by probability, over
regions of the space. But since the space of possibilities is no longer the space of
worlds, its regions to which degrees of belief and desirability attach are no longer
propositions. Instead they are properties.
Robert Stalnaker has argued that propositions, taken as sets of worlds, are just
the right objects of attitudes to assign if we want the assignment to be part of a
theory of rational action.13 But he was not considering the question of prepositional
versus property objects. In fact, the very considerations he gives turn out to call for
a version of decision theory based on attitudes de se. He describes the rational agent
as one who
sees various alternative possible futures with the one to become actual depending in
part on his choice of action. The function of desire is simply to divide these alternative
courses of events into the ones to be sought and the ones to be avoided, or ... to
provide an ordering or measure of the alternative possibilities with respect to their
desirability. The function of belief is simply to determine which are the relevant alternative possible situations, or ... to rank them with respect to their probability on
various conditions of becoming actual.

He goes on to argue that objects for attitudes ought to be identified if and only if
they are functionally equivalent, and are functionally equivalent if and only if they
disagree on none of the agent's alternative possible situations.
If the agent's alternative possible situations are always alternative worlds, as Stalnaker assumes, this is indeed an argument for prepositional objects. But I claim
that sometimes the agent has alternative possibilities in a single world. Consider
Lingens when he knows almost enough to get out. He has narrowed the possibilities down to two. Perhaps he is in aisle five, floor six, of Main Library, Stanford,
in which case the way out is to go downstairs. Or perhaps he is on one of the lower
floors in the stacks of Widener, in which case the thing to do is to go up. The
books tell him that there are amnesiacs lost in both places, and he has figured out
that he is one of the two. His deliberation concerns eight alternative possibilities.
''"Propositions," in Alfred MacKay and Daniel Merrill, eds., Issues in the Philosophy of Language (New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1976).

Philosophy of Mind

150

He is the Stanford amnesiac

He is the Widener amnesiac

Stanford
amnesiac
goes down

Stanford
amnesiac
goes up

Stanford
amnesiac
goes down

Widenet
amnesiac
goes down

Case 1
Good

Case 2
Bad

Case 3
Bad

Case 4
Bad

Widener
amnesiac
goes up

Case 5
Good

Case 6
Bad

Case 7
Good

Case 8
Good

Stanford
amnesiac
goes up

He must choose whether to go down, and thereby actualize one of cases 1, 3, 4, or
5, or whether to go up and actualize one of 2, 6, 7, or 8. The eight cases are spread
over only four sorts of worlds. The good case 1 and the bad case 3, for instance,
do not belong to different worlds. They are separated by about 3000 miles within
a single world. If the objects of Lingen's attitudes are to play their proper role in a
systematic account of his deliberation, they must discriminate between these two
cases. Propositions won't, properties will.

XII

I hope I've convinced you that propositions won't quite do as uniform objects for
the attitudes, and that properties will do at least somewhat better. But I haven't
tried to show that only properties will do. I presume there are workable alternatives
to my theory, as to most philosophical theories.
Some philosophers would favor sentential objects, drawn either from natural
language or from some hypothetical language of thought. Others would favor sentence meanings, entities enough like sentences to have syntactic structure and indexicality. If you are of one of these persuasions, my advice to you is by no means
new: do not limit yourself to complete, closed, nonindexical sentences or meanings.
Be prepared to use predicates, open sentences, indexical sentences, or meanings
thereof—something that can be taken to express properties rather than propositions.
Another proposal, given by Perry (op. cit.), is roughly as follows. (I shall disregard any difference there may be between properties and Perry's "incomplete Fregean senses" and I shall not use Perry's terminology.) Take belief; the cases of
knowledge, desire, and the rest would be parallel. In Perry's scheme, a belief has
two objects.

Attitudes De Dicto and De Se

151

The first object is a pair of an individual and a property. To have the belief is
to ascribe the property to the individual, and if the individual has the property
then the belief is true. (More generally we should take pairs of an »-tuple of individuals and an »-ary relation. The case of an individual-property pair is the case
n = 1, near enough; and ordinary prepositional belief could be taken as the case
n = 0. But let's keep to individual-property pairs for the sake of simplicity.)
Insofar as belief is characterized by the first object, Perry claims that beliefs ain't
in the head. Hume and Heimson are alike in the head. But the first object of
Hume's belief that he himself is Hume is the pair of Hume and the property of
being Hume, whereas the first object of Heimson's like belief is the pair of Heimson and the property of being Hume. Perry asks how can it be, if Hume and
Heimson are alike, that Hume is right and Heimson is crazy:* He takes the first
way out: despite the likeness of their heads, they don't believe the same thing. The
first object of Hume's belief is true, that of Heimson's belief is false.
Perry fully appreciates that attributions of beliefs enter into a systematic common-sense psychology, and that for this purpose beliefs had better be in the head.
Hence the second object. The second object is a function that takes the subject as
argument and delivers as value the first object, the pair of an individual and a
property ascribed to it. Characterized by second object, beliefs are in the head.
Hume and Heimson have the same second object of belief: a function that assigns
to Hume the pair of Hume and the property of being Hume, and that assigns to
Heimson the pair of Heimson and the property of being Hume. So Perry recognizes, as he should, a sense in which Hume and Heimson believe alike.
Perry's second object has a job to do, sure enough, but what about the first? It
has two jobs. It determines whether one's belief is true, as we saw. In addition, it
serves to explain agreement in belief. Suppose Heimson manages to convince his
psychiatrist that he is right, so that the psychiatrist also ascribes to Heimson the
property of being Hume. Then Heimson and his psychiatrist share a common
belief. Not in the sense in which Heimson and Hume do—the psychiatrist doesn't
believe that he himself is Hume-—but in another, equally legitimate sense. They
agree in that they share as a first object of belief the pair of Heimson and the
property of being Hume.
That is Perry's proposal. I am sure it works as well as mine, but it is more
complicated. I doubt that the extra complexity buys anything.
Perry's proposal must work at least as well as mine, because mine can be subsumed under his. Whenever I say that someone self-ascribes a property X, let Perry
say that the first object of his belief is the pair of himself and the property X. Let
Perry say also that the second object is the function that assigns to any subject Y
the pair of Y and X,
The apparent advantage of Perry's scheme is that it provides, in the most
straightforward way possible, for other-ascription as well as self-ascription of properties. Ascription of properties to individuals, in general, is called belief^? re. Perry's scheme is made for belief de re, and belief de se falls under that as a special

152

Philosophy of Mind

case. By providing for ascription of properties in general, Perry gives an account of
agreement in the ascription of properties. Heimson and his gullible psychiatrist
agree in that they both ascribe to Heimson the property of being Hume.
Certainly we need to be able to make sense of belief de re in general—of otherascription as well as self-ascription of properties. But do we need a scheme as elaborate as Perry's? I think not.
On the account I shall suggest, the subject's self-ascriptions are the whole of his
system of beliefs. Other-ascriptions of properties are not some further beliefs alongside the self-ascriptions. Beliefs are in the head; but I agree with Perry that beliefs
de re, in general, are not. Beliefs de re are not really beliefs. They are states of affairs
that obtain in virtue of the relations of the subject's beliefs to the res in question.
If I am right, Perry's scheme for representing beliefs actually represents beliefs and
more besides. As a scheme for representing beliefs, it is redundant. Given just a
few of the first objects—those that represent the subject's self-ascriptions—and
given the requisite facts not about beliefs, we have all the first and second objects
of belief. And the same goes mutatis mutandis for other attitudes, though I shall
continue to discuss only the case of belief.

XIII
Unaware that the Lord High Auditor and the Paymaster-General are the same
man, Go-To ascribes rectitude to this man under the description "Lord High Auditor" but not under the description "Paymaster-General." This familiar notion of
ascription of properties to individuals under descriptions is not yet belief de re, but
it is a step in that direction.
We needn't take the so-called descriptions as verbal, thereby limiting ourselves
to what can be expressed in some particular language. I might ascribe espionage to
a stranger under a description given by a visual image of his face. We might take
descriptions as properties, not as particular expression of properties in thought and
language, As a preliminary definition, we might say that a subject ascribes property
X to individual Y under description Z if and only if (1) Y uniquely has the property Z, and (2) the subject believes the proposition that there is something which
uniquely has property Z and also has property X. (By "uniquely" I mean
"uniquely in its world.") But this is not general enough, because it requires the
subject's belief to be prepositional. We want to be able to raise the question
whether one of our two gods ascribes to his mountain, under the description
"mountain I live on top of," the property of being the tallest mountain. The answer
should be that he does if and only if he self-ascribes the property of living on top
of the tallest mountain, and that is a matter of his nonpropositional belief de se.
So let us take relations of the subject to the described individual, such as the relation expressed by "mountain I live on top of," also as descriptions undet which
properties may be ascribed. (There is a sense in which "mountain I live on top of"

Attitudes De Dicto and De Se

153

expresses a property relative to any given subject; but also there is a sense in which
what it expresses is not relative to subject, and it expresses a relation. The latter
sense is more convenient for present purposes.) If we take relations as descriptions,
we need not consider separately the case in which the description is a property: we
can trade in such a property for a peculiar sort of relation, a relation which a subject
bears to an individual if and only if the individual has the given property.
Here is a final definition. A subject ascribes property X to individual Y under
description Z if and only if (1) the subject bears the relation Z uniquely to Y, and
(2) the subject self-ascribes the property of bearing relation Z uniquely to something which has property X.
Now for belief de re. Up to a point it is obvious what to say. To ascribe property
X to individual Y simpliciter—to believe de re of Y that Y has X—is to ascribe
X to Y under some suitable description of Y. It remains to ask what makes a
description "suitable."
Certainly not just any description is suitable. Ascribing espionage to someone
under the description "shortest spy" is notoriously not an example of belief de re."
Neither is any ascription I might make under the description "shortest of my ancestors," to take an example in which the description must be regarded as a relation.
An ascription under the description "the murderer" may or may not be an example
of belief de re, depending on how close the subject is to solving the crime in question.
It will not be possible to say precisely which relations are suitable, since it is
often quite vague whether some case should or should not count as an example of
belief de re. The vagueness is partly resolved in context, but differently in different
contexts. Still, I can at least say something about what tends to make a relation be
a suitable description.
If our topic were modality de re, the suitable descriptions would be those that
capture the essence of the thing described. It is necessary de re of individual Y that
Y has property X if and only if, for some property Z, (1) Z is the essence of Y,
and (2) the proposition that whatever has Z also has X is the necessary proposition.
(This and a definition of belief de re are not quite parallel in form; rightly not, I
think.) I have elsewhere" suggested that the essence of Y is that property which
belongs to Y and all its counterparts, and to nothing else. If so, essence is infected
with the vagueness of the counterpart relation. The balancing of respects of similarity and difference—for instance, the question whether perfect match of origins
should have decisive weight—goes differently in different contexts, and is never
'"See David Kaplan, "Quantifying In," Synlhese 19 (1968): 178-214. My account of belief de re is
broadly similar to Kaplan's. The most important difference is that Kaplan takes the subject's causal
rapport with the described individual under the description as an extra condition; whereas I take it as
part of the content of a suitable description, at least in most cases. (I am indebted at this point to
David Lumsden.)
''"Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic," in this volume. Others would define the essence
differently, or not at all.

154

Philosophy of Mind

fully determinate. That is as it should be. In veiw of our difficulty in applying it,
the concept of essence had better not turn out to be a precise concept.
The trouble with essences, as "suitable descriptions" in the analysis of belief de
re, is not that the concept of essence is imprecise. The trouble is that essences are
hard to come by. Hume's essence is an extremely rich property, rich enough to
apply to Hume alone out of all the inhabitants of this world and rich enough to
distinguish Hume's counterparts from all of his not-quite-counterparts at other
worlds. Certainly I don't know Hume's essence. I doubt that anyone does, even
the scholars who know most about Hume. I doubt that Hume did himself. Yet I
think I have beliefs de re about Hume, and I'm certain that many of his contemporaries did. If I could never have a de re belief about Y without knowing that
there is something which uniquely has Z, where Z is Vs essence under some reasonable counterpart relation, I would have scarcely any beliefs de re. (Beliefs de re
about numbers might be the most likely survivors.) And that is just what would
follow if the only "suitable descriptions" were those rich enough to capture
essences.
The psychiatrist ascribes to Heimson the property of being Hume. He would be
unlikely to do so under a description that captures Heimson's essence. Heimson's
essence is quite unlike Hume's, so it would be quite difficult to believe that there
is something that uniquely has Heimson's essence and that also has the property
of being Hume. For this reason also, it seems wrong that the only "suitable descriptions" are those that capture essences.
(A complication arises. It is plausible that ordinary proper names express
essences, so that the description "Hume" applies exactly to Hume and his counterparts under some reasonable counterpart relation. If I ascribe a property to Hume
by name, having a belief I might express by saying "Hume was noble," do I thereby
ascribe nobility to Hume under a description that captures his essence? No. As I
have noted already in sections V and VI, the sentential expression of belief is not
a straightforward matter.' 6 I may say "Hume was noble," not knowing quite which
proposition it expresses because I don't know Hume's essence. And I may thereby
express a belief, indeed a belief in virtue of which I believe de re of Hume that he
was noble. And still I do not believe that something noble uniquely has Z, where
Z is Hume's unknown essence.)
Leaving essences in abeyance, we will do well to look elsewhere for "suitable
descriptions." It will help to have a collection of examples, uncontroversial or so I
hope, of relationships in which belief de re is possible. I can have beliefs de re (1)
about my acquaintances, present or absent; (2) about contemporary public figures
prominent in the news; (3) about the famous dead who feature prominently in
history; (4) about authors whose works I have read; (5) about strangers now face
16

That is why it seems to me unfortunate that the study of the objects of belief has become entangled
with the semantic analysis of attributions of belief. I hope that in this paper I have managed to keep
the topics separate.

Attitudes De Dicto and De Se

155

to face with me; (6) about strangers I am somehow tracing, such as the driver of
the car ahead of me, or the spy I am about to catch because he has left so many
legible traces; and (7) about myself.
What have these cases in common? To put a name to it: a relation of acquaintance." To make it a little more precise: in each case, I and the one of whom I have
beliefs de re are so related that there is an extensive causal dependence of my states
upon his; and this causal dependence is of a sort apt for the reliable transmission
of information.
It is too much to require that information actually be reliably transmitted. In
every case, a lot might go wrong and I might be very badly misinformed, and yet
I could have beliefs de re—many of them wrong, perhaps—about the one to whom
I bear a relation of acquaintance.
It is not enough just to require an extensive causal dependence. My life may be
remarkably entangled with that of some stranger. I may have caught his germs
time and again. His driving may have caused traffic jams that made me late to
many important appointments. He may have caused many people to go to places
where they happened to meet me. And so on. In short, maybe my life would have
been very different but for his doings. None of this, by itself, makes it possible for
me to have beliefs de re about this stranger.
Here is my proposal. A subject ascribes property X to individual Y if and only
if the subject ascribes X to Y under some description Z such that either (1) Z
captures the essence of Y, or (2) Z is a relation of acquantance that the subject bears
to Y.
(If I have a belief that I might express by saying "Hume was noble," I probably
ascribe nobility to Hume under the description "the one I have heard of under the
name of 'Hume'." That description is a relation of acquantance that I bear to
Hume. This is the real reason why I believe de re of Hume that he was noble. The
fact that "Hume" expresses Hume's unknown essence is irrelevant.)
Seldom do we know essences; seldom do we believe de re by ascribing properties
to individuals under descriptions that capture their essences. If I did manage to
know someone's essence, probably it would be by dint of much investigation. But
in that case I would bear a relation of acquaintance to the one I had investigated.
Then I don't need his essence to have beliefs de re about him. I can ascribe properties to him under the description "target of such-and-such investigations of
mine." So it is unclear that anything is gained by providing for essence-capturing
descriptions as well as relations of acquaintance. If we have the former, we will
have the latter. (But again, beliefs de re about numbers may be an exception—how
can you be acquainted with a number?)
This has not been a very thorough study of belief de re. But I hope it is enough
"Compare Charles Chastain's discussion of "knowledge of in section 12 of "Reference and Context,"
in Language, Mind, and Knowledge (Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science 7), ed. by Keith
Gunderson, (Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press, 1975).

756

Philosophy of Mind

to make my point: other-ascriptions of properties are not further beliefs alongside
the self-ascriptions, but rather are state of affairs that obtain partly in virtue of the
subject's self-ascriptions and partly in virtue of facts not about his attitudes.

XIV

Self-ascription of properties is ascription of properties to oneself under the relation
of identity. Certainly identity is a relation of acquaintance par excellence. So belief
de se falls under belief de re.
But there are other relations of acquaintance, besides identity, that a subject may
bear to himself. So belief de re about oneself turns out to cover more than selfascription of properties. To take an example due to David Kaplan,18 watching is a
relation of acquaintance. I watch myself in reflecting glass, unaware that I am
watching myself. I ascribe to myself, under the description "the one I am watching," the property of wearing pants that are on fire. I therefore believe de re of the
one I am watching—that is, myself—that his pants are on fire. But I do not selfascribe the property of wearing pants that are on fire. Very soon I will, but not yet.
So self-ascription isn't quite the same thing as ascription, de re, to onself."

Postscripts to

"Attitudes De Die to
and De Se"
A. DE RE AND DE SE

It should have been said more clearly: the analysis of belief de re that I propose in
Section XIII is not a reduction of de re to de dicta. Rather, it is a reduction of de
re generally to de se. We are normally left with an irreducibly de se belief in the
analysans: the subject self-ascribes the property of bearing the relation Z uniquely
to something which has property X. As it might be: I self-ascribe staring at something furry (and at nothing else); I am in fact staring only at Bruce, staring is a

™ Demonstratives (unpublished manuscript).
I9
I am grateful to many people for conversations about this material; especially Paul Benacerraf, Max
Cresswell, and David Lumsden.

Attitudes De Dicto and De Se

757

suitable relation of acquaintance, and that is how I believe de re of Bruce that he
is furry.
If I am right, there can be no reduction of de re to de dicto. For such a reduction
would apply, inter alia, to the special case in which the subject ascribes a property
to himself under the relation of identity—that is, to the special case of belief de
se. But I have argued that de se is not in general reducible to de dicto.
Since belief de se is a special case of belief de re, a question arises.1 I said that
belief de se was (narrowly) psychological, whereas belief de re is only partly psychological: "Beliefs de re are not really beliefs. They are states of affairs that obtain
in virtue of the relations of the subject's beliefs to the res in question." Then is
belief de se wholly psychological, or is it not?—It is. In this exceptional case, the
nonpsychological part drops out. The nonpsychological part of de re belief generally
is that the subject bears a suitable relation uniquely to the res. But when the res is
himself and the relation is identity, this nonpsychological part reduces to the mere
necessary truth that he is identical to himself and to nothing else.

B. GRIEF FOR MODERATE MODAL REALISM?2
I suggested in Section X that the moderate modal realist has a problem about
actuality. On his view, there is one of the abstract ersatz worlds, and one only, that
is special because it is the one that represents the concrete world. This one, he says,
is actualized. Now, consider W, another of the abstract ersatz worlds. It is not
special, not the one that represents the concrete world, not actualized. But it could
have been. Surely it is a contingent matter which of the ersatz worlds is actualized,
and in particular it is possible that W be actualized. What is possible is what is
true at some world. Which world?—Presumably W itself. So the moderate realist
must be able to say: it is true at W that W is actualized, for at W, W is the ersatz
world that alone represents the concrete world.
I asked: what does this mean? There is only one concrete world, according to the
moderate realist. Ex hypothesi, W does not represent it. Then how can it be that,
at W, W does represent it?
The problem is part of a more general one. What does it mean when we say
that something that is not true simpliciter is nevertheless true at a world? For me,
truth at a world is a simple matter. It is just truth, with world-dependent linguistic
elements evaluated at the world in question. For instance—and this alone will take
us a lot of the way—quantifiers must (usually) be restricted to inhabitants of the
proper world. 3 Thus it is true at a certain world that some pigs fly iff some inhab'It was brought to my attention by Mark Johnston.
In this postscript, I am much indebted to correspondence with John G. Bennett.
See the translation scheme proposed in "Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic" (in this
volume), in particular clauses T2g-T2h, page 31.

158

Philosophy of Mind

icants of that world are pigs that fly. It is not true simplictter that some pigs fly,
since no pigs that fly inhabit this world.
If that is what truth at a world means, I do not see how it can be true at one
ersatz world and false at another that W represents the concrete world. It just does
or it just doesn't. The concrete world is not part of any ersatz world. Still less are
there supposed to be different concrete worlds to inhabit different ersatz worlds.
That was my objection.
But, as should have been clear all along, the moderate modal realist cannot and
does not think of truth at a world in the same way that I do. If he did, how could
he even agree that it is true at a certain world that pigs fly? Pigs that fly are parts
of some worlds, or so I think, but they are not parts of any ersatz worlds. (Maybe,
representations of them are parts of some ersatz worlds.) So my objection should
be in part withdrawn and in part generalized. I should ask: what does the moderate
realist mean when he says that anything is true at an ersatz world?
That was not meant as an unanswerable question. There are many answers the
moderate realist might offer. I think that all of them, except for some that don't
even get the facts of modality right, succeed only by giving up on some of the
analytic goals that modal realism was meant to serve. We are left with theories
that may help to systematize our opinions about modality, counterfactuals, truth
in a representation, . . . but that no longer offer instructive analyses.
It will suffice to consider one of all the answers that might be given: the modal
answer. The moderate realist might say that it is true at ersatz world W that <j> iff,
necessarily, if W represented the concrete world, then it would be that 4>. (Despite
the subjunctive verbs, this is to be taken simply as a strict implication—the necessitation of a truth-functional conditional.) Taking </> as "W represents the concrete
world," this answer handles my original objection with the greatest of ease. But if
it is given, then it becomes uninstructive to analyze necessity as truth at all (ersatz)
worlds!

C. POSSIBILIA POWER?
According to what I have said, our beliefs and desires consist in relations to properties. These properties are sets of possible individuals. In any realistic case, most
of these possibilia are unactualized. But we act as we do because we believe and
desire as we do. Then do our relations with unactualized possibilia enter into the
causal histories of actual events? That would never do!
No; what's true is rather this. Certain of our states, presumably brain states,
jointly cause our acts. Because of the ways they cause and get caused, we classify
them as certain beliefs and desires. We classify beliefs and desires by associating
them with "objects of attitudes"—namely, with sets consisting in part of unactualized individuals. They bear interpretations, according to such principles as are

Attitudes De Dicto and De Se

159

discussed in "Radical Interpretation" (in this volume). But they stand in relations
to unactualized possibilia because they bear interpretations, and they bear interpretations because of their causal powers—not vice versa.
You might as well worry that numbers have causal powers, since the water boils
because it reaches the centigrade temperature of 100. The answer is the same. The
state of the water is indexed by the number in virtue of its causal powers—not vice
versa.

This page intentionally left blank

PART THREE

Philosophy of Language

This page intentionally left blank

ELEVEN

Languages and Language

I. THESIS
What is a language? Something which assigns meanings to certain strings of types
of sounds or of marks. It could therefore be a function, a set of ordered pairs of
strings and meanings. The entities in the domain of the function are certain finite
sequences of types of vocal sounds, or of types of inscribable marks; if a is in the
domain of a language £, let us call a a sentence of £. The entities in the range of
the function are meanings: if a is a sentence of £, let us call £(cr) the meaning of
a in £. What could a meaning of a sentence be? Something which, when combined
with factual information about the world—or factual information about any possible world—yields a truth-value. It could therefore be a function from worlds to
truth-values—or more simply, a set of worlds. We can say that a sentence a is true
in a language £ at a world w if and only if w belongs to the set of worlds £(ff).
We can say that a is true in £ (without mentioning a world) if and only if our
actual world belongs to £(er). We can say that a is analytic in £ if and only if
every possible world belongs to £(ff). And so on, in the obvious way.

This paper was originally prepared in 1968 and was revised in 1972. The 1968 draft appears in Italian
translation as "Lingue e lingua," Versus 4 (1973): 2-21.

163

164

Philosophy of Language

II. ANTITHESIS
What is a language? A social phenomenon which is part of the natural history of
human beings; a sphere of human action, wherein people utter strings of vocal
sounds, or inscribe strings of marks, and wherein people respond by thought or
action to the sounds or marks which they observe to have been so produced.
This verbal activity is, for the most part, rational. He who produces certain
sounds or marks does so for a reason. He knows that someone else, upon hearing
his sounds or seeing his marks, is apt to form a certain belief or act in a certain
way. He wants, for some reason, to bring about that belief or action. Thus his
beliefs and desires give him a reason to produce the sounds or marks, and he does.
He who responds to the sounds or marks in a certain way also does so for a reason.
He knows how the production of sounds or marks depends upon the producer's
state of mind. When he observes the sounds or marks, he is therefore in a position
to infer something about the producer's state of mind. He can probably also infer
something about the conditions which caused that state of mind. He may merely
come to believe these conclusions, or he may act upon them in accordance with his
other beliefs and his desires.
Not only do both have reasons for thinking and acting as they do; they know
something about each other, so each is in a position to replicate the other's reasons,
Each one's replication of the other's reasons forms part of his own reason for thinking and acting as he does; and each is in a position to replicate the other's replication of his own reasons. Therefore the Gricean mechanism' operates: X intends
to bring about a response on the part of Y by getting Y to recognize that X intends
to bring about that response; Y does recognize X's intention, and is thereby given
some sort of reason to respond just as X intended him to.
Within any suitable population, various regularities can be found in this rational
verbal activity. There are regularities whereby the production of sounds or marks
depends upon various aspects of the state of mind of the producer. There are regularities whereby various aspects of responses to sounds or marks depend upon the
sounds or marks to which one is responding. Some of these regularities are accidental. Others can be explained, and different ones can be explained in very different ways.
Some of them can be explained as conventions of the population in which they
prevail. Conventions are regularities in action, or in action and belief, which are
arbitrary but perpetuate themselves because they serve some sort of common interest. Past conformity breeds future conformity because it gives one a reason to go
on conforming; but there is some alternative regularity which could have served
instead, and would have perpetuated itself in the same way if only it had got
started.
More precisely: a regularity R, in action or in action and belief, is a convention
'H. P. Gnce, "Meaning," Philosophical Review 66 (1957): 377-88.

Languages and Language

165

in a population P if and only if, within P, the following six conditions hold. (Or
at least they almost hold. A few exceptions to the "everyone"s can be tolerated.)
(1) Everyone conforms to R.
(2) Everyone believes that the others conform to R.
(3) This belief that the others conform to R gives everyone a good and decisive
reason to conform to R himself. His reason may be that, in particular, those of the
others he is now dealing with conform to R; or his reason may be that there is
general or widespread conformity, or that there has been, or that there will be. His
reason may be a practical reason, if conforming to R is a matter of acting in a
certain way; or it may be an epistemic reason, if conforming to R is a matter of
believing in a certain way. First case: according to his beliefs, some desired end may
be reached by means of some sort of action in conformity to R, provided that the
others (all or some of them) also conform to R; therefore he wants to conform to
R if they do. Second case: his beliefs, together with the premise that others conform
to R, deductively imply or inductively support some conclusions; and in believing
this conclusion, he would thereby conform to R. Thus reasons for conforming to a
convention by believing something—like reasons for belief in general—are
believed premises tending to confirm the truth of the belief in question. Note that
I am not speaking here of practical reasons for acting so as to somehow produce in
oneself a certain desired belief.
(4) There is a general preference for general conformity to R rather than slightlyless-than-general conformity—in particular, rather than conformity by all but any
one. (This is not to deny that some state of widespread nonconformity to R might
be even more preferred.) Thus everyone who believes that at least almost everyone
conforms to R will want the others, as well as himself, to conform. This condition
serves to distinguish cases of convention, in which there is a predominant coincidence of interest, from cases of deadlocked conflict. In the latter cases, it may be
that each is doing the best he can by conforming to R, given that the others do so;
but each wishes the others did not conform to R, since he could then gain at their
expense.
(5) R is not the only possible regularity meeting the last two conditions. There
is at least one alternative R' such that the belief that the others conformed to R'
would give everyone a good and decisive practical or epistemic reason to conform
to R' likewise; such that there is a general preference for general conformity to R'
rather than slightly-less-than-general conformity to R'; and such that there is normally no way of conforming to R and R' both. Thus the alternative R' could have
perpetuated itself as a convention instead of R, this condition provides for the
characteristic arbitrariness of conventions.
(6) Finally, the various facts listed in conditions (1) to (5) are matters of common
(or mutual} knowledge: they are known to everyone, it is known to everyone that
they are known to everyone, and so on. The knowledge mentioned here may be
merely potential: knowledge that would be available if one bothered to think hard
enough. Everyone must potentially know that (1) to (5) hold; potentially know

166

Philosophy of Language

that the others potentially know it; and so on. This condition ensures stability. If
anyone tries to replicate another's reasoning, perhaps including the other's replication of his own reasoning, . . . , the result will reinforce rather than subvert his
expectation of conformity to R. Perhaps a negative version of (6) would do the job:
no one disbelieves that (1) to (5) hold, no one believes that others disbelieve this,
and so on.
This definition can be tried out on all manner of regularities which we would
be inclined to call conventions. It is a convention to drive on the right. It is a
convention to mark poisons with skull and crossbones. It is a convention to dress
as we do. It is a convention to train beasts to turn right on "gee" and left on "haw."
It is a convention to give goods and services in return for certain pieces of paper or
metal. And so on.
The common interests which sustain conventions are as varied as the conventions
themselves. Our convention to drive on the right is sustained by our interest in not
colliding. Our convention for marking poisons is sustained by our interest in making it easy for everyone to recognize poisons. Our conventions of dress might be
sustained by a common aesthetic preference for somewhat uniform dress, or by the
low cost of mass-produced clothes, or by a fear on everyone's part that peculiar
dress might be thought to manifest a peculiar character, or by a desire on everyone's
part not to be too conspicuous, or—most likely—by a mixture of these and many
other interests.
It is a platitude-—something only a philosopher would dream of denying—that
there are conventions of language, although we do not find it easy to say what those
conventions are. If we look for the fundamental difference in verbal behavior
between members of two linguistic communities, we can be sure of finding something which is arbitrary but perpetuates itself because of a common interest in
coordination. In the case of conventions of language, that common interest derives
from our common interest in taking advantage of, and in preserving, our ability to
control others' beliefs and actions to some extent by means of sounds and marks.
That interest in turn derives from many miscellaneous desires we have; to list them,
list the ways you would be worse ofT in Babel.

III. SYNTHESIS
What have languages to do with language? What is the connection between what
I have called languages, functions from strings of sounds or of marks to sets of
possible worlds, semantic systems discussed in complete abstraction from human
affairs, and what I have called language, a form of rational, convention-governed
human social activity? We know what to call this connection we are after: we can
say that a given language £ is used by, or is a (or the) language of, a given population P. We know also that this connection holds by virtue of the conventions of

Languages and Language

167

language prevailing in P. Under suitably different conventions, a different language
would be used by P. There is some sort of convention whereby P uses £—but
what is it? It is worthless to call it a convention to use £, even if it can correctly
be so described, for we want to know what it is to use £.
My proposal2 is that the convention whereby a population P uses a language £
is a convention of truthfulness and trust in £. To be truthful in £ is to act in a
certain way: to try never to utter any sentences of £ that are not true in £. Thus it
is to avoid uttering any sentence of £ unless one believes it to be true in £. To be
trusting in £ is to form beliefs in a certain way: to impute truthfulness in £ to
others, and thus to tend to respond to another's utterance of any sentence of £ by
coming to believe that the uttered sentence is true in £.
Suppose that a certain language £ is used by a certain population P. Let this be
a perfect case of normal language use. Imagine what would go on; and review the
definition of a convention to verify that there does prevail in P a convention of
truthfulness and trust in £.
(1) There prevails in P at least a regularity of truthfulness and trust in £, The
members of P frequently speak (or write) sentences of £ to one another. When
they do, ordinarily the speaker (or writer) utters one of the sentences he believes to
be true in £; and the hearer (or reader) responds by coming to share that belief of
the speaker's (unless he already had it), and adjusting his other beliefs accordingly.
(2) The members of P believe that this regularity of truthfulness and trust in £
prevails among them. Each believes this because of his experience of others' past
truthfulness and trust in £.
(3) The expectation of conformity ordinarily gives everyone a good reason why
he himself should conform. If he is a speaker, he expects his hearer to be trusting
in £; wherefore he has reason to expect that by uttering certain sentences that are
true in £ according to his beliefs—by being truthful in £ in a certain way—he can
impart certain beliefs that he takes to be correct. Commonly, a speaker has some
reason or other for wanting to impart some or other correct beliefs. Therefore his
beliefs and desires constitute a practical reason for acting in the way he does: for
uttering some sentence truthfully in £.
As for the hearer: he expects the speaker to be truthful in £, wherefore he has
good reason to infer that the speaker's sentence is true in £ according to the speaker's beliefs. Commonly, a hearer also has some or other reason to believe that the
speaker's beliefs are correct (by and large, and perhaps with exceptions for certain
topics); so it is reasonable for him to infer that the sentence he has heard is probably
true in £. Thus his beliefs about the speaker give him an epistemic reason to
respond trustingly in £.
We have coordination between truthful speaker and trusting hearer. Each con2

This propsal is adapted from the theory given in Erik Stenius, "Mood and Language-Game," Synthese
17 (1967): 254-74.

168

Philosophy of Language

forms as he does to the prevailing regularity of truthfulness and trust in £ because
he expects complementary conformity on the part of the other.
But there is also a more diffuse and indirect sort of coordination. In coordinating
with his present partner, a speaker or hearer also is coordinating with all those
whose past truthfulness and trust in £ have contributed to his partner's present
expectations. This indirect coordination is a four-way affair: between present speakers and past speakers, present speakers and past hearers, present hearers and past
speakers, and present hearers and past hearers. And whereas the direct coordination
between a speaker and his hearer is a coordination of truthfulness with trust for a
single sentence of £, the indirect coordination with one's partner's previous partners
(and with their previous partners, etc.) may involve various sentences of £. It may
happen that a hearer, say, has never before encountered the sentence now addressed
to him; but he forms the appropriate belief on hearing it—one such that he has
responded trustingly in £—because his past experience with truthfulness in £ has
involved many sentences grammatically related to this one.
(4) There is in P a general preference for general conformity to the regularity of
truthfulness and trust in £. Given that most conform, the members of P want all
to conform. They desire truthfulness and trust in £ from each other, as well as
from themselves. This general preference is sustained by a common interest in communication. Everyone wants occasionally to impart correct beliefs and bring about
appropriate actions in others by means of sounds and marks. Everyone wants to
preserve his ability to do so at will. Everyone wants to be able to learn about the
parts of the world that he cannot observe for himself by observing instead the
sounds and marks of his fellows who have been there.
(5) The regularity of truthfulness and trust in £ has alternatives. Let £' be any
language that does not overlap £ in such a way that is is possible to be truthful
and trusting simultaneously in £ and in £', and that is rich and convenient enough
to meet the needs of P for communication. Then the regularity of truthfulness and
trust in £' is an alternative to the prevailing regularity of truthfulness and trust in
£. For the alternative regularity, as for the actual one, general conformity by the
others would give one a reason to conform; and general conformity would be generally preferred over slightly-less-than-general conformity.
(6) Finally, all these facts are common knowledge in P. Everyone knows them,
everyone knows that everyone knows them, and so on. Or at any rate none believes
that another doubts them, none believes that another believes that another doubts
them, and so on.
In any case in which a language £ clearly is used by a population P, then, it
seems that there prevails in P a convention of truthfulness and trust in £, sustained
by an interest in communication. The converse is supported by an unsuccessful
search for counterexamples: I have not been able to think of any case in which there
is such a convention and yet the language £ is clearly not used in the population
P. Therefore I adopt this definition, claiming that it agrees with ordinary usage in
the cases in which ordinary usage is fully determinate:

Languages and Language

169

a language £ is used by a population P if and only if there prevails in P a
convention of truthfulness and trust in £, sustained by an interest in
communication.
Such conventions, I claim, provide the desired connection between languages and
language-using populations.
Once we understand how languages are connected to populations, whether by
conventions of truthfulness and trust for the sake of communication or in some
other way, we can proceed to redefine relative to a population all those semantic
concepts that we previously denned relative to a language. A string of sounds or of
marks is a sentence of P if and only if it is a sentence of some language £ which is
used in P. It has a certain meaning in P if and only if it has that meaning in some
language £ which is used in P, It is true in P at a. world w if and only is it is true
at w in some language £ which is used in P. It is true in P if and only if it is true
in some language £ which is used in P.
The account just given of conventions in general, and of conventions of language
in particular, differs in one important respect from the account given in my book
Convention?
Formerly, the crucial clause in the definition of convention was stated in terms
of a conditional preference for conformity: each prefers to conform if the others do,
and it would be the same for the alternatives to the actual convention. (In some
versions of the definition, this condition was subsumed under a broader requirement of general preference for general conformity.) The point of this was to explain
why the belief that others conform would give everyone a reason for conforming
likewise, and so to explain the rational self-perpetuation of conventions. But a reason involving preference in this way must be a practical reason for acting, not an
epistemic reason for believing. Therefore I said that conventions were regularities
in action alone. It made no sense to speak of believing something in conformity to
convention. (Except in the peculiar case that others' conformity to the convention
gives one a practical reason to conform by acting to somehow produce a belief in
oneself; but I knew that this case was irrelvant to ordinary language use.) Thus I
was cut off from what I now take to be the primary sort of conventional coordination in language use: that between the action of the truthful speaker and the
responsive believing of his trusting hearer. I resorted to two different substitutes.
Sometimes it is common knowledge how the hearer will want to act if he forms
various beliefs, and we can think of the speaker not only as trying to impart beliefs
but also as trying thereby to get the hearer to act in a way that speaker and hearer
alike deem appropriate under the circumstances that the speaker believes to obtain.
Then we have speaker-hearer coordination of action. Both conform to a convention
of truthfulness for the speaker plus appropriate responsive action by the hearer.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Universiry Press, 1969. A similar account was given in the original version
of this paper, written in 1968.

170

Philosophy of Language

The hearer's trustful believing need not be part of the content of the convention,
though it must be mentioned to explain why the hearer acts in conformity. In this
way we reach the account of "signaling" in Convention, chapter IV.
But signaling was all-too-obviously a special case. There may be no appropriate
responsive action for the hearer to perform when the speaker imparts a belief to
him. Or the speaker and hearer may disagree about how the hearer ought to act
under the supposed circumstances. Or the speaker may not know how the hearer
will decide to act; or the hearer may not know that he knows; and so on. The
proper hearer's response to consider is believing, but that is not ordinarily an action.
So in considering language use in general, in Convention, chapter V, I was forced
to give up on speaker-hearer coordination. I took instead the diffuse coordination
between the present speaker and the past speakers who trained the present hearer.
Accordingly, I proposed that the convention whereby a population P used a language £ was simply a convention of truthfulness in £. Speakers conform; hearers
do not, until they become speakers in their turn, if they ever do.
I think now that I went wrong when I went beyond the special case of signaling.
I should have kept my original emphasis on speaker-hearer coordination, broadening the definition of convention to fit. It was Jonathan Bennett 4 who showed me
how that could be done: by restating the crucial defining clause not in terms of
preference for conformity but rather in terms of reasons for conformity—practical
or epistemic reasons. The original conditional preference requirement gives way now
to clause (3): the belief that others conform gives everyone a reason to conform
likewise, and it would be the same for the alternatives to the actual convention.
Once this change is made, there is no longer any obstacle to including the hearer's
trust as part of the content of a convention.
(The old conditional preference requirement is retained, however, in consequence
of the less important clause (4). Clause (3) as applied to practical reasons, but not
as applied to epistemic reasons, may be subsumed under (4).)
Bennett pointed out one advantage of the change: suppose there is only one
speaker of an idiolect, but several hearers who can understand him. Shouldn't he
and his hearers comprise a population that uses his idiolect? More generally, what
is the difference between (a) someone who does not utter sentences of a language
because he does not belong to any population that uses it, and (b) someone who
does not utter sentences of the language although he does belong to such a population because at present—or always, perhaps—he has nothing to say? Both are
alike, so far as action in conformity to a convention of truthfulness goes. Both are
vacuously truthful. In Convention I made it a condition of truthfulness in £ that
one sometimes does utter sentences of £, though not that one speaks up on any
particular occasion. But that is unsatisfactory: what degree of truthful talkativeness
^Personal communication, 1971. Bennett himself uses the broadened concept of convention differently,
wishing to exhibit conventional meaning as a special case of Gricean meaning. See his "The MeaningNominalist Strategy," Foundations of Language 10(1973): 141-68.

Languages and Language

171

does it take to keep up one's active membership in a language-using population?
What if someone just never thought of anything worth saying?
(There is a less important difference between my former account and the present
one. Then and now, I wanted to insist that cases of convention are cases of predominant coincidence of interest. I formerly provided for this by a denning clause that
seems now unduly restrictive; in any instance of the situation to which the convention applies, everyone has approximately the same preferences regarding all possible
combinations of actions. Why all? It may be enough that they agree in preferences
to the extent specified in my present clause (4). Thus I have left out the further
agreement-in-preference clause.)

IV. OBJECTIONS AND REPLIES
Objection; Many things which meet the definition of a language given in the thesis—many functions from strings of sounds or of marks to sets of possible worlds—
are not really possible languages. They could not possibly be adopted by any
human population. There may be too few sentences, or too few meanings, to make
as many discriminations as language-users need to communicate. The meanings
may not be anything language-users would wish to communicate about. The sentences may be very long, impossible to pronounce, or otherwise clumsy. The language may be humanly unlearnable because it has no grammar, or a grammar of
the wrong kind.
Reply: Granted. The so-called languages of the thesis are merely an easily specified superset of the languages we are really interested in. A language in a narrower
and more natural sense is any one of these entities that could possibly—possibly
in some appropriately strict sense—be used by a human population.
Objection: The so-called languages discussed in the thesis are excessively simplified. There is no provision for indexical sentences, dependent on features of the
context of their utterance: for instance, tensed sentences, sentences with personal
pronouns or demonstratives, or anaphoric sentences. There is no provision for
ambiguous sentences. There is no provision for non-indicative sentences: imperatives, questions, promises and threats, permissions, and so on.
Reply: Granted. I have this excuse: the phenomenon of language would be not
too different if these complications did not exist, so we cannot go too far wrong by
ignoring them. Nevertheless, let us sketch what could be done to provide for indexicality, ambiguity, or non-indicatives. In order not to pile complication on complication we shall take only one at a time.
We may define an indexical language £ as a function that assigns sets of possible
worlds not to its sentences themselves, but rather to sentences paired with possible
occasions of their utterance. We can say that a is true in £ at a world w on a
possible occasion o of the utterance of a if and only if u> belongs to £((7, o). We
can say that a is true in £ on o (without mentioning a world) if and only if the

772

Philosophy of Language

world in which o is located—our actual world if o is an actual occasion of utterance
of o, or some other world if not—belongs to £(cr, o). We can say that a speaker is
truthful in £ if he tries not to utter any sentence a of £ unless a would be true in
£ on the occasion of his utterance of a. We can say that a hearer is trusting in £
if he believes an uttered sentence of £ to be true in £ on its occasion of utterance.
We may define an ambiguous language £ as a function that assigns to its sentences not single meanings, but finite sets of alternative meanings. (We might or
might not want to stipulate that these sets are non-empty.) We can say that a
sentence a is true in £ at w under some meaning if and only if w belongs to some
member of £(<r). We can say that a is true in £ under some meaning if and only
if our actual world belongs to some member of £(<r). We can say that someone is
(minimally) truthful in £ if he tries not to utter any sentence a of £ unless a is
true in £ under some meaning. He is trusting if he believes an uttered sentence of
£ to be true in £ under some meaning.
We may define a polymodal language £ as a function which assigns to its sentences meanings containing two components: a set of worlds, as before; and something we can call a mood: indicative, imperative, etc. (It makes no difference what
things these are—they might, for instance, be taken as code numbers.) We can say
that a sentence ff is indicative, imperative, etc., in £ according as the mood-component of the meaning £(<r) is indicative, imperative, etc. We can say that a sentence a is true in £, regardless of its mood in £, if and only if our actual world
belongs to the set-of-worlds-component of the meaning £(<r). We can say that
someone is truthful in £ with respect to indicatives if he tries not to utter any
indicative sentence of £ which is not true in £; truthful in £ with respect to imperatives if he tries to act in such a way as to make true in £ any imperative sentence
of £ that is addressed to him by someone in a relation of authority to him; and so
on for other moods. He is trusting in £ with respect to indicatives if he believes
uttered indicative sentences of £ to be true in £; trusting in £ with respect to
imperatives if he expects his utterance of an imperative sentence of £ to result in
the addressee's acting in such a way as to make that sentence true in £, provided
he is in a relation of authority to the addressee; and so on. We can say simply that
he is truthful and trusting in £ if he is so with respect to all moods that occur in
£. It is by virtue of the various ways in which the various moods enter into the
definition of truthfulness and of trust that they deserve the familiar names we have
given them. (I am deliberating stretching the ordinary usage of "true," "truthfulness," and "trust" in extending them to non-indicatives. For instance, truthfulness
with respect to imperatives is roughly what we might call obedience in £.)
Any natural language is simultaneously indexical, ambiguous, and polymodal;
I leave the combination of complications as an exercise. Henceforth, for the most
part, I shall lapse into ignoring indexicality, ambiguity, and non-indicatives.
Objection: We cannot always discover the meaning of a sentence in a population
just by looking into the minds of the members of the population, no matter what
we look for there. We may also need some information about the causal origin of

Languages and Language

173

what we find in their minds. So, in particular, we cannot always discover the meaning of a sentence in a population just by looking at the conventions prevailing
therein. Consider an example: What is the meaning of the sentence "Mik Karthee
was wise" in the language of our 137th-century descendants, if all we can find in
any of their minds is the inadequate dictionary entry: "Mik Karthee: controversial
American politician of the early atomic age"? It depends, we might think, partly
on which man stands at the beginning of the long causal chain ending in that
inadequate dictionary entry.
Reply: If this doctrine is correct, I can treat it as a subtle sort of indexicality.
The set of worlds in which a sentence a is true in a language £ may depend on
features of possible occasions of utterance of a. One feature of a possible occasion
of utterance—admittedly a more recondite feature than the time, place, or
speaker—is the causal history of a dictionary entry in a speaker's mind.
As with other kinds of indexicality, we face a problem of nomenclature. Let a
meaning^ be that which an indexical language £ assigns to a sentence a on a possible
occasion a of its utterance: £(cr, »), a set of worlds on our account. Let a meaning-^
be that fixed function whereby the meaning, in £ of a sentence a varies with its
occasions of utterance. Which one is a meaning? That is unclear—and it is no
clearer which one is a sense, intension, interpretation, truth-condition, or proposition.
The objection says that we sometimes cannot find the meaning, of a on D in P
by looking into the minds of members of P. Granted. But what prevents it is that
the minds do not contain enough information about o: in particular, not enough
information about its causal history. We have been given no reason to doubt that
we can find the meaning2 of a in P by looking into minds; and that is all we need
do to identify the indexical language used by P.
An exactly similar situation arises with more familiar kinds of indexicality. We
may be unable to discover the time of an utterance of a tensed sentence by looking
into minds, so we may know the meaning; of the sentence uttered in the speaker's
indexical language without knowing its meaning, on the occasion in question.
Objection: It makes no sense to say that a mere string of sounds or of marks can
bear a meaning or a truth-value. The proper bearers of meanings and truth-values
are particular speech acts.
Reply: I do not say that a string of types of sounds or of marks, by itself, can
bear a meaning or truth-value. I say it bears a meaning and truth-value relative to
a language, or relative to a population. A particular speech act by itself, on the
other hand, can bear a meaning and truth-value, since in most cases it uniquely
determines the language that was in use on the occasion of its performance. So can
a particular uttered string of vocal sounds, or a particular inscribed string of marks,
since in most cases that uniquely determines the particular speech act in which it
was produced, which in turn uniquely determines the language.
Objection: It is circular to give an account of meanings in terms of possible
worlds. The notion of a possible world must itself be explained in semantic terms.

1 74

Philosophy of Language

Possible worlds are models of the analytic sentences of some language, or they are
the diagrams or theories of such models.5
Reply: I do not agree that the notion of a possible world ought to be explained
in semantic terms, or that possible worlds ought to be eliminated from our ontology and replaced by their linguistic representatives—models or whatever.
For one thing, the replacement does not work properly. Two worlds indistinguishable in the representing language will receive one and the same representative.
But more important, the replacement is gratuitous. The notion of a possible
world is familiar in its own right, philosophically fruitful, and tolerably clear. Possible worlds are deemed mysterious and objectionable because they raise questions
we may never know how to answer: are any possible worlds five-dimensional? We
seem to think that we do not understand possible worlds at all unless we are capable of omniscience about them—but why should we think that? Sets also raise
unanswerable questions, yet most of us do not repudiate sets.
But if you insist on repudiating possible worlds, much of my theory can be
adapted to meet your needs. We must suppose that you have already defined truth
and analyticity in some base language-—that is the price you pay for repudiating
possible worlds—and you want to define them in general, for the language of an
arbitrary population P. Pick your favorite base language with any convenient special properties you like: Latin, Esperanto, Begriffsschrift, Semantic Markerese, or
what have you. Let's say you pick Latin. Then you may redefine a language as any
function from certain strings of sound or of marks to sentences of Latin. A sentence
a of a language £ (in your sense) is true, analytic, etc., if and only if £(<r) is true,
analytic, etc., in Latin.
You cannot believe in languages in my sense, since they involve possible worlds.
But I can believe in languages in your sense. And I can map your languages onto
mine by means of a fixed function from sentences of Latin to sets of worlds. This
function is just the language Latin, in my sense. My language £ is the composition
of two functions: your language £, and my language Latin. Thus I can accept your
approach as part of mine.
Objection: Why all this needless and outmoded hypostasis of meanings? Our
ordinary talk about meaning does not commit us to believing in any such entities
as meanings, any more than our ordinary talk about actions for the sake of ends
commits us to believing in any such entities as sakes.
Reply: Perhaps there are some who hypostatize meanings compulsively, imagining that they could not possibly make sense of our ordinary talk about meaning
^Possible worlds are taken as models in S. Kripke, "A Completeness Theorem in Modal Logic," Journal
of Symbolic Logic 24 (1959): 1-15; in Carnap's recent work on semantics and inductive logic, discussed
briefly in sees. 9, 10, and 25 of "Replies and Systematic Expositions," The Philosophy of Rudolf Camap,
ed. by P. Schilpp, (La Salle, 111.: Open Court,, 1963) and elsewhere. Worlds are taken as state-descriptions—diagrams of models—in Carnap's earlier work: for instance, sec. 18 of Introduction to Semantics
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, 1942). Worlds are taken as complete, consistent novels—
theories of models—in R. Jeffrey, The Logic of Decision (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1965), sec. 12.8.

Languages and Language

175

if they did not. Not I. I hypostatize meanings because I find it convenient to do
so, and I have no good reason not to. There is no point in being a part-time nominalist. I am persuaded on independent grounds that I ought to believe in possible
worlds and possible beings therein, and that I ought to believe in sets of things I
believe in. Once I have these, I have all the entities I could ever want.
Objection: A language consists not only of sentences with their meanings, but
also of constituents of sentences—things sentences are made of—with their meanings. And if any language is to be learnable without being finite, it must somehow
be determined by finitely many of its constituents and finitely many operations on
constituents.
Reply: We may define a class of objects called grammars. A grammar F is a
triple comprising (1) a large finite lexicon of elementary constituents paired with
meanings; (2) a finite set of combining operations which build larger constituents by
combining smaller constituents, and derive a meaning for the new constituent out
of the meanings of the old ones; and (3) a representing operation which effectively
maps certain constituents onto strings of sounds or of marks. A grammar F generates a function which assigns meanings to certain constituents, called constituents
in F. It generates another function which assigns meanings to certain strings of
sounds or of marks. Part of this latter function is what we have hitherto called a
language. A grammar uniquely determines the language it generates. But a language does not uniquely determine the grammar that generates it, not even when
we disregard superficial differences between grammars.
I have spoken of meanings for constituents in a grammer, but what sort of things
are these? Referential semantics tried to answer that question. It was a near miss,
failing because contingent facts got mixed up with the meanings. The cure, discovered by Carnap,6 is to do referential semantics not just in our actual world but
in every possible world. A meaning for a name can be a function from worlds to
possible individuals; for a common noun, a function from worlds to sets; for a
sentence, a function from worlds to truth-values (or more simply, the set of worlds
where that function takes the value truth). Other derived categories may be defined
by their characteristic modes of combination. For instance, an adjective combines
with a common noun to make a compound common noun; so its meaning may be
a function from common-noun meanings to common-noun meanings, such that
the meaning of an adjective-plus-common-noun compound is the value of this
function when given as argument the meaning of the common noun being modified. Likewise a verb phrase takes a name to make a sentence; so its meaning may
be a function that takes the meaning of the name as argument to give the meaning
of the sentence as value. An adverb (of one sort) takes a verb phrase to make a verb
phrase, so its meaning may be a function from verb-phrase meanings to verb-phrase
6

"Replies and Systematic Expositions," sec. 9-v. A better-known presentation of essentially the same
idea is in S. Kripke, "Semantical Considerations on Modal Logic," Acta Philosophica Fennica 16
(1963): 83-94.

176

Philosophy of Language

meanings. And so on, as far as need be, to more and more complicated derived
categories.7
If you repudiate possible worlds, an alternative course is open to you: let the
meanings for constituents in a grammar be phrases of Latin, or whatever your favorite base language may be.
A grammar, for us, is a semantically interpreted grammar—just as a language
is a semantically interpreted language. We shall not be concerned with what are
called grammars or languages in a purely syntactic sense. My definition of a grammar is meant to be general enough to encompass transformational or phrase-structure grammars for natural language8 (when provided with semantic interpretations)
as well as systems of formation and valuation rules for formalized languages. Like
my previous definition of a language, my definition of a grammar is too general: it
gives a large superset of the interesting grammars.
A grammar, like a language, is a set-theoretical entity which can be discussed in
complete abstraction from human affairs. Since a grammar generates a unique language, all the semantic concepts we earlier defined relative to a language £—sentencehood, truth, analyticity, etc.—could just as well have been defined relative to
a grammar F. We can also handle other semantic concepts pertaining to constituents, or to the constituent structure of sentences.
We can define the meaning in F, denotation in F, etc., of a subsentential constituent in F. We can define the meaning in F, denotation in F, etc., of a phrase:
a string of sounds or of marks representing a subsentential constituent in F via the
representing operation of F. We can define something we may call the fine structure
of meaning in F of a sentence or phrase: the manner in which the meaning of the
sentence or phrase is derived from the meanings of its constituents and the way it
is built out of them. Thus we can take account of the sense in which, for instance,
different analytic sentences are said to differ in meaning.
Now the objection can be restated: what ought to be called a language is what
I have hitherto called a grammar, not what I have hitherto called a language. Different grammar, different language—at least if we ignore superficial differences
between grammars. Verbal disagreement aside, the place I gave to my so-called
languages ought to have been given instead to my so-called grammars. Why not
begin by saying what it is for a grammar F to be used by a population P? Then
we could go on to define sentencehood, truth, analyticity, etc., in P as sentencehood, truth, analyticity, etc., in whatever grammar is used by P. This approach
would have the advantage that we could handle the semantics of constituents in a
See my "General Semantics," in this volume.
8
For a description of the sort of grammars I have in mind (minus the semantic interpretation) see N.
Chomsky, Aspects of the Theory of Syntax (Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1965), and G. Harman,
"Generative Grammars without Transformation Rules," Language 37 (1963): 597-616. My "constituents" correspond to semantically interpreted deep phrase-markers, or sub-trees thereof, in a transformational grammar. My "representing operation" may work in several steps and thus subsumes both
the transformational and the phonological components of a transformational grammar.

Languages and Language

111

population in an exactly similar way. We could say that a constituent or phrase
has a certain meaning, denotation, etc., in P if it has that meaning, denotation,
etc., in whatever grammar is used by P. We could say that a sentence or phrase
has a certain fine structure of meaning in P if it has it in whatever grammar is used
by P.
Unfortunately, I know of no promising way to make objective sense of the assertion that a grammar F is used by a population P whereas another grammar I",
which generates the same language as F, is not. I have tried to say how there are
facts about P which objectively select the languages used by P. I am not sure there
are facts about P which objectively select privileged grammars for those languages.
It is easy enough to define truthfulness and trust in a grammar, but that will not
help: a convention of truthfulness and trust in F will also be a convention of truthfulness and trust in F' whenever F and F' generate the same language.
I do not propose to discard the notion of the meaning in P of a constituent or
phrase, or the fine structure of meaning in P of a sentence. To propose that would
be absurd. But I hold that these notions depend on our methods of evaluating
grammars, and therefore are no clearer and no more objective than our notion of a
best grammar for a given language. For I would say that a grammar F is used by
P if and only if F is a best grammar for a language £ that is used by P in virtue
of a convention in P of truthfulness and trust in £; and I would define the meaning
in P of a constituent or phrase, and the fine structure of meaning in P of a sentence,
accordingly.
The notions of a language used by P, of a meaning of a sentence in P, and so
on, are independent of our evaluation of grammars. Therefore I take these as primary. The point is not to refrain from ever saying anything that depends on the
evaluation of grammars. The point is to do so only when we must, and that is why
I have concentrated on languages rather than grammars.
We may meet little practical difficulty with the semantics of constituents in populations, even if its foundations are as infirm as I fear. It may often happen that
all the grammars anyone might call best for a given language will agree on the
meaning of a given constituent. Yet there is trouble to be found: Quine's examples
of indeterminacy of reference9 seem to be disagreements in constituent semantics
between alternative good grammars for one language. We should regard with suspicion any method that purports to settle objectively whether, in some tribe, "gavagai" is true of temporally continuant rabbits or time-slices thereof. You can give
their language a good grammar of either kind—and that's that.
It is useful to divide the claimed indeterminacy of constituent semantics into
three separate indeterminacies. We begin with undoubted objective fact: the dependence of the subject's behavioral output on his input of sensory stimulation (both
as it actually is and as it might have been) together with all the physical laws and
9

W. V. Quine, "Ontological Relativity," Journal of Philosophy 65 (1968): 185-212; Word and Object,
pp. 68-79.

178

Philosophy of Language

anatomical facts that explain it. (a) This information either determines or underdetermines the subject's system of propositional attitudes: in particular, his beliefs
and desires, (b) These propositional attitudes either determine or underdetermine
the truth conditions of full sentences—what I have here called his language, (c)
The truth conditions of full sentences either determine or underdetermine the
meanings of sub-sentential constituents—what I have here called his grammar.
My present discussion has been directed at the middle step, from beliefs and
desires to truth conditions for full sentences. I have said that the former determine
the latter—provided (what need not be the case) that the beliefs and desires of the
subject and his fellows are such as to comprise a fully determinate convention of
truthfulness and trust in some definite language. I have said nothing here about
the determinacy of the first step; and I am inclined to share in Quine's doubts
about the determinacy of the third step.
Objection: Suppose that whenever anyone is party to a convention of truthfulness
and trust in any language £, his competence to be party to that convention—to
conform, to expect conformity, etc.—is due to his possession of some sort of unconscious internal representation of a grammar for £. That is a likely hypothesis, since
it best explains what we know about linguistic competence. In particular, it
explains why experience with some sentences leads spontaneously to expectations
involving others. But on that hypothesis, we might as well bypass the conventions
of language and say that £ is used by P if and only if everyone in P possesses an
internal representation of a grammar for £.
Reply: In the first place, the hypothesis of internally represented grammars is not
an explanation—best or otherwise—of anything. Perhaps it is part of some theory
that best explains what we know about linguistic competence; we can't judge until
we hear something about what the rest of the theory is like.
Nonetheless, I am ready enough to believe in internally represented grammars.
But I am much less certain that there are internally represented grammars than I
am that languages are used by populations; and I think it makes sense to say that
languages might be used by populations even if there were no internally represented
grammars. I can tentatively agree that £ is used by P if and only if everyone in P
possesses an internal representation of a grammar for £, if that is offered as a scientific hypothesis. But I cannot accept it as any sort of analysis of "£ is used by
P", since the analysandum clearly could be true although the analysans was false.
Objection: The notion of a convention of truthfulness and trust in £ is a needless
complication. Why not say, straightforwardly, that £ is used by P if and only if
there prevails in P a convention to bestow upon each sentence of £ the meaning
that £ assigns to it? Or, indeed, that a grammar F of £ is used by P if and only
if there prevails in P a convention to bestow upon each constituent in F the meaning that F assigns to it?
Reply: A convention, as I have defined it, is a regularity in action, or in action
and belief. If that feature of the definition were given up, I do not see how to
salvage any part of my theory of conventions. It is essential that a convention is a

Languages and Language

179

regularity such that conformity by others gives one a reason to conform; and such
a reason must either be a practical reason for acting or an epistemic reason for
believing. What other kind of reason is there?
Yet there is no such thing as an action of bestowing a meaning (except for an
irrelevant sort of action that is performed not by language-users but by creators of
language) so we cannot suppose that language-using populations have conventions
to perform such actions. Neither does bestowal of meaning consist in forming some
belief. Granted, bestowal of meaning is conventional in the sense that it depends
on convention: the meanings would have been different if the conventions of truthfulness and trust had been different. But bestowal of meaning is not an action done
in conformity to a convention, since it is not an action, and it is not a beliefformation in conformity to a convention, since it is not a belief-formation.
Objection: The beliefs and desires that constitute a convention are inaccessible
mental entities, just as much as hypothetical internal representations of grammars
are. It would be best if we could say in purely behavioristic terms what it is for a
language £ to be used by a population P. We might be able to do this by referring
to the way in which members of P would answer counterfactual questionnnaires;
or by referring to the way in which they would or would not assent to sentences
under deceptive sensory stimulation; or by referring to the way in which they would
intuitively group sentences into similarity-classes; or in some other way.
Reply: Suppose we succeeded in giving a behavioristic operational definition of
the relation "£ is used by P." This would not help us to understand what it is for
£ to be used by P; for we would have to understand that already, and also know
a good deal of common-sense psychology, in order to check that the operational
definition was a definition of what it is supposed to be a definition of. If we did
not know what it meant for £ to be used by P, we would not know what sort of
behavior on the part of members of P would indicate that £ was used by P.
Objection: The conventions of language are nothing more nor less than our
famously obscure old friends, the rules of language, renamed.
Reply: A convention of truthfulness and trust in £ might well be called a rule,
though it lacks many features that have sometimes been thought to belong to the
essence of rules. It is not promulgated by any authority. It is not enforced by means
of sanctions except to the extent that, because one has some sort of reason to conform, something bad may happen if one does not. It is nowhere codified and therefore is not "laid down in the course of teaching the language" or "appealed to in
the course of criticizing a person's linguistic performance." 10 Yet it is more than a
mere regularity holding "as a rule"; it is a regularity accompanied and sustained
by a special kind of system of beliefs and desires.
A convention of truthfulness and trust in £ might have as consequences other
regularities which were conventions of language in their own right: specializations
of the convention to certain special situations. (For instance, a convention of truth10

P. Ziff, Semantic Analysis, pp. 34-35.

180

Philosophy of Language

fulness in £ on weekdays.) Such derivative conventions of language might also be
called rules; some of them might stand a better chance of being codified than the
overall convention which subsumes them.
However, there are other so-called rules of language which are not conventions
of language and are not in the least like conventions of language: for instance,
"rules" of syntax and semantics. They are not even regularities and cannot be formulated as imperatives. They might better be described not as rules, but as clauses
in the definitions of entities which are to be mentioned in rules: clauses in the
definition of a language £, of the act of being truthful in £, of the act of stating
that the moon is blue, etc.
Thus the conventions of language might properly be called rules, but it is more
informative and less confusing to call them conventions.
Objection; Language is not conventional. We have found that human capacities
for language acquisition are highly specific and dictate the form of any language
that humans can learn and use.
Reply: It may be that there is less conventionality than we used to think: fewer
features of language which depend on convention, more which are determined by
our innate capacities and therefore are common to all languages which are genuine
alternatives to our actual language. But there are still conventions of language; and
there are still convention-dependent features of language, differing from one alternative possible convention of language to another. That is established by the diversity of actual languages. There are conventions of language so long as the regularity
of truthfulness in a given language has even a single alternative.
Objection: Unless a language-user is also a set-theorist, he cannot expect his fellows to conform to a regularity of truthfulness and trust in a certain language £.
For to conform to this regularity is to bear a relation to a certain esoteric entity: a
set of ordered pairs of sequences of sound-types or of mark-types and sets of possible worlds (or something more complicated still, if £ is a natural language with
indexicality, ambiguity, and non-indicatives). The common man has no concept of
any such entity. Hence he can have no expectations regarding such an entity.
Reply: The common man need not have any concept of £ in order to expect his
fellows to be truthful and trusting in £. He need only have suitable particular
expectations about how they might act, and how they might form beliefs, in various situations. He can tell whether any actual or hypothetical particular action or
belief-formation on their part is compatible with his expectations. He expects them
to conform to a regularity of truthfulness and trust in £ if any particular activity
or belief-formation that would fit his expectations would fall under what we—but
not he—could describe as conformity to that regularity.
It may well be that his elaborate, infinite system of potential particular expectations can only be explained on the hypothesis that he has some unconscious mental entity somehow analogous to a general concept of £—say, an internally represented grammar. But it does not matter whether this is so or not. We are concerned

Languages and Language

181

only to say what system of expectations a normal member of a language-using
population must have. We need not engage in psychological speculation about how
those expectations are generated.
Objection: If there are conventions of language, those who are party to them
should know what they are. Yet no one can fully describe the conventions of language to which he is supposedly a party.
Reply: He may nevertheless know what they are. It is enough to be able to
recognize conformity and non-conformity to his convention, and to be able to try
to conform to it. We know ever so many things we cannot put into words.
Objection: Use of language is almost never a rational activity. We produce and
respond to utterances by habit, not as the result of any sort of reasoning or deliberation.
Reply: An action may be rational, and may be explained by the agent's beliefs
and desires, even though that action was done by habit, and the agent gave no
thought to the beliefs or desires which were his reason for acting. A habit may be
under the agent's rational control in this sense: if that habit ever ceased to serve
the agent's desires according to his beliefs, it would at once be overridden and
corrected by conscious reasoning. Action done by a habit of this sort is both habitual and rational. Likewise for habits of believing. Our normal use of language is
rational, since it is under rational control.
Perhaps use of language by young children is not a rational activity. Perhaps it
results from habits which would not be overridden if they ceased to serve the
agent's desires according to his beliefs. If that is so, I would deny that these children
have yet become party to conventions of language, and I would deny that they have
yet become normal members of a language-using population. Perhaps language is
first acquired and afterward becomes conventional. That would not conflict with
anything I have said. I am not concerned with the way in which language is
acquired, only with the condition of a normal member of a language-using population when he is done acquiring language.
Objection: Language could not have originated by convention. There could not
have been an agreement to begin being truthful and trusting in a certain chosen
language, unless some previous language had already been available for use in making the agreement.
Reply: The first language could not have originated by an agreement, for the
reason given. But that is not to say that language cannot be conventional. A convention is so-called because of the way it persists, not because of the way it originated. A convention need not originate by convention—that is, by agreement—
though many conventions do originate by agreement, and others could originate
by agreement even if they actually do not. In saying that language is conventiongoverned, I say nothing whatever about the origins of language.
Objection: A man isolated all his life from others might begin—through genius
or a miracle—to use language, say to keep a diary. (This would be an accidentally

182

Philosophy of Language

private language, not the necessarily private language Wittgenstein is said to have
proved to be impossible.) In this case, at least, there would be no convention
involved.
Reply: Taking the definition literally, there would be no convention. But there
would be something very similar. The isolated man conforms to a certain regularity
at many different times. He knows at each of these times that he has conformed
to that regularity in the past, and he has an interest in uniformity over time, so he
continues to conform to that regularity instead of to any of various alternative regularities that would have done about as well if he had started out using them. He
knows at all times that this is so, knows that he knows at all times that this is so,
and so on. We might think of the situation as one in which a convention prevails
in the population of different time-slices of the same man.
Objection: It is circular to define the meaning in P of sentences in terms of the
beliefs held by members of P. For presumably the members of P think in their
language. For instance, they hold beliefs by accepting suitable sentences of their
language. If we do not already know the meaning in P of a sentence, we do not
know what belief a member of P would hold by accepting that sentence.
Reply: It may be true that men think in language, and that to hold a belief is
to accept a sentence of one's language. But it does not follow that belief should be
analyzed as acceptance of sentences. It should not be. Even if men do in fact think
in language, they might not. It is at least possible that men—like beasts—might
hold beliefs otherwise than by accepting sentences. (I shall not say here how I think
belief should be analyzed.) No circle arises from the contingent truth that a member of P holds beliefs by accepting sentences, so long as we can specify his beliefs
without mentioning the sentences he accepts. We can do this for men, as we can
for beasts.
Objection: Suppose a language £ is used by a population of inveterate liars, who
are untruthful in £ more often than not. There would not be even a regularity—
still less a convention, which implies a regularity—of truthfulness and trust in £.
Reply: I deny that £ is used by the population of liars. I have undertaken to
follow ordinary usage only where it is determinate; and, once it is appreciated just
how extraordinary the situation would have to be, I do not believe that ordinary
usage is determinate in this case. There are many similarities to clear cases in which
a language is used by a population, and it is understandable that we should feel
some inclination to classify this case along with them. But there are many important differences as well.
Although I deny that the population of liars collectively uses £, I am willing to
say that each liar individually may use £, provided that he falsely believes that he
is a member—albeit an exceptional, untruthful member—of a population wherein
there prevails a convention of truthfulness and trust in £. He is in a position like
that of a madman who thinks he belongs to a population which uses £, and
behaves accordingly, and so can be said ro use £, although in reality all the other
members of this £-using population are figments of his imagination.

Languages and Language

183

Objection: Suppose the members of a population are untruthful in their language
£ more often than not, not because they lie, but because they go in heavily for
irony, metaphor, hyperbole, and such. It is hard to deny that the language £ is
used by such a population.
Reply: I claim that these people are truthful in their language £, though they
are not literally truthful in £. To be literally truthful in £ is to be truthful in
another language related to £, a language we can call literal-£. The relation
between £ and literal-£ is as follows: a good way to describe £ is to start by
specifying literal-£ arnd then to describe £ as obtained by certain systematic departures from literal-£. This two-stage specification of £ by way of literal-£ may turn
out to be much simpler than any direct specification of £.
Objection: Suppose they are often untruthful in £ because they are not communicating at all. They are joking, or telling tall tales, or telling white lies as a matter
of social ritual. In these situations, there is neither truthfulness nor trust in £.
Indeed, it is common knowledge that there is not.
Reply: Perhaps I can say the same sort of thing about this non-serious language
use as I did about non-literal language use. That is: their seeming untruthfulness
in non-serious situations is untruthfulness not in the language £ that they actually
use, but only in a simplified approximation to £. We may specify £ by first specifying the approximation language, then listing the signs and features of context
by which non-serious language use can be recognized, then specifying that when
these signs or features are present, what would count as untruths in the approximation language do not count as such in £ itself. Perhaps they are automatically
true in £, regardless of the facts; perhaps they cease to count as indicative.
Example: what would otherwise be an untruth may not be one if said by a child
with crossed fingers. Unfortunately, the signs and features of context by which we
recognize non-serious language use are seldom as simple, standardized, and conventional as that. While they must find a place somewhere in a full account of the
phenomenon of language, it may be inexpedient to burden the specification of £
with them.
Perhaps it may be enough to note that these situations of non-serious language
use must be at least somewhat exceptional if we are to have anything like a clear
case of use of £; and to recall that the definition of a convention was loose enough
to tolerate some exceptions. We could take the non-serious cases simply as violations—explicable and harmless ones—of the conventions of language.
There is a third alternative, requiring a modification in my theory. We may say
that a serious communication situation exists with respect to a sentence a of £ whenever it is true, and common knowledge between a speaker and a hearer, that (a)
the speaker does, and the hearer does not, know whether G is true in £; (b) the
hearer wants to know; (c) the speaker wants the hearer to know; and (d) neither
the speaker nor the hearer has other (comparably strong) desires as to whether or
not the speaker utters a. (Note that when there is a serious communication situation with respect to <r, there is one also with respect to synonyms or contradictories

184

Philosophy of Language

in £ of <T, and probably also with respect to other logical relatives in £ of a.) Then
we may say that the convention whereby P uses £ is a convention of truthfulness
and trust in £ in serious communication situations. That is: when a serious communication situation exists with respect to a, then the speaker tries not to utter a
unless it is true in £, and the hearer responds, if a is uttered, by coming to believe
that er is true in £. If that much is a convention in P, it does not matter what goes
on in other situations: they use £.
The definition here given of a serious communication resembles that of a signaling problem in Convention, chapter IV, the difference being that the hearer may
respond by belief-formation only, rather than by what speaker and hearer alike take
to be appropriate action. If this modification were adopted, it would bring my
general account of language even closer to my account in Convention of the special
case of signaling.
Objection; Truthfulness and trust cannot be a convention. What could be the
alternative to uniform truthfulness—uniform #«truthfulness, perhaps? But it seems
that if such untruthfulness were not intended to deceive, and did not deceive, then
it too would be truthfulness.
Reply: The convention is not the regularity of truthfulness and trust simpliciter.
It is the regularity of truthfulness and trust in some particular language £. Its
alternatives are possible regularities of truthfulness and trust in other languages. A
regularity of uniform untruthfulness and non-trust in a language £ can be redescribed as a regularity of truthfulness and trust in a different language anti-£ complementary to £. Anti-£ has exactly the same sentences as £, but with opposite
truth conditions. Hence the true sentences of anti-£ are all and only the untrue
sentences of £.
There is a different regularity that we may call a regularity of truthfulness and
trust simpliciter. That is the regularity of being truthful and trusting in whichever
language is used by one's fellows. This regularity neither is a convention nor
depends on convention. If any language whatever is used by a population P, then
a regularity (perhaps with exceptions) of truthfulness and trust simpliciter prevails
in P.
Objection: Even truthfulness and trust in £ cannot be a convention. One conforms
to a convention, on my account, because doing so answers to some sort of interest.
But a decent man is truthful in £ if his fellows are, whether or not it is in his
interest. For he recognizes that he is under a moral obligation to be truthful in £;
an obligation to reciprocate the benefits he has derived from others' truthfulness in
£, or something of that sort. Truthfulness in £ may bind the decent man against
his own interest. It is more like a social contract than a convention.
Reply: The objection plays on a narrow sense of "interest" in which only selfish
interests count. We commonly adopt a wider sense. We count also altruistic interests and interests springing from one's recognition of obligations. It is this wider
sense that should be understood in the definition of convention. In this wider sense,
it is nonsense to think of an obligation as outweighing one's interests. Rather, the
obligation provides one interest which may outweigh the other interests.

Languages and Language

185

A convention of truthfulness and trust in £ is sustained by a mixture of selfish
interests, altruistic interests, and interests derived from obligation. Usually all are
present in strength; perhaps any one would be enough to sustain the convention.
But occasionally truthfulness in £ answers only to interests derived from obligation
and goes against one's selfish or even altruistic interests. In such a case, only a
decent man will have an interest in remaining truthful in £. But I dare say such
cases are not as common as moralists might imagine. A convention of truthfulness
and trust among scoundrels might well be sustained—with occasional lapses—by
selfish interests alone.
A convention persists because everyone has reason to conform if others do. If the
convention is a regularity in action, this is to say that it persists because everyone
prefers general conformity rather than almost-general conformity with himself as
the exception. A (demythologized) social contract may also be described as a regularity sustained by a general preference for general conformity, but the second
term of the preference is different. Everyone prefers general conformity over a certain state of general non-conformity called the state of nature. This general preference sets up an obligation to reciprocate the benefits derived from others' conformity, and that obligation creates an interest in conforming which sustains the social
contract. The objection suggests that, among decent men, truthfulness in £ is a
social contract. I agree; but there is no reason why it cannot be a social contract
and a convention as well, and I think it is.
Objection: Communication cannot be explained by conventions of truthfulness
alone. If I utter a sentence a of our language £, you—expecting me to be truthful
in £—will conclude that I take a to be true in £. If you think I am well informed,
you will also conclude that probably a is true in £. But you will draw other conclusions as well, based on your legitimate assumption that it is for some good
reason that I chose to utter a rather than remain silent, and rather than utter any
of the other sentences of £ that I also take to be true in £. I can communicate all
sorts of misinformation by exploiting your beliefs about my conversational purposes, without ever being untruthful in £. Communication depends on principles
of helpfulness and relevance as well as truthfulness.
Reply: All this does not conflict with anything I have said. We do conform to
conversational regularities of helpfulness and relevance. But these regularities are
not independent conventions of language; they result from our convention of truthfulness and trust in £ together with certain general facts—not dependent on any
convention—about our conversational purposes and our beliefs about one another.
Since they are by-products of a convention of truthfulness and trust, it is unnecessary to mention them separately in specifying the conditions under which a language is used by a population.
Objection: Let £ be the language used in P, and let £ be some fairly rich fragment of £. That is, the sentences of £~ are many but not all of the sentences of £
(in an appropriate special sense if £ is infinite); and any sentence of both has the
same meaning in both. Then £~ also turns out to be a language used by P; for by
my definition there prevails in P a convention of truthfulness and trust in £~,

186

Philosophy of Language

sustained by an interest in communication. Not one but many—perhaps infinitely
many—languages are used by P.
Reply: That is so, but it is no problem. Why not say that any rich fragment of
a language used by P is itself a used language?
Indeed, we will need to say such things when P is linguistically inhomogeneous.
Suppose, for instance, that P divides into two classes: the learned and the vulgar.
Among the learned there prevails a convention of truthfulness and trust in a language £; among P as a whole there does not, but there does prevail a convention
of truthfulness and trust in a rich fragment £~ of £. We wish to say that the
learned have a common language with the vulgar, but that is so only if £~, as well
as £, counts as a language used by the learned.
Another case: the learned use £,, the vulgar use £ 2 , neither is included in the
other, but there is extensive overlap. Here £, and £2 are to be the most inclusive
languages used by the respective classes. Again we wish to say that the learned and
the vulgar have a common language: in particular, the largest fragment common
to £, and £2. That can be so only if this largest common fragment counts as a
language used by the vulgar, by the learned, and by the whole population.
I agree that we often do not count the fragments; we can speak of the language
of P, meaning by this not the one and only thing that is a language used by P, but
rather the most inclusive language used by P. Or we could mean something else:
the union of all the languages used by substantial sub-populations of P, provided
that some quite large fragment of this union is used by (more or less) all of P.
Note that the union as a whole need not be used at all, in my primary sense, either
by P or by any sub-population of P. Thus in my example of the last paragraph,
the language of P might be taken either as the largest common fragment of £, and
£2 or as the union of £1 and £2.
Further complications arise. Suppose that half of the population of a certain
town uses English, and also uses basic Welsh; while the other half uses Welsh, and
also uses basic English. The most inclusive language used by the entire population
is the union of basic Welsh and basic English. The union of lagnuages used by
substantial sub-populations is the union of English and Welsh, and the proviso is
satisfied that some quite large fragment of this union is used by the whole population. Yet we would be reluctant to say that either of these unions is the language
of the population of the town. We might say that Welsh and English are the two
languages of the town, or that basic English and basic Welsh are. It is odd to call
either of the two language-unions a language; though once they are called that, it
is no further oddity to say that one or other of them is the language of the town.
There are two considerations. First: English, or Welsh, or basic English, or basic
Welsh, can be given a satisfactory unified grammar; whereas the language-unions
cannot. Second: English, or Welsh, or basic Welsh, or basic English, is (in either
of the senses I have explained) the language of a large population outside the town;
whereas the language-unions are not. I am not sure which of the two considerations
should be emphasized in saying when a language is the language of a population.

Languages and Language

187

Objection: Let £ be the language of P; that is, the language that ought to count
as the most inclusive language used by P. (Assume that P is linguistically homogeneous.) Let £ + be obtained by adding gatbage to £; some extra sentences, very
long and difficult to pronounce, and hence never uttered in P, with arbitrarily chosen meanings in £ + . Then it seems that £ + is a language used by P, which is
absurd.
A sentence never uttered at all is a fortiori never uttered untruthfully. So truthfulness-as-usual in £ plus truthfulness-by-silence on the garbage sentences constitutes a kind of truthfulness in £ + ; and the expectation thereof constitutes trust in
£ + . Therefore we have a prevailing regularity of truthfulness and trust in £ + . This
regularity qualifies as a convention in P sustained by an interest in communication.
Reply: Truthfulness-by-silence is truthfulness, and expectation thereof is expectation of truthfulness; but expectation of truthfulness-by-silence is not yet trust.
Expectation of (successful) truthfulness-—expectation that a given sentence will not
be uttered falsely—is a necessary but not sufficient condition for trust. There is no
regularity of trust in £ + , so far as the garbage sentences are concerned. Hence there
is no convention of truthfulness and trust in £ + , and £ + is not used by P.
For trust, one must be able to take an utterance of a sentence as evidence that
the sentence is true. That is so only if one's degree of belief that the sentence will
be uttered falsely is low, not only absolutely, but as a fraction of one's degree of
belief—perhaps already very low—that the sentence will be uttered at all. Further,
this must be so not merely because one believes in advance that the sentence is
probably true: one's degree of belief that the sentence will be uttered falsely must
be substantially lower than the product of one's degree of belief that the sentence
will be uttered times one's prior degree of belief that it is false. A garbage sentence
of £ + will not meet this last requirement, not even if one believes to high degrees
both that it is true in £ + and that it never will be uttered.
This objection was originally made, by Stephen Schiffer, against my former view
that conventions of language are conventions of truthfulness. I am inclined to think
that it succeeds as a counter-example to that view. I agree that £ + is not used by
P, in any reasonable sense, but I have not seen any way to avoid conceding that
£ + is a possible language—it might really be used—and that there does prevail
in P a convention of truthfulness in £ + , sustained by an interest in communication.
Here we have another advantage of the present account over my original one.
Objection: A sentence either is or isn't analytic in a given language, and a language either is or isn't conventionally adopted by a given population. Hence there
is no way for the analytic-synthetic distinction to be unsharp. But not only can it
be unsharp; it usually is, at least in cases of interest to philosophers. A sharp analytic-synthetic distinction is available only relative to particular rational reconstructions of ordinary language.
Reply: One might try to explain unsharp analyticity by a theory of degrees of
convention. Conventions do admit of degree in a great many ways: by the strengths
of the beliefs and desires involved, and by the fraction of exceptions to the many

788

Philosophy of Language

almost-universal quantifications in the definition of convention. But this will not
help much. It is easy to imagine unsharp analyticity even in a population whose
conventions of language are conventions to the highest degree in every way.
One might try to explain unsharp analyticity by recalling that we may not know
whether some worlds are really possible. If a sentence is true in our language in all
worlds except some worlds of doubtful possibility, then that sentence will be of
doubtful analyticity. But this will not help much either. Unsharp analyticity usually seems to arise because we cannot decide whether a sentence would be true in
some bizarre but clearly possible world.
A better explanation would be that our convention of language is not exactly a
convention of truthfulness and trust in a single language, as I have said so far.
Rather it is a convention of truthfulness and trust in whichever we please of some
cluster of similar languages: languages with more or less the same sentences, and
more or less the same truth-values for the sentences in worlds close to our actual
world, but with increasing divergence in truth-values as we go to increasingly
remote, bizarre worlds. The convention confines us to the cluster, but leaves us
with indeterminacies whenever the languages of the cluster disagree. We are free
to settle these indeterminacies however we like. Thus an ordinary, open-textured,
imprecise language is a sort of blur of precise languages—a region, not a point, in
the space of languages. Analyticity is sharp in each language of our cluster. But
when different languages of our cluster disagree on the analyticity of a sentence,
then that sentence is unsharply analytic among us.
Rational reconstructions have been said to be irrelevant to philosophical problems arising in ordinary, unreconstructed language. My hypothesis of conventions
of truthfulness and trust in language-clusters provides a defense against this accusation. Reconstruction is not—or not always—-departure from ordinary language.
Rather it is selection from ordinary language: isolation of one precise language, or
of a sub-cluster, out of the language-cluster wherein we have a convention of truthfulness and trust.
Objection: The thesis and the antithesis pertain to different subjects. The thesis,
in which languages are regarded as semantic systems, belongs to the philosophy of
artificial languages. The antithesis, in which language is regarded as part of human
natural history, belongs to the philosophy of natural language.
Reply: Not so. Both accounts—just like almost any account of almost anything—can most easily be applied to simple, artificial, imaginary examples. Language-games are just as artificial as formalized calculi.
According to the theory I have presented, philosophy of language is a single
subject. The thesis and antithesis have been the property of rival schools; but in
fact they are complementary essential ingredients in any adequate account either of
languages or of language.

TWELVE

General Semantics

I. INTRODUCTION
On the hypothesis that all natural or artificial languages of interest to us can be
given transformational grammars of a certain not-very-special sort, it becomes possible to give very simple general answers to the questions:
(1)
(2)

What sort of thing is a meaning?
What is the form of the semantic rules whereby meanings of compounds
are built from the meanings of their constituent parts?

It is not my plan to make any strong empirical claim about language. To the
contrary: I want to propose a convenient format for semantics general enough to
work for a great variety of logically possible languages. This paper therefore belongs
not to empirical linguistic theory but to the philosophy thereof.
My proposals regarding the nature of meanings will not coniform to the expectations of those linguists who conceive of semantic interpretation as the assignment
to sentences and their constituents of compounds of 'semantic markers' or the like.1
This paper is derived from a talk given at the Third La Jolla Conference on Linguistic Theory, March
1969. I am much indebted to Charles Chastain, Frank Heny, David Kaplan, George LakofF, Richard
Montague, and Barbara Partee for many valuable criticisms and suggestions.
'Jerrold Katz and Paul Postal, An Integrated Theory of Linguistic Descriptions (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press, 1964), for instance.

789

190

Philosophy of Language

Semantic markers are symbols: items in the vocabulary of an artificial language we
may call Semantic Markerese. Semantic interpretation by means of them amounts
merely to a translation algorithm from the object language to the auxiliary language
Markerese. But we can know the Markerese translation of an English sentence without knowing the first thing about the meaning of the English sentence: namely, the
conditions under which it would be true. Semantics with no treatment of truth
conditions is not semantics. Translation into Markerese is at best a substitute for
real semantics, relying either on our tacit competence (at some future date) as
speakers of Markerese or on our ability to do real semantics at least for the one
language Markerese. Translation into Latin might serve as well, except insofar as
the designers of Markerese may choose to build into it useful features—freedom
from ambiguity, grammar based on symbolic logic—that might make it easier to
do real semantics for Markerese than for Latin. 2
The Markerese method is attractive in part just because it deals with nothing
but symbols: finite combinations of entities of a familiar sort out of a finite set of
elements by finitely many applications of finitely many rules. There is no risk of
alarming the ontologically parsimonious. But it is just this pleasing finitude that
prevents Markerese semantics from dealing with the relations between symbols and
the world of non-symbols—that is, with genuinely semantic relations. Accordingly,
we should be prepared to find that in a more adequate method, meanings may
turn out to be complicated, infinite entities built up out of elements belonging to
various ontological categories.
My proposals will also not conform to the expectations of those who, in analyzing meaning, turn immediately to the psychology and sociology of language users:
to intentions, sense-experience, and mental ideas, or to social rules, conventions,
and regularities. I distinguish two topics: first, the description of possible languages
or grammars as abstract semantic systems whereby symbols are associated with
aspects of the world; and second, the description of the psychological and sociological facts whereby a particular one of these abstract semantic systems is the one used
by a person or population. Only confusion comes of mixing these two topics. This
paper deals almost entirely with the first.3
My proposals are in the tradition of referential, or model-theoretic, semantics
descended from Frege, Tarski, Carnap (in his later works), and recent work of
Kripke and others on semantic foundations of intensional logic.4 The project of

2

For similar criticisms, see Bruce Vermazen, review of Jerrold Karz and Paul Postal, An Integrated Theory
of Linguistic Descriptions, and of Katz, Philosophy of Language, in Synthese 17 (1967): 350-65.
3
I discuss the second elsewhere: David Lewis, "Languages and Language," in this volume; Convention:
A Philosophical Study (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, 1969), chapter 5.
''See Gottlob Frege, "Uber Sinn und Bedeutung," Zeitschrift fur Philosophic und phllosophische Kritik
100 (1892): 25-50, translated as "On Sense and Reference," in P. T. Geach and M. Black, Translations from the Philosophical Writings of Gottlob Frege (Oxford: Blackwell, 1960); Alfred Tarski, "Der
Wahrheitsbegriff in den formalisierten Sprachen," Studia Philosophica 1 (1936): 261-405, translated
as "The Concept of Truth in Formalized Languages," in Tarski, Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics

General Semantics

191

transplanting referential semantics from artificial to natural languages has recently
been undertaken, in various ways, by several philosophers and linguists. 5 I have no
quarrel with these efforts; indeed, I have here adapted features from several of
them. I hope, however, that the system set forth in this paper offers a simpler way
to do essentially the same thing. But simplicity is a matter of taste, and simplicity
at one place trades off against simplicity elsewhere. It is in these trade-offs that my
approach differs most from the others.

II. CATEGORIALLY BASED GRAMMARS
A categorial grammar in the sense of Ajdukiewicz6 is a context-free phrase structure
grammar of the following sort.
First, we have a small number of basic categories. One of these is the category
sentence (S). Others might be, for instance, the categories name (N) and common
noun (C). Perhaps we can get by with these three and no more; indeed, Ajdukiewicz
went so far as to do without the category common noun. Or perhaps we might do
better to use different basic categories; we will consider dispensing with the category
name in favor of an alternative basic category verb phrase (VP), or perhaps noun
phrase (NP).
Second, we have infinitely many derived categories. Whenever c, f,, . . . ,c, (n >:
1) are any categories, either basic or derived, we have a derived category which we
will write (cjcl . . . <-,). (However, we usually omit the outermost parentheses.)

(Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1956); Rudolf Carnap, Meaning and Necessity (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1947) and "Replies and Sysrematic Expositions," in P. Schilpp, ed., The Philosophy of
Rudolf Carnap (La Salle, 111.: Open Court, 1963), sec. 9; Saul Kripke, "Semantical Considerations on
Modal Logic," Ada Philosophica Fennica 16 (1963): 83-94; David Kaplan, Foundations of Intensional
Logic (Ph.D. dissertation, U.C.L.A., 1964); Richard Montague, "Logical Necessity, Physical Necessity,
Ethics, and Quantifiers," Inquiry 3 (1960): 259-69; Richard Montague, "Pragmatics," in Contemporary Philosophy—La philosophic contemporaine, ed. by R. Klibansky, (Florence: La Nuova Italia Editrice, 1968); Richard Montague, "Pragmatics and Intensional Logic," Synthese 22 (1970): 68-94;
Dana Scott, "Advice on Modal Logic," in Philosophical Problems in Logic: Recent Developments, ed. by
Karel Lambert, (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1970), pp. 143-73.
'Donald Davidson, "Truth and Meaning," Synthese 17 (1967): 304—23; Terence Parsons, A Semantics
for English (duplicated, 1968); Richard Montague, "Intensional Logic and Some of Its Connections
with Ordinary Language," talk delivered to the Southern California Logic Colloquim, April 1969, and
to the Association of Symbolic Logic meeting at Cleveland, Ohio, May 1969; Richard Montague,
"English as a Formal Language I" in Linguaggi nella societa e nella technica (Milan: Edizoni di Communita, 1970); Richard Montague, "Universal Grammar," Theoria 36 (1970); Edward Keenan, A
Logical Base for a Transformational Grammar ofEnglish (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pennsylvania,
1969).
6
Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz, "Die syntaktische Konnexitat," Studia Philosophica 1 (1935): 1-27; translated
as "Syntactic Connexion," in S. McCall, Polish Logic, (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1967), pp. 207-31;
part one translated as "On Syntactical Coherence," Review of Metaphysics 20 (1967): 635-47.
Yehoshua Bar-Hillel, Language and Information (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1964), part two.

192

Philosophy of Language

Third, we have context-free phrase-structure rules of the form

corresponding to each derived category. That is to say: for any categories c,
ct, . . . ,c,, the result of concatenating any expression of category (c/ct . . . c,), then
any expression of category r,, then. . . , and finally any expression of category c, is
an expression of category c. Accordingly, we will say that a (c/ct. . . c,) takes a r,
and . . . and a c, and makes a c. The phrase-structure rules are implicit in the system
of derived categories.
Finally, we have a lexicon wherein finitely many expressions—words or wordlike morphemes—are assigned to categories. The categories of these lexical expressions may be either basic or derived; unless some lexical expressions belong to
derived categories, no non-lexical compound expressions can be generated. Notice
that although there are infinitely many derived categories and infinitely many
phase-structure rules, nevertheless with any given lexicon all but finitely many categories and rules will be unemployed. This is true even though many lexica will
generate infintely many compound expressions.
To specify a categorial grammar, we need only specify its lexicon. The rest is
common to all categorial grammars. Consider this lexicon:

(a
(believes
(every
(grunts
<is
( loves
(Petunia

(S/(S/N))/C>
(S/N)/S>
(S/(S/N))/C)
S/N)
(S/N)/N)
(S/N)/N)
N)

<pig
(piggishly
(Porky
(something
(the
(which
(yellow

C)

(S/N)/(S/N)>
N>

S/(S/N)>
(S/(S/N))/C>
(C/C)/(S/N)>
C/C)

It gives us a categorial grammar which is simply a notational variant of this rather
commonplace context-free grammar:
S

VP

NP + VP
Nprr
VP + Npr
Adv + VP NP
Vt + Npr Nco
Vs + SS
VP

NP

Art + Nco

Nco
Adj

Adj + Nco
Rel + VP

w

V

Vs
Art
Adj
Adv
Rel

Porky
Petunia
something
Pig

grunts
loves
is

believes
a
every
the
yellow
piggishly
which

General Semantics

193

There are three peculiarities about the grammar. First, proper nouns are distinguished from noun phrases. Proper nouns or noun phrases may be subjects (though
with different word order) but only proper nouns may be objects. Second, there is
nothing to prevent inappropriate iteration of modifiers. Third, the word order is
sometimes odd. We will see later how these peculiarities may be overcome.
The employed rules in this example are the eight phrase-structure rules corresponding to the eight employed derived categories.
In this example, I have used only derived categories of the form (cjc() that take
a single argument. I shall adopt this restriction for the most part in practice, but
not in principle.
It is apparent that categorial grammars of this sort are not reasonable grammars
for natural language. For that matter, they are not reasonable grammars for most
artificial languages either—the exception being symbolic logic in Polish notation.
Hence, despite their elegance, categorial grammars have largely been ignored since
the early 1950's. Since then, however, we have become interested in the plan of
using a simple phrase-structure grammar as a base for a transformational grammar.
The time therefore seems ripe to explore categorially based transformational grammars, obtained by taking an Ajdukiewicz categorial grammar as base and adding a
transformational component. So far as I know, this proposal has been made only
once before,7 but it seems an obvious one.
It is obvious that by adding a transformational component to the categorial
grammar of our example, we could rectify the word order and filter out inappropriate iterations of modifiers. Less obviously, we could provide for noun phrase
objects by means of a transformational component together with a few additional
lexical items—items that need never appear in the final generated sentences.
If reasonable categorially based transformational grammars can be given for all
languages of interest to us, and if this can be done under the constraint that meanings are to be determined entirely by base structure, so that the transformational
component is irrelevant to semantics, then it becomes extremely easy to give general
answer to the questions: What is a meaning? What is the form of a semantic projection rule? Let us see how this can be done.

III. INTENSIONS FOR BASIC CATEGORIES
In order to say what a meaning is, we may first ask what a meaning does, and then
find something that does that.
A meaning for a sentence is something that determines the conditions under
which the sentence is true or false. It determines the truth-value of the sentence in
various possible states of affairs, at various times, at various places, for various
7

John Lyons, "Towards a 'Notional' Theory of the Parts of Speech," Journal of Linguistics 2 (1966):
209-236.

794

Philosophy of Language

speakers, and so on. (I mean this to apply even to non-declarative sentences, but
postpone consideration of them.) Similarly, a meaning for a name is something
that determines what thing, if any, the name names in various possible states of
affairs, at various times, and so on. Among 'things' we include things that do not
actually exist, but might exist in states of affairs different from the actual state of
affairs. Similarly, a meaning for a common noun is something that determines
which (possible or actual) things, if any, that common noun applies to in various
possible states of affairs, at various times, and so on.
We call the truth-value of a sentence the extension of that sentence; we call the
thing named by a name the extension of that name; we call the set of things to
which a common noun applies the extension of that common noun. The extension
of something in one of these three categories depends on its meaning and, in general, on other things as well: on facts about the world, on the time of utterance, on
the place of utterance, on the speaker, on the surrounding discourse, etc. It is the
meaning which determines how the extension depends upon the combination of
other relevant factors. What sort of things determine how something depends on
something else? Functions, of course; functions in the most general set-theoretic
sense, in which the domain of arguments and the range of values may consist of
entities of any sort whatever, and in which it is not required that the function be
specifiable by any simple rule. We have now found something to do at least part
of what a meaning for a sentence, name, or common noun does: a function which
yields as output an appropriate extension when given as input a package of the
various factors on which the extension may depend. We will call such an input
package of relevant factors an index; and we will call any function from indices to
appropriate extensions for a sentence, name, or common noun an intension.
Thus an appropriate intension for a sentence is any function from indices to truthvalues; an appropriate intension for a name is any function from indices to things;
an appropriate intension for a common noun is any function from indices to sets.
The plan to construe intensions as extension-determining functions originated with
Carnap.8 Accordingly, let us call such functions Carnapian intensions. But whereas
Carnap's extension-determining functions take as their arguments models or statedescriptions representing possible worlds, I will adopt the suggestion9 of letting the
arguments be packages of miscellaneous factors relevant to determining extensions.
We may take indices as ^-tuples (finite sequences) of the various items other
than meaning that may enter into determining extensions. We call these various
items coordinates of the index, and we shall assume that the coordinates are given
some arbitrary fixed order.
8

Rudolf Carnap, Meaning and Necessity (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1947), sec. 40; and Rudolf
Carnap, "Replies and Systematic Expositions," in P. Schilpp, ed.. The Philosophy of Rudolf Carnap,
(La Salle, 111.; Open Court, 1963).
9
Richatd Montague, "Pragmatics," in Contemporary Philosophy—La philosophic contemporaine; Dana
Scott, "Advice on Modal Logic."

General Semantics

195

First, we must have a possible-world coordinate. Contingent sentences depend for
their truth value on facts about the world, and so are true at some possible worlds
and false at others. A possible world corresponds to a possible totality of facts,
determinate in all respects. Common nouns also have different extensions at different possible worlds; and so do some names, at least if we adopt the position10 that
things are related to their counterparts in other worlds by ties of strong similarity
rather than identity.
Second, we must have several contextual coordinates corresponding to familiar
sorts of dependence on features of context. (The world coordinate itself might be
regarded as a feature of context, since different possible utterances of a sentence are
located in different possible worlds.) We must have a time coordinate, in view of
tensed sentences and such sentences as 'Today is Tuesday'; a place coordinate, in
view of such sentences as 'Here there are tigers'; a speaker coordinate in view of
such sentences as 'I am Porky'; an audience coordinate in view of such sentences as
'You are Porky'; an indicated-objects coordinate in view of such sentences as 'That
pig is Porky' or 'Those men are Communists'; and a previous discourse coordinate
in view of such sentences as 'The aforementioned pig is Porky'.
Third, it is convenient to have an assignment coordinate: an infinite sequence of
things, regarded as giving the values of any variables that may occur free in such
expressions as ''x is tall' or 'son of y . Each variable employed in the language will
accordingly be a name having as its intension, for some number n, the nth variable
intension: that function whose value, at any index i, is that thing which is the reth
term of the assignment coordinate of i. That thing is the extension, or value, of the
variable at i. (Note that because there is more than one possible thing, the variable
intensions are distinct: nothing is both the «,th and the « 2 th variable intension for
two different numbers «, and » 2 .) The extensions of'x is tali' and 'son of y depend
on the assignment and world coordinates of indices just as the extensions of 'I am
tall' and 'son of mine' depend on the speaker and world coordinates. Yet the
assignment coordinate cannot naturally be included among features of context. One
might claim that variables do not appear in sentences of natural languages; but
even if this is so, it may be useful to employ variables in a categorial base. In any
case, I seek sufficient generality to accommodate languages that do employ variables.
Perhaps other coordinates would be useful. (See the Appendix.) But let us stop
here, even though the penalty for introducing a superfluous coordinate is mere
clutter, while the penalty for omitting a needed one is inadequacy. Thus an index
is tentatively any octuple of which the first coordinate is a possible world, the
second coordinate is a moment of time, the third coordinate is a place, the fourth
coordinate is a person (or other creature capable of being a speaker), the fifth coordinate is a set of persons (or other creatures capable of being an audience), the sixth
coordinate is a set (possibly empty) of concrete things capable of being pointed at,
lu

Defended in "Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic," in this volume.

196

Philosophy of Language

the seventh coordinate is a segment of discourse, and the eighth coordinate is an
infinite sequence of things.
Intensions, our functions from indices to extensions, are designed to do part of
what meanings do. Yet they are not meanings; for there are differences in meaning
unaccompanied by differences in intension. It would be absurd to say that all tautologies have the same meaning, but they have the same intension: the constant
function having at every index the value truth. Intensions are part of the way to
meanings, however, and they are of interest in their own right. We shall consider
later what must be added to an intension to obtain something that can do all of
what a meaning does.
We may permit Carnapian intensions to be partial functions from indices, undefined at some indices. A name may not denote anything at a given possible world.
'Pegasus', for instance, denotes nothing at our world, so its intension may be taken
as undefined at any index having our world as its world coordinate. A sentence that
suffers from failure of presupposition is often thought to lack a truth-value." If we
adopt this treatment of presupposition, sentences susceptible to lack of truth-value
should have intensions that are undefined at some indices. They might even have
intensions that are undefined at all indices; a sentence with inconsistent presuppositions should have as its intension the empty function, defined at no index.
Hitherto I have spoken uncritically of 'things'. Things are name extensions and
values of name intensions; sets of things are common-noun extensions and values
of common-noun intensions; sequences of things are assignment coordinates of
indices. Change the underlying set of things and we change the sets of extensions,
indices, and Carnapian intensions. What, then, are things? Of course I want to say,
once and for all: everything is a thing. But I must not say that. Not all sets of
things can be things; else the set of things would be larger than itself. No Carnapian
intension can be a thing (unless it is undefined at certain indices); else it would be
a member of ... a member of itself. We must understand the above definitions of
extensions, indices, and Carnapian intensions (and the coming definitions of compositional intensions, meanings, and lexica) as tacitly relativized to a chosen set of
things. Can we choose the set of things once and for all? Not quite; no matter what
set we choose as the set of things, the system of intensions defined over that set
will not provide intensions for certain terms—'intension', for instance—of the
semantic metalanguage corresponding to that choice. Consider the language of this
paper (minus this paragraph) with the extension of 'thing' somehow fixed; it is an
adequate semantic metalanguage for some languages but not for itself. To do
semantics for it, we must move to a second language in which 'thing' is taken more
inclusively; to do semantics for that language we must move to a third language
"For instance in P. F. Strawson, "On Referring," Mind 59 (1950): 320-44; Edward Keenan, A Logical
Base for a Transformational Grammar nf English: James McCawley, "Semantic Representation," paper
presented to a symposium on Cognitive Studies and Artificial Intelligence Research, University of
Chicago Center for Continuing Education, March 1969.

General Semantics

197

in which 'thing' is taken more inclusively still; and so on. Any language can be
treated in a metalanguage in which 'thing' is taken inclusively enough; but the
generality of semantics is fundamentally limited by the fact that no language can
be its own semantic metalanguage12 and hence there can be no universal semantic
metalanguage. But we can approach generality as closely as we like by taking
'thing' inclusively enough. For the remainder of this paper, let us proceed on the
assumption that the set of things has been chosen, almost once and for all, as some
very inclusive set: at least as the universe of some intended model of standard set
theory with all the non-sets we want, actual or possible, included as individuals.
Let us ignore the sequence of semantic metalanguages that still escape treatment.
In that case there is overlap between things, sets of things, and truth-values.
(Not all sets of things can be things, but some should be.) Moreover, there is
overlap between sets and truth-values if we adopt the common conventions of identifying the truth-values truth and falsity with the numbers 1 and 0 respectively,
and of identifying each natural number with the set of its predecessors. Thus the
appropriate extensions and intensions for sentences, names, and common nouns
overlap. The same function that is the intension of all contradictions is also the
intension of the name 'zero' and of the common noun 'round square'. Such overlap,
however, is harmless. Whenever we want to get rid of it, we can replace intensions
by ordered pairs of a category and an intension appropriate for that category.

IV. INTENSIONS FOR DERIVED CATEGORIES
Turning to derived categories, it is best to foresake extensions and Carnapian intensions in the interest of generality. Sometimes, for instance, a C/C—that is, an
adjective—has an extension like that of a common noun: a set of things to which
(at a given index) it applies. Probably 'married' is such an extensional adjective.
But most adjectives do not have extensions. What is the set of things to which
'alleged' applies? An alleged Communist is not something which is, on the one
hand, an alleged thing and, on the other hand, a Communist.
In general, an adjective takes a common noun to make a new, compound common noun; and the intension of the new common noun depends on the intension
of the original common noun in a manner determined by the meaning of the adjective. A meaning for an adjective, therefore, is something that determines how one
common-noun intension depends on another. Looking for an entity that does what
a meaning does, we are led to say that an appropriate intension for an adjective is
any function from common-noun intensions to common-noun intensions. In more
detail: it is a function whose domain and range consist of functions from indices
to sets. Thus the intension of 'alleged' is a function that, when given as argument
12

Cf. Tarski, "Der Wahrheitsbegriff in den formalisierten Sprachen"; translated as 'The Concept of
Truth in Formalized Languages,' in Tarski, Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics.

198

Philosophy of Language

the intension of 'Communist', 'windshield', or 'chipmunk' yields as value the
intension of the compound common noun 'alleged Communist', 'alleged windshield', or 'alleged chipmunk' respectively. Note that it would not work to use
instead a function from common-noun extensions (sets) to common-noun extensions; for at certain indices 'Communist' and 'Maoist' have the same extension but
'alleged Communist' and 'alleged Maoist' do not—or, at other indices, vice versa.
More generally, let us say that an appropriate intension for a (c/c,. . . . ca), where
c, c,, . . . , and c, are any categories, basic or derived, is any w-place function from
^-intensions, . . . , and c.-intensions to ^-intensions. That is, it is any function
(again in the most general set-theoretic sense) having as its range of values a set of
f-intensions, having as its domain of first arguments the set of c,-intensions, . . . ,
and having as its domain of wth arguments the set of ^-intensions. A (r/V, . . . O
takes a r, and . . . and a c, and makes a f by concatenation; correspondingly, a
(f/f, . . . rj-intension takes a r,-intension and . . . and a ^-intension as arguments
and makes a r-intension as function value. We will call these intensions for derived
categories compositional intensions," The general form of the semantic projection
rules for an interpreted categorial grammar is implicit in the nature of compositional intensions, just as the general form of the phase-structure rules is implicit in
the nomenclature for derived categories. The result of concatenating a (c/c, . . . c,)
with intension </>„, a c, with intension $,, . . . , and a c, with intension </>„ is a c
with intension </>0('/)i . . . 0J.
We have considered already the derived category adjective C/C. For another
example, take the derived category verb phrase, S/N.
A verb phrase takes a name to make a sentence. (We rely on the transformational
component to change the word order if necessary.) An appropriate intension for a
verb phrase—an S/N-intension—is therefore a function from name intensions to
sentence intensions. That is, it is a function from functions from indices to things
to functions from indices to truth values. The intension of 'grunts', for instance, is
that function (p whose value, given as argument any function </>, from indices to
things, is that function 02 from indices to truth values such that, for any index i,
truth if <£[(*) is something which grunts at the world and time
given by the appropriate coordinates of i
falsity otherwise.
Applying the projection rule, we find that the sentence 'Porky grunts' is true at just
those indices i such that the thing named by 'Porky' at i grunts at the possible
world that is the world coordinate of / at the time which is the time coordinate of
^Intensions resembling some of my compositional intensions are discussed in David Kaplan, Foundations of Intentional Logic; in Dana Scott, "Advice on Modal Logic"; and—as appropriate intensions
for adjectives and other modifiers—in Terence Parsons, A Semantics for English, and in Richard
Montague, "English as a Formal Language I." The latter discussion is due in part to J. A. W. Kamp.

General Semantics

199

i. (The appearance of circularity in this account is spurious; it comes of the fact
that I am using English to specify the intension of a word of English.)
For another example, take the derived category adverb (of one sort),
(S/N)/(S/N). An adverb of this sort takes a verb phrase to make a verb phrase;
so an appropriate intension for such an adverb—an (S/N)/(S/N)-intension—is a
function from verb-phrase intensions to verb-phrase intensions; or, in more detail,
a function from functions from functions from indices to things to functions from
indices to truth-values to functions from functions from indices to things to functions from indices to truth-values.
I promised simplicity; I deliver functions from functions from functions to functions to functions from functions to functions. And worse is in store if we consider
the sort of adverb that modifies ordinary adverbs: the category ((S/N)/(S/N))/
((S/N)/(S/N)). Yet I think no apology is called for. Intensions are complicated
constructs, but the principles of their construction are extremely simple. The situation is common: look at any account of the set-theoretic construction of real numbers, yet recall that children often understand the real numbers rather well.
In some cases, it would be possible to find simpler intensions, but at an exorbitant cost: we would have to give up the uniform function-and-arguments form
for semantic projection rules. We have noted already that some adjectives are extensional, though most are not. The extensional adjectives could be given sets as extensions and functions from indices to sets as Carnapian intensions. Similarly for verb
phrases: we may call a verb phrase extensional if there is a function (p from indices
to sets such that if 0, is the (compositional) intension of the verb phrase, (j)2 is any
name intension, <£3 is 0,($2X and ' is any index, then
truth if o2(i) is a member of o(i)

falsity otherwise.
If there is any such function 0, there is exactly one; we can call it the Carnapian
intension of the verb phrase and we can call its value at any index i the extension
of the verb phrase at i. 'Grunts', for instance, is an extensional verb phrase; its
extension at an index i is the set of things that grunt at the world and the time
given by the world coordinate and the time coordinate of the index /. Verb phrases,
unlike adjectives, are ordinarily extensional; but Barbara Partee has pointed out
that the verb phrase in The price of milk is rising' seems to be non-extensional.
There is no harm in noting that extensional adjectives and verb phrases have
Carnapian intensions as well as compositional intensions. However, it is the compositional intension that should be used to determine the intension of an extensional-adjective-plus-common-noun or extensional-verb-phrase-plus-name combination. If we used the Carnapian intensions, we would have a miscellany of
semantic projection rules rather than the uniform function-and-arguments rule.
(Indeed, the best way to formulate projection rules using Carnapian intensions
might be to combine a rule for reconstructing compositional intensions from Car-

200

Philosophy of Language

napian intensions with the function-and-arguments rule for compositional intensions.) Moreover, we would sacrifice generality: non-extensional adjectives and verb
phrases would have to be treated separately from the extensional ones, or not at
all. This loss of generality would be serious in the case of adjectives; but not in the
case of verb phrases since there are few, if any, non-extensional verb phrases.
For the sake of generality, we might wish to take account of selection restrictions
by allowing a compositional intension to be undefined for some arguments of
appropriate type. If we thought that 'green idea' should lack an intension, for
instance, we might conclude that the intension of 'green' ought to be a partial
function from common-noun intensions to common-noun intensions, undefined for
such arguments as the intension of 'idea'. It proves more convenient, however,
never to let the intension be undefined but rather to let it take on a value called
the null intension (for the appropriate category). The null intension for the basic
categories will be the empty function; the null intension for any derived category
(c/c, . . . f,,) will be that {c/ct . . . rj-intension whose value for any combination
of appropriate arguments is the null intension for c. Thus the intension of 'green',
given as argument the intension of 'idea', yields as value the null intension for the
category C. The intension of the adverb 'furiously', given as argument the intension
of 'sleeps', yields as value the null intension for the category S/N, and that in turn,
given as value any name intension, yields as value the null intension for the category
S, (I dislike this treatment of selection restrictions, but provide the option for those
who want it.)
It is worth mentioning that my account of intensions for derived categories, and
of the corresponding form for projection rules, is independent of my account of
intensions for basic categories. Whatever S-intensions and N-intensions may be—
even expressions of Markerese or ideas in someone's mind—it still is possible to
take S/N-intensions as functions from N-intensions to S-intensions and to obtain
the intension of 'Porky grunts' by applying the intension of 'grunts' as function to
the intension of 'Porky' as argument.

V. MEANINGS
We have already observed that intensions for sentences cannot be identified with
meanings since differences in meaning-—for instance, between tautologies—may
not carry with them any difference in intension. The same goes for other categories,
basic or derived. Differences in intension, we may say, give us coarse differences in
meaning. For fine differences in meaning we must look to the analysis of a compound into consituents and to the intensions of the several constituents. For instance
'Snow is white or it isn't' differs finely in meaning from 'Grass is green or it isn't'
because of the difference in intension between the embedded sentences 'Snow is
white' and 'Grass is green'. For still finer differences in meaning we must look in
turn to the intensions of constituents of constituents, and so on. Only when we

General Semantics

201

come to non-compound, lexical constituents, can we take sameness of intension as
a sufficient condition of synonymy. 14
It is natural, therefore, to identify meanings with semantically interpreted phrase
markers minus their terminal nodes: finite ordered trees having at each node a
category and an appropriate intension. If we associate a meaning of this sort with
an expression, we are given the category and intension of the expression; and if the
expression is compound, we are given also the categories and intensions of its constituent parts, their constituent parts, and so on down.
Perhaps we would thereby cut meanings too finely. For instance, we will be
unable to agree with someone who says that a double negation has the same meaning as the corresponding affirmative. But this difficulty does not worry me: we will
have both intensions and what I call meanings, and sometimes one and sometimes
the other will be preferable as an explication of our ordinary discourse about meanings. Perhaps some entities of intermediate fineness can also be found, but I doubt
that there is any uniquely natural way to do so.
It may be disturbing that in our explication of meanings we have made arbitrary
choices—for instance, of the order of coordinates in an index. Meanings are meanings—how can we choose to construct them in one way rather than another? The
objection is a general objection to set-theoretic constructions," so I will not reply
to it here. But if it troubles you, you may prefer to say that real meanings are sui
generis entities and that the constructs I call 'meanings' do duty for real meanings
because there is a natural one-to-one correspondence between them and the real
meanings.
It might also be disturbing that I have spoken of categories without hitherto
saying what they are. This again is a matter of arbitrary choice; we might, for
instance, take them as sets of expressions in some language, or as sets of intensions,
or even as arbitrarily chosen code-numbers. It turns out to be most convenient, if
slightly unnatural, to identify categories with their own names: expressions composed in the proper way out of the letters 'S', 'N 1 , 'C' (and whatever others we
may introduce later in considering revisions of the system) together with parentheses and diagonal slashes. This does not prevent our category-names from being
names of categories: they name themselves. All definitions involving categories are
to be understood in accordance with the identification of categories and categorynames.
Some might even wish to know what a tree is. Very well: it is a function that
assigns to each member of the set of nodes of the tree an object said to occupy or
be at that node. The nodes themselves are finite sequences of positive numbers. A
set of such sequences is the set of nodes of some tree iff, first, it is a finite set, and
14

See Rudolf Carnap. Meaning and Necessity, sec. 14, on 'intensional isomorphism'; Clarence 1. Lewis,
"The Modes of Meaning," Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 4 (1944): 236-49, on 'analytic
meaning'.
"See Paul Benacerraf, "What Numbers Could Not Be," Philosophical Review 74 (1965): 47-73.

202

Philosophy of Language

second, whenever it contains a sequence (b\ . . . bt) then it also contains every
sequence that is an initial segment of {£, . . . bt) and every sequence (£, . . .
bk-\b'k) with b' k <- bk. We regard ( ), the sequence of zero length, as the topmost
node; (£,) as the $,th node from the left immediately beneath ( }; (bl t2) as
the bf\\ node from the left immediately beneath {£,); and so on. We can easily
define all the requisite notions of tree theory in terms of this construction.
Once we have identified meanings with semantically interpreted phrase markers,
it becomes natural to reconstrue the phrase-structure rules of categorial grammar,
together with the corresponding projection rules, as conditions of well-formedness
for meanings.' 6 Accordingly, we now define a meaning as a tree such that, first, each
node is occupied by an ordered pair (c </>) of a category and an appropriate intension for that category; and second, immediately beneath any non-terminal node
occupied by such a pair (c <f>) are two or more nodes, and these are occupied by
pairs (q, (/>„), (ct </>,), . . . , (c, $„) (in that order) such that c0 is (c/ct . . . cn) and
4> is <&,(</>,. . . . (/>„).
A meaning may be a tree with a single node; call such meanings simple and
other meanings compound. Compound meanings are, as it were, built up from simple meanings by steps in which several meanings (simple or compound) are combined as sub-trees under a new node, analogously to the way in which expressions
are built up by concatenating shorter expressions. We may call a meaning m' a
constituent of a meaning m if m' is a subtree of m. We may say that a meaning m
is generated by a set of simple meanings iff every simple constituent of m belongs
to that set. More generally, m is generated by a set of meanings (simple or compound) iff every simple constituent of m is a constituent of some constituent of m,
possibly itself, which belongs to that set.
We shall in many ways speak of meanings as though they were symbolic expressions generated by an interpreted categorial grammar, even though they are nothing
of the sort. The category of a meaning is the category found as the first component
of its topmost node. The intension of a meaning is the intension found as the second
component of its topmost node. The extension at an index i of a. sentence meaning,
name meaning, or common-noun meaning is the value of the intension of the
meaning for the argument i. A sentence meaning is true or false at z according as
its extension at / is truth or falsity; a name meaning names at i that thing, if any,
which is its extension at i; and a common-noun meaning applies at i to whatever
things belong to its extension at i. As we have seen, extensions might also be provided for certain meanings in derived categories such as C/C or S/N, but this
cannot be done in a non-artificial, general way.
Given as fundamental the definition of truth of a sentence meaning at an index,
we can define many derivative truth relations. Coordinates of the index may be

16

Cf. James McCawley, "Concerning the Base Component of a Transformational Grammar," Foundations of Language 4 (1968): 243-69.

General Semantics

203

made explicit, or may be determined by a context of utterance, or may be generalized over. Generalizing over all coordinates, we can say that a sentence meaning
is analytic (in one sense) iff it is true at every index. Generalizing over the world
and assignment coordinates and letting the remaining coordinates be determined
by context, we can say that a sentence meaning is analytic (in another sense) on a
given occasion iff it is true at every index ; having as its time, place, speaker,
audience, indicated-objects, and previous-discourse coordinates respectively the
time, the place, the speaker, the audience, the set of objects pointed to, and the
previous discourse on that occasion. Generalizing over the time and assignment
coordinates and letting the others (including world) be determined by context, we
define eternal truth of a sentence meaning on an occasion, generalizing over the
assignment coordinate and letting all the rest be determined by context, we define
simply truth on an occasion; and so on.
We also can define truth relations even stronger than truth at every index. Let
us call a meaning m' a semantic variant of a meaning m iff m and m' have exactly
the same nodes, with the same category but not necessarily the same intension at
each node, and, whenever a common intension appears at two terminal nodes in
m, a common intension also appears at those two nodes in m'. Let us call m' an
s-fixed semantic variant of m, where s is a set of simple meanings, iff m and m' are
semantic variants and every member of / which is a constituent of m is also a
constituent, at the same place, of m''. Then we can call a sentence meaning s-true
iff every /-fixed semantic variant of it (including itself) is true at every index. If s
is the set of simple meanings whose bearers we would classify as logical vocabulary,
then we may call /-true sentence meanings logically true; if s is the set of simple
meanings whose bearers we would classify as mathematical (including logical)
vocabulary, we may call /-true sentence meanings mathematically true. Analogously, we can define a relation of /-fixed semantic variance between sequences of
meanings; and we can say that a sentence meaning m0 is an s-consequence (for
instance, a logical consequence or mathematical consequence) of sentence meanings
7»i, . . . iff, for every /-fixed semantic variant (m'0 m', . . . } of the sequence
(ma *»,. . . . ) and every index ; such that all of m\, . . . are true at i, m'0 is true
at i. (The premises #z,, . . . may be infinite in number. Their order is insignificant.)
These definitions are adapted from definitions in terms of truth in all logically or
mathematically standard interpretations of a given language. However, we have
been able to avoid introducing the notion of alternative interpretations of a language, since so far we are dealing entirely with meanings.

VI. GRAMMARS RECONSTRUCTED
Our system of meanings may serve, in effect, as a universal base for categorially
based transformational grammars. There is no need to repeat the phrase-structure
rules of categorial well-formedness as a base component in each such grammar.

204

Philosophy of Language

Instead, we take the meanings as given, and regard a grammar as specifying a way
to encode meanings: a relation between certain meanings and certain expressions
(sequences of sound-types or of mark-types) which we will call the representing
relation determined by the grammar. We might just identify grammars with representing relations; but I prefer to take grammars as systems which determine representing relations in a certain way.
If we were concerned with nothing but transformation-free categorial grammars,
we could take a grammar to consist of nothing but a lexicon: a finite set of triples
of the form (e c <f>) where e is an expression, c is a category, and tj> is an intension
appropriate for that category. We may say that an expression e represents or has a
meaning m relative to a lexicon L iff L contains items (e, c, (/>,), . . . , { < ; „ cn $„}
such that, first, e is the result of concatenating e,, . . . , e, (in that order), and second,
the terminal nodes of m are occupied by ( f , < / > , } , . . . , (<:„ <j>,} (in that order).
We could instead have proceeded in two steps. Let us define a (categorial) phrase
marker as a tree having categories at its non-terminal nodes and expressions at its
terminal nodes. Then a phrase marker p represents or has a meaning m relative to
a lexicon L iff p is obtained from m as follows: given any terminal node of the
meaning m occupied by a pair (c </>), place below it another node occupied by an
expression e such that the item (e c 0) is contained in the lexicon; then remove
the intensions, replacing the (c </>) pair at each non-terminal node by its unaccompanied category c. Note that the set of meanings thus representable relative to a
lexicon L comprises all and only those meanings that are generated by the set of
simple meanings of the lexical items themselves; let us call it the set of meanings
generated by the lexicon L.
Next, we define the terminal string of a phrase marker p as the expression
obtained by concatenating, in order, the expressions at the terminal nodes of p.
Thus we see that an expression e represents a meaning m relative to a lexicon L,
according to the definition above, i f f e is the terminal string of some phrase marker
that represents m relative to L.
In the case of a categorially based transformational grammar, we have not two
steps but three. Such a grammar consists of a lexicon L together with a transformational component T. The latter imposes finitely many constraints on finite
sequences of phrase markers. A sequence { / > , . . . p,) of phrase markers that satisfies
the constraints imposed by T will be called a (transformational) derivation of p,
from /), in T. An expression e represents or has a meaning m in a grammar
{L T) iff there exists a derivation (pt . . . />„) in T such that e is the terminal
string of p, and p, represents m relative to the lexicon L. If so, we will also call e
a meaningful expression, p, a surface structure of e, /V-i an d • • • and p2 intermediate
structures of e, />, a base structure of e, and m a meaning of e (all relative to the
grammar (L T)). However, we will call any phrase marker p a base structure in
(L T) iff it represents a meaning relative to L. whether or not it is the base structure o/any expression; thus we allow for base structures which are filtered out by
not being the first term of any derivation in T.
The representing relation given by a grammar (L T) is by no means a one-to-

General Semantics

205

one correspondence between meanings and expressions. A given expression might
be ambiguous, representing several different meanings. (If it represents several different but cointensive meanings, however, it might be inappropriate to call it
ambiguous; for the common notion of meaning seems to hover between our technical notions of meaning and of intension.) On the other hand, several expressions
might be synonymous, representing a single meaning. We might also call several
expressions completely synonymous iff they share all their meanings; synonymy and
complete synonymy coincide when we are dealing only with unambiguous expressions. If several expressions represent different but cointensive meanings, we may
call them equivalent but not synonymous. If several expressions not only represent
the same meaning but also have a single base structure, we may call them not only
equivalent and synonymous but also paraphrases of one another.
Given a representing relation, all the semantic relations defined hitherto for
meanings carry over to expressions having those meanings. (If we like, they may
carry over also to the base, surface, and intermediate structures between the meanings and the expressions.) Thus we know what it means to speak, relative to a given
grammar and qualified in cases of ambiguity by 'on a meaning' or 'on all meanings', of the category and intension of any meaningful expression; of the extension
at a given index of any expression of appropriate category; of the thing named by
a name; of the things to which a common noun applies; of the truth at an index,
truth on an occasion, analyticity, logical truth, etc. of a sentence; and so on.
We should note an oddity in our treatment of logical truth. A synonym of a
logically true sentence is itself a logical truth, since it represents the same logically
true meaning as the original. Hence a descendant by synonym-substitution of a
logical truth is itself a logical truth if the synonym-substitution is confined to single
lexical items in the base structure; but not otherwise. 'All woodchucks are groundhogs' comes out logically true, whereas 'All squares are equilateral rectangles'
comes out merely analytic (in the strongest sense).
A transformational component may constrain sequences of phrase markers in two
ways. There is the local constraint that any two adjacent phrase markers in a derivation must stand in one of finitely many relations; these permitted relations
between adjacent phrase markers are the transformations. There may also be global
derivational constraints specifying relations between non-adjacent phrase markers
or properties of the derivation as a whole. An example is the constraint requiring
transformations to apply in some specified cyclic (or partly cyclic) order.
A transformation-free categorial grammar is a special case of a categorially based
transformational grammar. It has a transformational component with no transformations or global constraints, so that the derivations therein are all and only those
sequences {/»,) consisting of a single phrase marker.
I will not attempt to say more exactly what a transformation or a transformational component is. Mathematically precise definitions have been given, 17 but to
17

For instance in P. Stanley Peters and R. W. Ritchie, On the Generative Power of Transformational
Grammars (Technical Report in Computer Science, University of Washington, Seattle, Wash., 1969).

206

Philosophy of Language

choose among these would involve taking sides on disputed questions in syntactic
theory. I prefer to maintain my neutrality, and I have no present need for a precise
delineation of the class of transformational grammars. I have foremost in mind a
sort of simplified Aspects-model grammar, 18 but I have said nothing to eliminate
various alternatives.
I have said nothing to eliminate generative semantics. What I have chosen to
call the 'lexicon' is the initial lexicon. Words not in that lexicon might be introduced transformationally on the way from base to surface, if that seems desirable.
It might even be that none of the initial lexical items ever reach the surface, and
that all surface lexical items (expressions found at terminal nodes of surface structures) are introduced transformationally within derivations. In that case it would
be appropriate to use a standardized initial lexicon in all grammars, and to rechristen my base structures 'semantic representations'. In that case also there might or
might not be a level between base and surface at which word-introducing transformations are done and other transformations have not yet begun.
I have also said nothing to eliminate surface semantics. This may seem strange,
since I have indeed said that meanings are to be determined by base structures
alone. However, I rely here on the observation" that surface-structure interpretation
rules are indistinguishable from global derivational constraints relating three levels:
base structures (regarded as semantic representations), deep structures (an intermediate level), and surface structures. Deep structures might be ambiguous; a transformational grammar with base-deep-surface constraints might permit two
derivations

differing at the base and surface but not at the deep level, but it might rule out
other derivations of the forms

In such a case base structure (and hence meaning) would be determined by deep
and surface structure together, but not by deep structure alone. Similarly, we might
have constraints relating base structure not only to deep and surface structure but
also to structure at various other intermediate levels.
I have said nothing to eliminate a non-trivial phonological component; but I
would relocate it as part of the transformational component. The last few steps of
a transformational derivation might go from the usual pre-phonological surface
structure to a post-phonological surface structure whence the output expression can
be obtained simply by concatenation of terminal nodes.
18

Noam Chomsky, Aspects of the Theory of Syntax (Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1965).
George Lakoff, "On Generative Semantics," in Semantics: An Interdisciplinary Reader in Philosophy,
Linguistics, Anthropology and Psychology, ed. by Danny Steinberg and Leon Jakobovits, (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1970), sec. 3.

19

General Semantics

20 7

I have said nothing to eliminate an elaborate system of selection restrictions; but
these will appear not as restrictions on the lexical insertions between meanings and
base structures but as transformational filtering later on. There will be base structures representing the meanings of such questionable sentences as 'Seventeen eats
beans' and 'He sang a pregnant toothbrush'. But these base structures need not be
the first terms of any derivations, so these meanings may be unrepresented by sentences. If we like selection restrictions, we might match the lexicon to the transformational component in such a way as to filter out just those meanings that have
the null intension.
I have not stipulated that only sentential meanings may be represented; that
stipulation could be added if there is reason for it.
In fact, the only restriction I place on syntax is that transformational grammars
should be categorially based. In other words: a transformational component should
operate on a set of categorial phrase markers representing a set of meanings generated by some lexicon. But categorial bases are varied enough that this restriction
is not at all severe. I claim that whatever familiar sort of base component you may
favor on syntactic grounds, you can find a categorial base (i.e. a suitable part of the
system of meanings, generated by a suitable chosen lexicon) that resembles the base
you favor closely enough to share its attractive properties. Indeed, with a few preliminary rearranging transformations you can go from my categorial base structures
to (notational variants of) more familiar base structures; then you can proceed
exactly as before. I shall not marshall evidence for this claim; but I think that the
following exploration of alternative categorial treatments of quantification will
exhibit the close similarities between these categorial treatments and several alternative familiar base components. If it were necessary to choose between a categorial
base that was convenient for semantics and a non-categorial base that was convenient for transformational syntax, I might still choose the the former. But I deny
the need to choose.
This completes the exposition of my proposed system of categories, intensions,
and meanings. Now I shall consider how this system—either as is or slightly
revised—might be applied to two difficult areas: the semantics of quantification
and the semantics of non-declaratives. The treatments following are intended only
as illustrations, however; many further alternatives are possible, and might be more
convenient for syntax.

VII. TREATMENT OF QUANTIFICATION AND NOUN PHRASES
Let us consider such expressions as 'a pig', 'most pigs', 'seventeen pigs', 'roughly
seventeen pigs', 'some yellow pig', 'everything', 'nobody', and the like. We call
these quantifier phrases (presupposing that they should belong to a common category). What category in our system is this? What sort of intensions do quantifier
phrases have?

208

Philosophy of Language

Quantifier phrases combine with verb phrases to make sentences: 'Some pig
grunts', 'Nobody grunts', 'Roughly seventeen pigs grunt', and the like. Names do
this, since the category verb phrase is the derived category S/N. But quantifier
phrases cannot be names, under our semantic treatment of names, because they do
not in general name anything. ('The pig' could be an exception at indices such that
exactly one pig existed at the world and time given by the index.) The absurd
consequences of treating 'nobody', as a name, for instance, are well known. 20 If a
quantifier phrase combines with an S/N to make an S, and yet is not an N, it
must therefore be an S/(S/N).
Except perhaps for one-word quantifier phrases—'nobody', 'everything', and
such—quantifier phrases contain constituent common nouns. These may be either
simple, as in 'some pig' or compound, as in 'every pink pig that wins a blue ribbon'. Indeed, we may regard common nouns simply as predicates used to restrict
quantifiers. 21 The expressions 'a', 'the', 'some', 'every', 'no', 'most', 'seventeen',
'roughly seventeen', and so on which combine with common nouns (simple or
compound) to make quantifier phrases and which are variously called quantifiers,
determiners, or articles must therefore belong to the category (S/(S/N))/C. And
modifiers of quantifiers like 'roughly', which combine with certain quantifiers to
make quantifiers, must belong to the category ((S/(S/N))/C)/((S/(S/N))/C).
Selection restrictions by means of transformational filtering could be used to dispose
of quantifiers like 'roughly the'.
The intension of 'some pig' may be taken as that function </> from S/N-intensions to S-intensions such that if (/>, is any S/N-intension, (f>2 is the S-intension
<t>((t>t), and ; is any index, then
truth if,for some N-intension o3, o3(i) is a pig and if o4 is o1(o3)
then o4(i) is truth
falsity otherwise.

The intension of 'some' may be taken as that function </> from C-intensions to
S/(S/N)-intensions such that if </>, is any C-intension, <f>2 is the S/(S/N)-intension
</>(<^>,), (/), is any S/N-intension, 04 is the S-intension <p2(<t>i), and i is any index,
then
truth if,for some N-intension o5, o5(i) is a member and if o1(i)and
if o6 is o3(o5) then o6(i) is truth

falsity otherwise.

I spare you the intension of 'roughly'.
Other intensions might be specified for 'some pig' and 'some' that would differ
from these only when a quantifier phrase was applied to a non-extensional verb
20
21

Charles L. Dodgson, Through the Looking-GIass (London, 1871).
This suggestion derives from Richard Montague, "English as a Formal Language I."

General Semantics

209

phrase. If there are no non-extensional verb phrases in English, then the choice
among these alternatives is arbitrary.
This treatment of quantifier phrases is motivated by a desire to handle simple
sentences involving quantifier phrases as straightforwardly as possible, minimizing
the use of transformations. But it raises problems. Quantifier phrases seemingly
occur not only as subjects of sentences but also as objects of verbs or prepositions.
And in all their roles—as subjects or as objects—they are interchangeable with
names. That is why it is usual to have a category noun phrase comprising both
quantifier phrases and names.
We might try the heroic course of doubling all our object-takers. We could
have one word 'loves' which is an (S/N)/N and takes the object 'Petunia' to
make the verb phrase 'loves Petunia'; and alongside it another 'loves' which is an
(S/N)/(S/(S/N)) and takes the object 'some pig' to make the verb phrase 'loves
some pig'. But we need not decide how much we mind such extravagant doubling,
since it does not work anyway. It would give us one meaning for 'Every boy loves
some girl': the weaker meaning, on which the sentence can be true even if each boy
loves a different girl. But the sentence is ambiguous; where shall we get a stronger
meaning, on which the sentence is true only if a certain girl—Zuleika, perhaps—
is loved by all boys? (There are those who do not perceive this ambiguity; but we
seek a treatment general enough to handle the idolects of those who do.) The
method of doubling object-takers is a blind alley; rather we must look to the
method of variable binding, routinely used in the semantic analysis of standardly
formulated symbolic logic.
The quantifiers of symbolic logic belong to the category S/NS, taking a name
and a sentence to make a sentence. The name must be a variable; other combinations could be disposed of by transformational filtering. For instance, the logician's
quantifier 'some' takes the variable 'x' and the sentence 'grunts x' to make a sen
tence translatable into English as 'something grunts'. The logician's 'some' has as
its intension that function (j) from N-intensions and S-intensions to S-intensions
such that if </>, is the wth variable intension for any number n, <j>2 is any S-intension,
03 is (j)(4>t<t>2), and i is any index, then
truth if for some index i' that is like i except perhaps at the nth
term of the assignment coordinate, o2(i')is truth
falsity otherwise;

and such that if $, is any N-intension that is not a variable intension and </>2 is any
S-intension, then <j>(4>l(t>2) is the null intension. The intension of the logician's quantifier 'every' is specified similarly, with 'for every index / ' . . . ' replacing 'for some
index /' . . .'.
It would be troublesome to employ logician's quantifiers in a grammar for
English. In the first place, these quantifiers are unrestricted, ranging over everything. The base structure of 'Some pig grunts', for instance, would come out as

270

Philosophy of Language

in which there is no constituent corresponding to 'some pig' and in which 'pig'
and 'grunts' alike are put into the category S/N. (It was with structures like this
in mind that Ajdukiewicz saw fit to omit the category C.) This attempt to dispense
with quantifier phrases in favor of unrestricted quantifiers taking compound sentences is clumsy at best, and fails entirely for quantifiers such as 'most'. 22 In the
second place, by having the quantifier itself do the binding of variables, we require
there to be bound variables wherever there are quantifiers. We get the unnecessarily
complicated base structure

for 'Something grunts', whereas if we had employed quantifier phrases which take
verb phrases and do not bind variables, we could have had

with three constituents instead of six and no work for the transformations to do.
It is not necessary, however, that the quantifier itself should bind variables. We
can stick with verb-phrase-taking quantifier phrases of the category S/(S/N),
restricted by constituent common nouns in most cases, and bind variables when
necessary—but only when necessary—by means of a separate constituent called a
binder: a certain sort of (S/N)/S that takes a sentence and makes an extensional
verb phrase by binding a variable at all its free occurrences (if any) in the sentence.
22

See John Wallace, "Sortal Predicates and Quantification," Journal of Philosophy 62 (1965): 8-13.

General Semantics

211

To every variable there corresponds a binder. Suppose 'x' is a variable; we may
write its corresponding binder as 'x" and read it as 'is something x such that'. (But
presumably binders may best be treated as base constituents that never reach the
surface; so if the words 'is something x such that' ever appear in a meaningful
expression, they will be derived not from an 'x" in base structure but in some other
way.) For instance, the following base structure using a binder is equivalent to
'grunts' and might be read loosely as 'is something x such that x grunts'.

The following is a possible base structure for 'is loved by y'.

The following might be a base structure for 'Porky loves himself'. 23

(Provided there is no ambiguity among our variables, we can use them in this way
to keep track of coreferentiality, rather than subscripting the names in
23

Cf. James McCawley, "Semantic Representation."

212

Philosophy of Language

to indicate whether we are dealing with one Porky or two.)
If V has the »th variable intension, then the corresponding binder 'x has the
wth binder intension: that function <p from S-intensions to S/N-intensions such that
if 0, is any S-intension, (t>2 is the S/N-intension </>($,), $3 is any N-intension, </>4
is the S-intension </>2($3), z is any index, and /' is that index which has 0 s (z) as the
reth term of its assignment coordinate and otherwise is like /', then 0 4 (/) = </>,(;').
It can be verified that this intension justifies the reading of 'x" as 'is something x
such that'.
A finite supply of variables and binders, however large, would lead to the mistaken omission of some sentences. To provide an infinite supply by means of a
finite lexicon, we must allow our variables and binders to be generated as compounds. We need only three lexical items: one simple variable having the first
variable intension; an N/N having as intension a function whose value, given as
argument the nth variable intension for any »>; 1, is the (» + l)th variable intension; and an ((S/N)/S)/N having as intension a function whose value, given as
argument the »th variable intension for any «>1, is the wth binder intension. The
first item gives us a starting variable; the second, interated, manufactures the other
variables; the third manufactures binders out of variables. However, we will continue to abbreviate base structures by writing variables and binders as if they were
simple.
Variable-binding introduces a sort of spurious ambiguity called alphabetic variance. 'Porky loves himself could have not only the structure shown but also others
in which 'x' and 'x are replaced by '/ and 'y', or V and '£', etc. Since different
variables may have different intensions, these structures correspond to infinitely
many different cointensive meanings for 'Porky loves himself. The simplest way
to deal with this nuisance is to define an ordering of any such set of meanings and
employ transformational filtering to dispose of all but the first meaning in the set
(according to the ordering).
Binders have occasionally been discussed by logicians, under the name 'abstraction operators' or 'lambda operators'. 24
"Alonzo Church, The Calculi of Lambda Conversion (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1941);
Rudolf Carnap, Introduction to Symbolic Logic (New York: Dover, 1958), sec. 33; Richmond Thomason and Robert Stalnaker, "Modality and Reference," Notts 2 (1968): 359-72.

General Semantics

213

Now we are in a position to complete our account of the category S/(S/N) of
verb-phrase-taking quantifier phrases, using binders as needed. The base structure
for 'Every boy loves Zuleika' may be simply

with no unnecessary variable-binding to make work for the transformational component. There is another base structure with variable-binding which we may read
roughly as 'Every boy is something x such that x loves Zuleika'; it represents a
different but equivalent meaning. We can either let these be another base structure
and another (but equivalent) meaning for 'Every boy loves Zuleika' or get rid of
them by transformational filtering. The base structure for 'Lothario loves some girl'
is

in which the quantifier phrase which is the surface object of 'loves' is treated as
subject of a verb phrase obtained by binding the variable which is the base object
of 'loves'. To reach an intermediate structure in which the quantifier phrase is relocated as the object of 'loves', we must have recourse to a transformation that moves
the subject of a verb phrase made by variable binding into the place of one (the
first?) occurrence of the bound variable and destroys the variable-binding apparatus.
Note that, if desired, this transformation might apply beneath an intermediate level
corresponding most closely to the ordinary level of deep structure. The two base
structures for 'Every boy loves some girl' are

214

Philosophy of Language

for the weak sense, and

for the strong—Zuleika—sense.
It may be that quantifier-phrase objects should not be abandoned altogether.
'Lothario seeks a girl', in the sense in which it can be paraphrased as 'Lothario
seeks a certain particular girl', can have the base structure

General Semantics

215

but what about the sense in which any old girl would do? We might give it the
base structure

using a second 'seeks' that takes quantifier-phrase objects. The alternative is to let
the word 'seeks' be introduced transformationally rather than lexically, as a transformational descendant of'strives-to-find', so that the base structures would be

for the sense in which a certain particular girl is sought and

216

Philosophy of Language

for the sense in which any old girl would do. But it is controversial whether we
ought to let words be introduced transformationally in this way; and it is not clear
how to apply this treatment to 'conceives of a tree'. 25 Perhaps conceiving-ofis imagining-to-exist, but perhaps not.
This completes one treatment of quantifier phrases, carried out with no modification of the system I originally presented. It is straightforward from the semantic
point of view; however, it might result in excessive complications to transformational syntax. Ordinary bases have a category noun phrase which combines quantifier phrases and names; and transformations seem to work well on bases of that
sort. By dividng the category of noun phrases, I may require some transformations
to be doubled (or quadrupled, etc.). Moreover, my structures involving variablebinding are complicated and remote from the surface, so by doing away with quantifier-phrase objects I make lots of work for the transformational component. It
might be, therefore, that this treatment is too costly to syntax. Therefore let us see
how we might reinstate the combined category noun phrase. There are two methods:
we might try to assimilate names to quantifier phrases, or we might try to assimilate quantifier phrases to names.
The method of assimilating names to quantifier phrases proceeds as follows. For
every name in our lexicon, for instance 'Porky', we add to our lexicon a corresponding pseudo-name in the category S/(S/N). If the intension of the original name
'Porky' is the N-intension (f>,, then the intension of the corresponding pseudo-name
'Porky*' should be that function (j> from S/N-intensions to S-intensions such that
for any S/N-intension 02, 0(02) = $2(0i)- As a result, a sentence such as 'Porky
grunts' can be given either of the base structures

and will have the same intension either way. The category S/(S/N) may now be
renamed noun phrase. It contains our former quantifier phrases together with our
new pseudo-names. It does not contain names themselves. Names are now unnecessary as subjects, but still needed as objects; so the next step is to replace all nametakers except verb phrases by noun-phrase-takers, For instance, the category
(S/N)/N of transitive verbs is to be replaced by the category (S/N)/(S/(S/N))
of pseudo-transitive verbs. The intensions of the replacements are related to the
intensions of the originals in a systematic way which I shall not bother to specify.
Names now serve no further purpose, having been supplanted both as subjects and
25

As remarked in Richard Montague, "Intensional Logic and Some of Its Connections with Ordinary
Language," talk delivered to the Southern California Logic Colloquium, April 1969, and to the Association of Symbolic Logic meeting at Cleveland, Ohio, May 1969.

General Semantic.

217

as objects by pseudo-names; so the next step is to remove names from the lexicon.
The category N is left vacant.
Since we have provided for noun-phrase objects for the sake of the pseudonames, we can also have quantifier-phrase objects and so cut down on variablebinding. For instance, we have

as the base structure for 'Every boy loves some girl' in the weak sense, leaving no
work for the transformations. We cannot do away with variable-binding altogether,
however. The base structure for 'Every boy loves some girl' in the strong—
Zuleika—-sense is now

in which the seeming noun-phrase object 'some girl' is treated as subject of a verb
phrase obtained by binding the pseudo-variable noun phrase 'x*' which is the real
object of 'loves'. Variables are names, of course, and therefore are replaced by
pseudo-names just as any other names are; no change is made, however, in the
corresponding binders.
So far we have not departed from the system I presented originally, and we could
stop here. It is now advantageous, however, to take the step of eliminating the
category N altogether and promoting the category verb phrase from a derived category S/N to a new basic category VP. Accordingly, the category of noun phrases
becomes S/VP; the category of quantifiers becomes (S/VP)/C; the category of
transitive verbs becomes VP/(S/VP); and the category which includes binders
becomes VP/S.
We can also reopen the question of letting verb-phrase intensions be Carnapian

218

Philosophy of Language

rather than compositional. We rejected this simplification before, principally
because it would require a projection rule which was not of our general functionand-arguments form; but that consideration no longer holds after names and verbphrase-plus-name combinations are done away with. A lesser objection still applies:
the simplification only works for extensional verb phrases. If any non-extensional
verb phrases exist, they cannot go into our new basic category VP with Carnapian
intensions. They will have to go into the category S/(S/VP) instead. The switch
to Carnapian intensions for the now-basic verb phrases changes most other intensions in a systematic way which I need not stop to specify.
We turn last to the opposite method, in which quantifier phrases are assimilated
to names to give an undivided category of noun phrases. This will require revising
the extensions and intensions of names in a manner discussed by Mates26 and
Montague. 27
In the dark ages of logic, a story something like this was told. The phrase 'some
pig' names a strange thing we may call the existentially generic pig which has just
those properties that some pig has. Since some pig is male, some pig (a different
one) is female, some pig is pink (all over), and some pig is grey (all over), the
existentially generic pig is simultaneously male, female, pink, and grey. Accordingly, he (she?) is in the extensions both of 'is male' and of 'is female', both of 'is
pink all over' and of 'is grey all over'. The phrase 'every pig' names a different
strange thing called the universally generic pig which has just those properties that
every pig has. Since not every pig is pink, grey, or any other color the universally
generic pig is not of any color. (Yet neither is he colorless, since not every—indeed
not any—pig is colorless). Nor is he (?) male or female (or neuter), since not every
pig is any one of these. He is, however, a pig and an animal, and he grunts; for
every pig is a pig and an animal, and grunts. There are also the negative universally
generic pig which has just those properties that no pig has (he is not a pig, but he
is both a stone and a number), the majority generic pig which has just those properties that more than half of all pigs have, and many more. A sentence formed
from a name and an extensional verb phrase is true (we may add: at an index i) if
and only if the thing named by the name (at i) belongs to the extension of the verb
phrase (at i); and this is so regardless of whether the name happens to be a name
like 'Porky' of an ordinary thing or a name like 'some pig' of a generic thing.
This story is preposterous since nothing, however recondite, can possibly have
more or less than one of a set of incompatible and jointly exhaustive properties, At
least, nothing can have more or less than one of them as its properties. But something, a set, can have any combination of them as its members; there is no contradiction in that.
Let us define the character of a thing as the set of its properties. Porky's character
26

Benson Mates, "Leibniz on Possible Worlds," in Logic, Methodology, and Philosophy of Science ///, ed.
by B. van Roocselaar and J. F. Sraal, (Amsterdam: North-Holland Publ. Co., 1968).
"Richard Montague, "Intensional Logic and Some of Its Connections with Ordinary language", "Universal Grammar," Theoria 36 (1970).

General Semantics

219

is that set which has as members just those properties that Porky has as properties.
The various generic pigs do not, and could not possibly, exist; but their characters
do. The character of the universally generic pig, for instance, is the set having as
members just those properties that every pig has as properties.
A character is any set of properties. A character is individual iff it is a maximal
compatible set of properties, so that something could possess all and only the properties contained in it; otherwise the character is generic,
Since no two things share all their properties (on a sufficiently inclusive conception of properties) things correspond one-to-one to their individual characters. We
can exploit this correspondence to replace things by their characters whenever convenient. Some philosophers have even tried to eliminate things altogether in favor
of their characters, saying that things are 'bundles of properties'.28 We need not go
so far. We will replace things by individual characters as extensions of names, and
as members of extensions of common nouns. However, we may keep the things
themselves as well, taking them to be related to their names via their characters.
Having made this substitution, we are ready to assimilate quantifier phrases to
names by letting them also take characters—in most cases, generic characters—as
extensions. 'Porky' has as extension Porky's individual character; 'every pig' has as
extension the generic character of the universally generic pig. Even 'nobody' has an
extension: the set of just those properties that nobody has.
We revise the system of meanings as follows. Our basic categories are sentence
(S), noun phrase (NP), and common noun (C). Appropriate extensions for sentences
are truth values; appropriate extensions for noun phrases are characters, either individual or generic; appropriate extensions for common nouns are sets of individual
characters. Intensions are as before: for basic categories, functions from some or all
indices to appropriate extensions; for a derived category (c/ct . . . c,), functions
from f,-intensions, . . . , and (-.-intensions to ("-intensions. A name is an NP that
never has a generic character as its extension at any index. The category of quantifiers becomes NP/C; the category of verb phrases becomes S/NP. Object-takers
take NP objects which may or may not be names. Some variable-binding still is
required; the two base structures for 'Every boy loves some girl' are

28

Such a system is proposed as a formal reconstruction of Leibniz's doctrine of possible individuals in
Benson Mates, "Leibniz on Possible Worlds," in Logic, Methodology, and Philosophy of Science III, ed.
by van Rootselaar and Staal.

220

Philosophy of Language

for the weak sense and

for the strong sense. Variables are names: the »th variable intension now becomes
that NP-intension that assigns to every index i the character at the world coordinate
of i of the thing that is the »th term of the assignment coordinate of /. The intensions of binders are revised to fit.

VIII. TREATMENT OF NON-DECLARATIVES
A meaning for a sentence, we said initially, was at least that which determines the
conditions under which the sentence is true or false. But it is only declarative sentences that can be called true or false in any straightforward way. What of nondeclarative sentences: commands, questions, and so on? If these do not have truthvalues, as they are commonly supposed not to, we cannot very well say that their
meanings determine their truth conditions.
One method of treating non-declaratives is to analyze all sentences, declarative
or non-declarative, into two components: a sentence radical that specifies a state of
affairs and a mood that determines whether the speaker is declaring that the state
of affairs holds, commanding that it hold, asking whether it holds, or what. 29 We
are to regard the sentences
It is the case that you are late.
Make it the case that you are late!
Is it the case that you are late?
or more idiomatically
You are late.
Be late!
Are you late?
!9

I adopt the terminology of Erik Stenius, "Mood and Language-Game," Synthese 17 (1967); 254-74,
one recent exposition of such a view.

General Semantics

221

as having a common sentence-radical specifying the state of affairs consisting of
your being late, but differing in their moods: declarative, imperative, and interrogative. They might be given the base structures

with S now understood as the category sentence radical. Different moods will
induce different transformations of the sentence radical, leading to the different
sentences above. The sentence radical is not a declarative sentence. If it is represented on the surface at all, it should be represented as the clause 'that you are
late'. All that we have said about sentences should be taken as applying rather to
sentence radicals. It is sentence radicals that have truth-values as extensions, functions from indices to truth-values as intensions, and meanings with the category S
and an S-intension at the topmost node. We may grant that a declarative sentence
is called true iff its sentence radical has the value truth; if we liked, we could also
call an imperative or interrogative or other non-declarative sentence true iff its sentence radical has the value truth, but we customarily do not. Fundamentally, however, the entire apparatus of referential semantics (whether done on a categorial
base as I propose, or otherwise) pertains to sentence radicals and constituents
thereof. The semantics of mood is something entirely different. It consists of rules
of language use such as these (adapted from Stenius30):
Utter a sentence representing the combination of the mood declarative with
an S-meaning m only if m is true on the occasion in question.
React to a sentence representing the combination of the mood imperative
with an S-meaning m (if addressed to you by a person in a suitable relation
of authority over you) by acting in such a way as to make m true on the
occasion in question.
In abstract semantics, as distinct from the theory of language use, a meaning for a
sentence should simply be a pair of a mood and an S-meaning (moods being identified with some arbitrarily chosen entities).
The method of sentence radicals requires a substantial revision of my system. It
works well for declaratives, imperatives, and yes-no questions. It is hard to see how
"Ibid.

222

Philosophy of Language

it could be applied to other sorts of questions, or to sentences like 'Hurrah for
Porky!'
I prefer an alternative method of treating non-declaratives that requires no revision whatever in my system of categories, intensions, and meanings. Let us once
again regard S as the category sentence, without discrimination of mood. But let us
pay special attention to those sentential meanings that are represented by base structures of roughly the following form.

Such meanings can be represented by performative sentences such as these.31
I command you to be late.
I ask you whether you are late.
Such meanings might also be represented, after a more elaborate transformational
derivation, by non-declaratives.
Be late!
Are you late?
I propose that these non-declaratives ought to be treated as paraphrases of the corresponding performatives, having the same base structure, meaning, intension, and
truth-value at an index or on an occasion. And I propose that there is no difference
in kind between the meanings of these performatives and non-declaratives and the
meanings of the ordinary declarative sentences considered previously.
It is not clear whether we would classify the performative sentences as declarative. If not, then we can divide sentential meanings into declarative sentential
meanings and non-declarative sentential meanings, the latter being represented
both by performatives and by imperatives, questions, etc. But if, as I would prefer,
we classify performatives as declarative, then the distinction between declarative
and non-declarative sentences becomes a purely syntactic, surface distinction. The
only distinction among meanings is the distinction between those sentential meanings that can only be represented by declarative sentences and those that can be
represented either by suitable declarative sentences (performatives) or by non"SeeJ. L. Austin, Haw To Da Things with Words (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1962),
for the standard account of performatives; but, as will be seen, I reject part of this account.

General Semantics

223

declarative paraphrases thereof. Let us call the latter performative sentential meanings. I need not delineate the class of performative sentential meanings precisely,
since I am claiming that they do not need to be singled out for special semantic
treatment.
The method of paraphrased performatives can easily be extended to those nondeclaratives that resisted treatment by the method of sentence radicals. Not only
yes-no questions but other questions as well correspond to performative sentences.
The sentences below
I ask who Sylvia is.
Who is Sylvia?
for instance, might have a common meaning represented by a base structure something like this.

And the sentences
I cheer Porky.
Hurrah for Porky!
might have this base structure. (Thus the word 'Hurrah' would be introduced
transformationally.)

We may classify the sentential meanings represented by these base structures also
as performative.
We noted at the outset that non-declaratives are commonly supposed to lack
truth-values. The method of sentence radicals respects this common opinion by
assigning truth-values fundamentally to sentence radicals rather than to whole sentences. We are under no compulsion to regard a non-declarative sentence as sharing

224

Philosophy of Language

the truth-value of its sentence radical, and we have chosen not to. The method of
paraphrased performatives, on the other hand, does call for the assignment of truthvalues to non-declarative sentences. The truth-value assigned is not that of the
embedded sentence (corresponding to the sentence radical), however, but rather
that of the paraphrased performative. If I say to you 'Be late!' and you are not late,
the embedded sentence is false, but the paraphrased performative is true because I
do command that you be late. I see no problem in letting non-declaratives have
the truth-values of the performatives they paraphrase; after all, we need not ever
mention their truth-values if we would rather not.
So far, I have assumed that performatives themselves do have truth-values, but
that also has been denied.32 I would wish to say that T bet you sixpence it will rain
tomorrow' is true on an occasion of utterance iff the utterer does then bet his audience sixpence that it will rain on the following day; and, if the occasion is normal
in certain respects, the utterer does so bet; therefore his utterance is true. Austin
says it is obviously neither true nor false, apparently because to utter the sentence
(in normal circumstances) is to bet. Granted; but why is that a reason to deny that
the utterance is true? To utter 'I am speaking' is to speak, but it is also to speak
the truth. This much can be said in Austin's defense: the truth-values (and truth
conditions, that is intensions) of performatives and their paraphrases are easily
ignored just because it is hard for a performative to be anything but true on an
occasion of its utterance. Hard but possible: you can be play-acting, practicing elocution, or impersonating an officer and say 'I command that you be late' falsely,
that is, say it without thereby commanding your audience to be late. I claim that
those are the very circumstances in which you could falsely say 'Be late!'; otherwise
it, like the performative, is truly uttered when and because it is uttered. It is no
wonder if the truth-conditions of the sentences embedded in performatives and
their non-declarative paraphrases tend to eclipse the truth conditions of the performatives and non-declaratives themselves.
This eclipsing is most visible in the case of performative sentences of the form
T state that
' or 'I declare that
'. If someone says 'I declare that
the Earth is flat' (sincerely, not play-acting etc.) I claim that he has spoken truly:
he does indeed so declare. I claim this not only for the sake of my theory but as a
point of common sense. Yet one might be tempted to say that he has spoken
falsely, because the sentence embedded in his performative—-the content of his
declaration, the belief he avows—is false. Hence I do not propose to take ordinary
declaratives as paraphrased performatives, as Ross has proposed,'3 because that
would get their truth conditions wrong. If there are strong syntactic reasons for
adopting Ross's proposal, I would regard it as semantically a version of the method
32

J. L. Austin, ibid., lecture one.
John R. Ross, "On Declarative Sentences," Readings in Transformational Grammar, ed. by R. Jacobs
and P. Rosenbaum, (Boston, Mass.: Blaisdell, 1970).

33

General Semantics

225

of sentence radicals, even if it employs base structures that look exactly like the
base structures employed in the method of paraphrased performatives.
I provide only one meaning for the sentence 'I command you to be late'. Someone might well object that this sentence ought to come out ambiguous, because it
can be used in two ways. It can be used to command; thus used, it can be paraphrased as 'Be late!', and it is true when uttered in normal circumstances just
because it is uttered. It can be used instead to describe what I am doing; thus used,
it cannot be paraphrased as an imperative, and it is likely to be false when uttered
because it is difficult to issue a command and simultaneously say that I am doing
so. (Difficult but possible: I might be doing the commanding by signing my name
on a letter while describing what I am doing by talking.)
I agree that there are two alternative uses of this and other performative sentences: the genuinely performative use and the non-performative self-descriptive
use. I agree also that the non-declarative paraphrase can occur only in the performative use. It still does not follow that there are two meanings. Compare the case
of these two sentences.
I am talking in trochaic hexameter.
In hexameter trochaic am I talking.
The latter can be used to talk in trochaic hexameter and is true on any occasion of
its correctly accented utterance. The former cannot be so used and is false on any
occasion of its correctly accented utterance. Yet the two sentences are obviously
paraphrases. Whether a sentence can be used to talk in trochaic hexameter is not a
matter of its meaning. The distinction between using a sentence to talk in trochaic
hexameter or not so using it is one sort of distinction; the distinction between using
a performative sentence performatively and using it self-descriptively is quite
another sort. Still I think the parallel is instructive. A distinction in uses need not
involve a distinction in meanings of the sentences used. It can involve distinction
in surface form; or distinction in conversational setting, intentions, and expectations; or distinction of some other sort. I see no decisive reason to insist that there
is any distinction in meanings associated with the difference between performative
and self-descriptive uses of performative sentences, if the contrary assumption is
theoretically convenient.
We may ask to what extent the method of sentence radicals and the method of
paraphrased performatives are compatible. In particular: given any sentence that
can be analyzed into mood and sentence-radical, can we recover the mood and the
sentence-radical intension from the meaning of the sentence according to the
method of paraphrased performatives?
We almost can do this, but not quite. On the method of sentence radicals, the
difference between the performative and self-descriptive uses of performative sentences must be treated as a difference of meanings. So given a performative sentence
meaning, we will get two pairs of a mood and a sentence-radical intension corre-

226

Philosophy of Language

spending to the two uses. Suppose we are given a performative sentential meaning
represented by a base structure like this, for instance.

For the self-descriptive use, we do just what we would do for a non-performative
sentence meaning: take the mood to be declarative and the sentence-radical intension to be the intension of the entire meaning. In this case, it would be the intension
corresponding to the sentence radical 'that I command you to be late'. For the
performative use, we take the mood to be determined by the (S/N)/NS-intension
at node ( 1 1}, and the sentence-radical intension to be the S-intension at node
(1 3). In this case, these are respectively the intension of 'command', which determines that the mood is imperative, and the S-intension of the embedded sentence
meaning, corresponding to the sentence radical 'that you are late'. Note here a
second advantage, apart from fineness of individuation, of taking meanings as
semantically interpreted phrase markers rather than as single intensions: we can
recover the meanings of constituents from the meanings of their compounds.

APPENDIX: INDICES EXPANDED
Indices are supposed to be packages of everything but meaning that goes into determining extensions. Do we have everything? Let me speculate on several expansions
of the indices that might prove useful.
First, consider the sentence 'This is older than this'. I might say it pointing at a
1962 Volkswagen when I say the first 'this' and at a 1963 Volkswagen when I say
the second 'this'. The sentence should be true on such an occasion; but how can it
be? Using the intension of 'this', with its sensitivity to the indicated-objects coordinate, we obtain the intension of the whole sentence; then we take the value of
that intension at an index with world and contextual coordinates determined by
features of the occasion of utterance. (We generalize over indices alike except at the
assignment coordinate; but we can consider any one of these, since the assignment
coordinate is irrelevant to the sentence in question.) This procedure ignores the fact
that the indicated object changes part-way through the occasion of utterance. So

General Semantics

221

the sentence comes out false, as it should on any occasion when the indicated object
stays the same.
On a more extensional approach to semantics, a solution would be easy. We
could take the two extensions of 'this' on the two occasions of its utterance and use
these, rather than the fixed intension of 'this', to determine the truth-value of the
sentence. The intension and the occasion of utterance of the sentence as a whole
would drop out. But since the extensions of compounds are not in general determined by the extensions of their constituents, this extensional solution would preclude a uniform treatment of semantic projection rules.
An acceptable solution has been suggested to me by David Kaplan, as follows.
Let the indicated-objects coordinate be not just one set of objects capable of being
pointed at but an infinite sequence of such sets. Let the indicated-objects coordinate
determined by a given occasion of utterance of a sentence have as its »th term the
set of things pointed to at the »th utterance of 'this' during the utterance of the
sentence so long as « does not exceed the number of such utterances, and let it be
the empty set when « does exceed that number. Let there be an infinite sequence
of constituents 'this,', 'this 2 ', . . . with intensions such that 'this,' depends for its
extension at an index on the »th term of the assignment coordinate. So that the
lexicon will remain finite, let all but 'this,' be compounds generated by iterated
application of a suitable N/N to 'this,'. Let all members of the sequence appear
as 'this' in surface structure. Use transformational filtering to dispose of all base
structures except those employing an initial segment of the 'this'-sequence so
arranged that if the subscripts were carried to the surface, they would appear in
numerical order without repetition. Thus the only base structure for 'This is older
than this' will be

which will be true on occasions of the sort in question.
The solution must be modified to allow for the fact that 'this' is not the only
demonstrative; I omit details. Similar difficulties arise, and similar solutions are
possible, for other contextual coordinates: time, place, audience, and perhaps
speaker.
Second, consider the sentence 'The door is open'. This does not mean that the
one and only door that now exists is open; nor does it mean that the one and only
door near the place of utterance, or pointed at, or mentioned in previous discourse,
is open. Rather it means that the one and only door among the objects that are
somehow prominent on the occasion is open. An object may be prominent because

228

Philosophy of Language

it is nearby, or pointed at, or mentioned; but none of these is a necessary condition
of contextual prominence. So perhaps we need a prominent-objects coordinate, a new
contextual coordinate independent of the others. It will be determined, on a given
occasion of utterance of a sentence, by mental factors such as the speaker's expectations regarding the things he is likely to bring to the attention of his audience.
Third, consider the suggestion34 that the extension of a personal name on a given
occasion depends partly on the causal chain leading from the bestowal of that name
on some person to the later use of that name by a speaker on the occasion in
question. We might wish to accept this theory, and yet wish to deny that the
intension or meaning of the name depends, on the occasion in question, upon the
causal history of the speaker's use of it; for we might not wish to give up the
common presumption that the meaning of an expression for a speaker depends only
on mental factors within him. We might solve this dilemma 35 by including a
causal-history-of-acquisition-of-names coordinate in our indices and letting the intensions of names for a speaker determine their extensions only relative to that coordinate.
Fourth, we have so far been ignoring the vagueness of natural language. Perhaps
we are right to ignore it, or rather to deport it from semantics to the theory of
language-use. We could say, as I do elsewhere,36 that languages themselves are free
of vagueness but that the linguistic conventions of a population, or the linguistic
habits of a person, select not a point but a fuzzy region in the space of precise
languages. However, it might prove better to treat vagueness within semantics, and
we could do so as follows."
Pretend first that the only vagueness is the vagueness of 'cool' and 'warm'; and
suppose for simplicity that these are extensional adjectives. Let the indices contain
a delineation coordinate: a positive real number, regarded as the boundary temperature between cool and warm things. Thus at an index i the extension of 'cool' is
the set of things at the world and time coordinates of / having temperatures (in
degrees Kelvin) less than or equal to the delineation coordinate of i; the extension
of 'warm' is the set of such things having temperatures greater than the delineation
coordinate. A vague sentence such as 'This is cool' is true, on a given occasion, at
some but not all delineations; that is, at some but not all indices that are alike
except in delineation and have the world and contextual coordinates determined
by the occasion of utterance. But sentences with vague constituents are not necessarily vague: "This is cool or warm, but not both' is true at all delineations, on an

"David Kaplan, "Quantifying In," Synlhese 19 (1968): 178-214; Keith Donnellan, "Proper Names
and Identifying Descriptions," Synthese 21 (1970): 335-58.
35
As I proposed in "Languages and Language," in this volume.
v
'Convention: A Philosophical Study (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1969), chapter 5.
n
A related treatment, developed independently, is to he found in J. A. Goguen, "The Logic of Inexact
Concepts," Synthese 19 (1969): 325-73.

General Semantics

229

occasion on which there is a unique indicated object, even if the indicated object is
lukewarm.
The delineation coordinate is non-contextual. It resembles the assignment coordinate, in that we will ordinarily generalize over it rather than hold it fixed. We
may say that a sentence is true over a set s of delineations at an index i, iff, for any
index /' that is like ; except perhaps at the delineation coordinate, the sentence is
true at /' if and only if the delineation coordinate of i' belongs to s. Given a normalized measure function over delineations, we can say that a sentence is true to
degree d at i iff it is true at ( over a set of delineations of measure d. Note that the
degree of truth of a truth-functional compound of sentences is not a function of
the degrees of truth of its constituent sentences: 'x is cool' and 'x is warm' may
both be true to degree .5 at an index i, but 'x is cool or x is cool' is true at i to
degree .5 whereas 'x is cool or x is warm' is true at i to degree 1.
Treating vagueness within semantics makes for simple specifications of the intensions of such expressions as 'in some sense', 'paradigmatic', '
ish', and
'
er than'. The contemporary idiom 'in some sense', for instance, is an S/S
related to the delineation coordinate just as the modal operator 'possibly' is related
to the world coordinate. The intension of 'in some sense' is that function 0 such
that if 0, is any S-intension, <j>2 is 0(0,), and i is any index, then
truth if for some index i' that is like i except perhaps at the delineation coordinate,o1(i') is truth
falsity otherwise.

The comparative '
er than' is a ((C/C)/N)/(C/C) having an intension such
that, for instance, 'x is cooler than / is true at an index ; iff the set of delineations
over which 'y is cool' is true at i is a proper subset of the set of delineations over
which 'x is cool' is true at i. It follows that the sun is not cooler than Sirius unless
in some sense the sun is cool; but that conclusion seems correct, although I do not
know whether to deny that the sun is cooler than Sirius or to agree that in some
sense the sun is cool.38
More generally, the delineation coordinate must be a sequence of boundaryspecifying numbers. Different vague expressions will depend for their extensions
(or, if they are not extensional, for the extensions of their extensional compounds)
on different terms of the delineation. More than one term of the delineation coordinate might be involved for a single expression. For instance, the intension of
'green' might involve one term regarded as delineating the blue-green boundary
and another regarded as delineating the green-yellow boundary. The former but
not the latter would be one of the two terms involved in the intension of 'blue';
and so on around the circle of hues.

This analysis of comparatives was suggested to me by David Kaplan.

230

Philosophy of Language

Postscripts to
"General Semantics"
A. INDEX AND CONTEXT1
An index is an K-tuple which serves as a package of the various features of context
on which extensions may depend. But my packages were far too small. There are
ever so many relevant features of context besides the ones I listed. For discussion
of a few more of them, see "Scorekeeping in a Language Game" (in this volume).
We could wait for the end of linguistic inquiry, and define our indices then. But
the less patient of us may prefer another solution. Let the features of context mostly
be given implicitly. Once we have world, time, and speaker, what can be lacking?
The place is the place where that speaker is at that time at that world; the appropriate resolutions of vagueness are (under)determined by the pragmatic forces present in the conversation that has been going on around that speaker just before that
time at that world; and so on for other features of context, however numerous and
however recondite.
So perhaps my packages were not too small after all, but rather were too big.
Why not stop with world, time, and speaker? Or, as I would prefer, with all three
in one: a world-bound time-slice of a (potential) speaker. Call this a context,2
A context gives us a world, time, and speaker that are suitably related: the
speaker is present at that time at that world. If we take world-bound time-slices,
the relatedness is automatic. If we take world-time-speaker triples, the relatedness
is not automatic, but we must nevertheless demand it: without it, our method for
recovering the other features of context makes no sense.
Then, sad to say, contexts cannot replace indices. For we must often consider an
index whose world, time, and speaker are not suitably related, as witness the truth
of "I was not here yesterday, and I might not have been here now". To evaluate
this sentence as true, we must shift first time and then world in ways that destroy
the relatedness. Likewise we may need to shift other coordinates in ways that
destroy their relation to world, time, and speaker, as witness the truth of "No
matter who you are, you'd better understand double indexing". It is a good ques'For a fuller discussion, see my "Index, Context, and Content," in Stig Kangcr and Sven Ohman, cds.,
Philosophy and Grammar (Dordrecht. Reidel, 1981). I am much indebted to Robert Stalnaker, "Pragmatics," Synthest 22 (1970): 272-89, and to David Kaplan's unpublished study of demonstratives.
!
It will not escape the reader of "Attitudes De Ditto and De Se" (in this volume) that these "contexts"
arc the same as the "subjects" that self-ascribe properties, and that sets of them are the self-ascribed
properties. This agreement might well be exploited m the semantic analysis of de se attitude-sentences.
Arnim von Stechow has put forward proposals to this effect in his contribution to a symposium held
at Konstanz University in September 1981.

General Semantics

231

tion which, and how many, features of context are subject to such shifting. Certainly, far from all of them. I think it reasonable to hope for a short list of all the
shiftable features of context, well before the end of inquiry.
Given that short list, the thing to do is to define an index so that its first coordinate is a context, and its remaining coordinates correspond not to all the relevant
features of context but only to all the shiftable features. Then we must distinguish
two sorts of indices: Original indices, in which the shiftable features are as determined by the context which appears as first coordinate; and shifted indices, in which
that is not so. Truth in a context is truth at an original index, and this is the
semantic notion that is directly relevant to truthful speech. Truth at indices generally is an auxiliary notion: truth of a sentence at an original index may be determined by the extensions of its constituents at shifted indices, and more generally
by the structure of Carnapian and compositional intensions involving the full range
of indices.

B. VARIABLES AND BINDING
I was able to make provision, within a purely categorial grammar and its system
of intensions, for individual variables and for abstraction operators to bind them.
But my method cannot be extended to provide variables and binders throughout
the employed categories, lest we fall afoul of the Fundierungsaxiom of standard set
theory. The utility of bound variables in many categories has been shewn in the
work of M. J. Cresswell, so I now think it best to follow his example and invest
in the means for variable-binding outside the categorial framework. 3

C. INFINITIVES VERSUS CLAUSES
Although my framework did not require it, in several examples I went out of my
way to transform surface infinitives into underlying sentential clauses. Thus
"Lothario strives to find x" came out as (C) instead of (I).

3

See his Logics and Languages (London: Methuen, 1973).

232

Philosophy of Language

But (I) would have been better, for several reasons. (1) It is closer to surface structure. (2) It treats "strive to find x" as a genuine constituent. (3) It meshes with
my proposal in "Attitudes De Dido and De Se" that the objects of attitudes should
be taken in general as properties rather than propositions. For instance, an appropriate object of (the attitudinal part of) striving would be a property such as the
property of finding a certain individual x. (4) If Lothario does not realize that he
himself is Lothario, striving that he himself find x might differ from striving that
Lothario find x. If so, it is the former, rather than the latter, that we call "striving
to find x".
Similarly, I would now prefer that the performative meaning underlying "Be
late!" be taken as follows, so that it will include as a constituent the meaning of
the transitive verb phrase "command to be late".

THIRTEEN

Scorekeeping in a
Language Game

EXAMPLE 1: PRESUPPOSITION1
At any stage in a well-run conversation, a certain amount is presupposed. The parties to the conversation take it for granted; or at least they purport to, whether
sincerely or just "for the sake of the argument." Presuppositions can be created or
destroyed in the course of a conversation. This change is rule-governed, at least up
I am doubly grateful to Robert Stalnaker; first, for his treatment of presupposition, here summarized
as Example 1, which I have taken as the prototype for parallel treatments of other topics; and second,
for valuable comments on a previous version of this paper. I am also much indebted to Stephen Isard,
who discusses many of the phenomena that I consider here in his "Changing the Context," in Edward
L. Keenan, ed., formal Semantics of Natural Language (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1974).
Proposals along somewhat the same lines as mine are to be found in Thomas T. Ballmer, "Einfuhrung
und Kontrolle von Diskurswelten," in Dieter Wunderlich, ed., Linguistische Pragmatik (Konigstein,
W. Germ.: Athenaum-Verlag, 1972), and Ballmer, Logical Grammar: with Special Consideration of
Topics in Context Change (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1978).
An early version of this paper was presented to the Vacation School in Logic at Victoria University
of Wellington in August 1976; I thank the New Zealand-United States Educational Foundation for
research support on that occasion. The paper also was presented at a workshop on pragmatics and
conditionals at the University of Western Ontario in May 1978, and at a colloquium on semantics at
Konstanz University in September 1978.
'This treatment of presupposition is taken from two papers of Robert Stalnaker: "Presuppositions,"
Journal of Philosophical Logic 2 (1973): 447-57, and "Pragmatic Presuppositions," in Milton K. Munitz and Peter K. Unger, eds., Semantics and Philosophy (New York: New York University Press, 1974).
233

234

Philosophy of Language

to a point. The presuppositions at time / depend, in a way about which at least
some general principles can be laid down, on the presuppositions at an earlier time
/ and on the course of the conversation (and nearby events) between t and /.
Some things that might be said require suitable presuppositions. They are
acceptable if the required presuppositions are present; not otherwise. "The king of
France is bald" requires the presupposition that France has one king, and one only;
"Even George I.akoff could win" requires the presupposition that George is not a
leading candidate; and so on.
We need not ask just what sort of unacceptability results when a required presupposition is lacking. Some say falsehood, some say lack of truth value, some just
say that it's the kind of unacceptability that results when a required presupposition
is lacking, and some say it might vary from case to case.
Be that as it may, it's not as easy as you might think to say something that will
be unacceptable for lack of required presuppositions. Say something that requires
a missing presupposition, and straightway that presupposition springs into existence, making what you said acceptable after all. (Or at least, that is what happens
if your conversational partners tacitly acquiesce—if no one says "But France has
three kings!" or "Whadda ya mean, 'even George'?") That is why it is peculiar to
say, out of the blue, "All Fred's children are asleep, and Fred has children." The
first part requires and thereby creates a presupposition that Fred has children; so
the second part adds nothing to what is already presupposed when it is said; so the
second part has no conversational point. It would not have been peculiar to say
instead "Fred has children, and all Fred's children are asleep."
I said that presupposition evolves in a more or less rule-governed way during a
conversation. Now we can formulate one important governing rule: call it the rule
of accommodation for presupposition.
If a time / something is said that requires presupposition P to be acceptable,
and if P is not presupposed just before /, then—ceteris paribus and within
certain limits—presupposition P comes into existence at t.
This rule has not yet been very well stated, nor is it the only rule governing the
kinematics of presupposition. But let us bear it in mind nevertheless, and move on
to other things.

EXAMPLE 2: PERMISSIBILITY 2
For some reason—coercion, deference, common purpose—two people are both
willing that one of them should be under the control of the other. (At least within
certain limits, in a certain sphere of action, so long as certain conditions prevail.)
Call one the slave, the other the master. The control is exercised verbally, as follows.
2

This treatment of permissibility is discussed more fully in my paper "A Problem about Permission,"
in Esa Saarinen et al., eds., Essays in Honour ofjaakko Hmtikka (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1979).

Score/keeping in a Language Game

235

At any stage in the enslavement, there is a boundary between some courses of
action for the slave that are permissible, and others that are not. The range of
permissible conduct may expand or contract. The master shifts the boundary by
saying things to the slave. Since the slave does his best to see to it that his course
of action is a permissible one, the master can control the slave by controlling what
is permissible.
Here is how the master shifts the boundary. From time to time he says to the
slave that such-and-such courses of action are impermissible. Any such statement
depends for its truth value on the boundary between what is permissible and what
isn't. But if the master says that something is impermissible, and if that would be
false if the boundary remained stationary, then straightway the boundary moves
inward. The permissible range contracts so that what the master says is true after
all. Thereby the master makes courses of action impermissible that used to be
permissible. But from time to time also the master relents, and says to the slave
that such-and-such courses of action are permissible. Or perhaps he says that some
of such-and-such courses of action are permissible, but doesn't say just which ones.
Then the boundary moves outward. The permissible range expands, if need be (and
if possible), so that what the master says is true. Thereby the master makes courses
of action permissible that used to be impermissible.
The truth of the master's statements about permissibility—one aspect of their
acceptability—depends on the location of the boundary. The boundary shifts in a
rule-governed way. The rule is as follows; call it the rule of accommodation for permissibility.
If a time / something is said about permissibility by the master to the slave
that requires for its truth the permissibility or impermissibility of certain
courses of action, and if just before / the boundary is such as to make the
master's statement false, then—ceteris paribus and within certain limits—the
boundary shifts at t so as to make the master's statement true.
Again, this is not a very satisfactory formulation. For one thing, the limits and
qualifications are left unspecified. But more important, the rule as stated does not
say exactly how the boundary is to shift.
What if the master says that some of such-and-such courses of actions are permissible, when none of them were permissible before he spoke. By the rule, some
of them must straightway become permissible. Some—but which ones? The ones
that were closest to permissibility beforehand, perhaps. Well and good, but now
we have a new problem. At every stage there is not only a boundary between the
permissible and the impermissible, but also a relation of comparative near-permissibility between the courses of action on the impermissible side. Not only do we
need rules governing the shifting boundary, but also we need rules to govern the
changing relation of comparative near-permissibility. Not only must we say how
this relation evolves when the master says something about absolute permissibility,
but also we must say how it evolves when he says something—as he might—about

236

Philosophy of Language

comparative near-permissibility. He might say, for instance, that the most nearly
permissible courses of action in a class A are those in a subclass A'; or that some
courses of action in class B are more nearly permissible than any in class C. Again
the rule is a rule of accommodation. The relation of comparative near-permissibility
changes, if need be, so that what the master says to the slave is true. But again, to
say that is not enough. It does not suffice to determine just what the change is.
Those were Examples 1 and 2. Examples of what? I'll say shortly; but first, a
digression.
SCOREKEEPING IN A BASEBALL GAME
At any stage in a well-run baseball game, there is a septuple of numbers ( r,, rh, h,
i, s, b, o) which I shall call the score of that game at that stage. We recite the score
as follows: the visiting team has r, runs, the home team has rh runs, it is the ht\\
half (h being 1 or 2) of the ith inning; there are s strikes, b balls, and o outs. (In
another terminology, the score is only the initial pair (rf, rt), but I need a word
for the entire septuple.) A possible codification of the rules of baseball would consist of rules of four different sorts.
(1) Specifications of the kinematics of score. Initially, the score is (0, 0, 1, 1,0, 0,
0). Thereafter, if at time / the score is s, and if between time / and / the players
behave in manner m, then at time / the score is s', where s' is determined in a
certain way by s and m.
(2) Specifications of correct play. If at time / the score is s, and if between time /
and time / the players behave in manner m, then the players have behaved incorrectly. (Correctness depends on score: what is correct play after two strikes differs
from what is correct play after three.) What is not incorrect play according to these
rules is correct.
(3) Directive requiring correct play. All players are to behave, throughout the
game, in such a way that play is correct.
(4) Directives concerning score. Players are to strive to make the score evolve in
certain directions. Members of the visiting team try to make rv large and rh small,
members of the home team try to do the opposite.
(We could dispense with rules of sorts (2) and (3) by adding an eighth component to the score which, at any stage of the game, measures the amount of incorrect play up to that stage. Specifications of correct play are then included among
the specifications of the kinematics of score, and the directive requiring correct play
becomes one of the directives concerning score.)
Rules of sorts (1) and (2) are sometimes called constitutive rules. They are said

Score keeping in a Language Game

237

to be akin to definitions, though they do not have the form of definitions. Rules
of sorts (3) and (4) are called regulative rules. They are akin to the straightforward
directives "No smoking!" or "Keep left!"
We could explain this more fully, as follows. Specifications of sorts (1) and (2)
are not themselves definitions of "score" and "correct play." But they are consequences of reasonable definitions. Further, there is a systematic way to construct
the definitions, given the specifications. Suppose we wish to define the score function: the function from game-stages to septuples of numbers that gives the score at
every stage. The specifications of the kinematics of score, taken together, tell us
that the score function evolves in such-and-such way. We may then simply define
the score function as that function which evolves in such-and-such way. If the kinematics of score are well specified, then there is one function, and one only, that
evolves in the proper way; and if so, then the score function evolves in the proper
way if and only if the suggested definition of it is correct. Once we have defined
the score function, we have thereby defined the score and all its components at any
stage. There are two outs at a certain stage of a game, for instance, if and only if
the score function assigns to that game-stage a septuple whose seventh component
is the number 2.
Turn next to the specifications of correct play. Taken together, they tell us that
correct play occurs at a game-stage if and only if the players' behavior at that stage
bears such-and-such relation to score at that stage. This has the form of an explicit
definition of correct play in terms of current score and current behavior. If current
score has already been defined in terms of the history of the players' behavior up
to now, in the way just suggested, then we have defined correct play in terms of
current and previous behavior.
Once score and correct play are defined in terms of the players' behavior, then
we may eliminate the defined terms in the directive requiring correct play and the
directives concerning score. Thanks to the definitions constructed from the constitutive rules, the regulative rules become simply directives to strive to see to it that
one's present behavior bears a certain rather complicated relation to the history of
the players' behavior in previous stages of the game. A player might attempt to
conform to such a directive for various reasons: contractual obligation, perhaps, or
a conventional understanding with his fellow players based on their common interest in enjoying a proper game.
The rules of baseball could in principle be formulated as straighforward directives concerning behavior, without the aid of definable terms for score and its components. Or they could be formulated as explicit definitions of the score function,
the components of score, and correct play, followed by directives in which the
newly defined terms appear. It is easy to see why neither of these methods of formulation has found favor. The first method would pack the entire rulebook into
each directive; the second would pack the entire rulebook into a single preliminary
explicit definition. Understandably averse to very long sentences, we do better to
proceed in our more devious way.
There is an alternative analysis—the baseball equivalent of operationalism or

2388

Philosophy of Language

legal realism. Instead of appealing to constitutive rules, we might instead claim
that the score is, by definition, whatever some Scoreboard says it is. Which scoreboard? Various answers are defensible: maybe the visible Scoreboard with its arrays
of light bulbs, maybe the invisible Scoreboard in the head umpire's head, maybe
the many scoreboards in many heads to the extent that they agree. No matter. On
any such view, the specifications of the kinematics of score have a changed status.
No longer are they constitutive rules akin to definitions. Rather, they are empirical
generalizations, subject to exceptions, about the ways in which the players' behavior
tends to cause changes on the authoritative Scoreboard. Under this analysis, it is
impossible that this Scoreboard fails to give the score. What is possible is that the
score is in an abnormal and undesired relation to its causes, for which someone
may perhaps be blamed.
I do not care to say which analysis is right for baseball as it is actually played.
Perhaps the question has no determinate answer, or perhaps it has different answers
for formal and informal baseball. I only wish to distinguish the two alternatives,
noting that both are live options.
This ends the digression. Now I want to propose some general theses about
language—theses that were examplified by Examples 1 and 2, and that will be
exemplified also by several other examples.

CONVERSATIONAL SCORE
With any stage in a well-run conversation, or other process of linguistic interaction,
there are associated many things analogous to the components of a baseball score.
I shall therefore speak of them collectively as the score of that conversation at that
stage. The points of analogy are as follows.
(1) Like the components of a baseball score, the components of a conversational
score at a given stage are abstract entities. They may not be numbers, but they are
other set-theoretic constructs: sets of presupposed propositions, boundaries between
permissible and impermissible courses of action, or the like.
(2) What play is correct depends on the score. Sentences depend for their truth
value, or for their acceptability in other respects, on the components of conversational score at the stage of conversation when they are uttered. Not only aspects of
acceptability of an uttered sentence may depend on score. So may other semantic
properties that play a role in determining aspects of acceptability. For instance, the
constituents of an uttered sentence—subsentences, names, predicates, etc.—may
depend on the score for their intension or extension.
(3) Score evolves in a more-or-less rule-governed way. There are rules that specify
the kinematics of score:
If at time / the conversational score is s, and if between time / and time t1
the course of conversation is c, then at time / the score is s', where s' is
determined in a certain way by s and c.

Scorekeeping in a Language Game

239

Or at least:
. . . then at time / the score is some member of the class S of possible scores,
where S is determined in a certain way by s and c.
(4) The conversationalists may conform to directives, or may simply desire, that
they strive to steer certain components of the conversational score in certain directions. Their efforts may be cooperative, as when all participants in a discussion try
to increase the amount that all of them willingly presuppose. Or there may be
conflict, as when each of two debaters tries to get his opponent to grant him—to
join with him in presupposing—parts of his case, and to give away parts of the
contrary case.
(5) To the extent that conversational score is determined, given the history of
the conversation and the rules that specify its kinematics, these rules can be
regarded as constitutive rules akin to definitions. Again, constitutive rules could be
traded in for explicit definitions: the conversational score function could be defined
as that function from conversation-stages to K-tuples of suitable entities that evolves
in the specified way.
Alternatively, conversational score might be operationally defined in terms of
mental scoreboards—some suitable attitudes—of the parties to the conversation.
The rules specifying the kinematics of conversational score then become empirical
generalizations, subject to exceptions, about the causal dependence of what the
scoreboards register on the history of the conversation.
In the case of baseball score, either approach to the definition of score and the
status of the rules seems satisfactory. In the case of conversational score, on the
other hand, both approaches seem to meet with difficulties. If, as seems likely, the
rules specifying the kinematics of conversational score are seriously incomplete,
then often there may be many candidates for the score function, different but all
evolving in the specified way. But also it seems difficult to say, without risk of
circularity, what are the mental representations that comprise the conversationalists'
scoreboards.
It may be best to adopt a third approach—a middle way, drawing on both the
alternatives previously considered. Conversational score is, by definition, whatever
the mental scoreboards say it is; but we refrain from trying to say just what the
conversationalists' mental scoreboards are. We assume that some or other mental
representations are present that play the role of a Scoreboard, in the following sense:
what they register depends on the history of the conversation in the way that score
should according to the rules. The rules specifying the kinematics of score thereby
specify the role of a Scoreboard; the Scoreboard is whatever best fills this role; and
the score is whatever this Scoreboard registers. The rules specifying the kinematics
of score are to some extent constitutive, but on this third approach they enter only
in a roundabout way into the definition of score. It is no harm if they underdetermine the evolution of score, and it is possible that score sometimes evolves in a
way that violates the rules.

240

Philosophy of Language

RULES OF ACCOMMODATION
There is one big difference between baseball score and conversational score. Suppose
the batter walks to first base after only three balls. His behavior would be correct
play if there were four balls rather than three. That's just too bad—his behavior
does not at all make it the case that there are four balls and his behavior is correct.
Baseball has no rule of accommodation to the effect that if a fourth ball is required
to make correct the play that occurs, then that very fact suffices to change the score
so that straightway there are four balls.
Language games are different. As I hope my examples will show, conversational
score does tend to evolve in such a way as is required in order to make whatever
occurs count as correct play. Granted, that is not invariable but only a tendency.
Granted also, conversational score changes for other reasons as well. (As when
something conspicuous happens at the scene of a conversation, and straightway it
is presupposed that it happened.) Still, I suggest that many components of conversational score obey rules of accommodation, and that these rules figure prominently among the rules governing the kinematics of conversational score.
Recall our examples. Example 1: presupposition evolves according to a rule of
accommodation specifying that any presuppositions that are required by what is
said straightway come into existence, provided that nobody objects. Example 2:
permissibility evolves according to a rule of accommodation specifying that the
boundaries of the permissible range of conduct shift to make true whatever is said
about them, provided that what is said is said by the master to the slave, and
provided that there does exist some shift that would make what he says true. Here
is a general scheme for rules of accommodation for conversational score.
If at time / something is said that requires component s, of conversational
score to have a value in the range r if what is said is to be true, or otherwise
acceptable; and if J, does not have a value in the range r just before /; and if
such-and-such further conditions hold; then at t the score-component sn takes
some value in the range r.
Once we have this scheme in mind, I think we will find many instances of it. In
the rest of this paper I shall consider some further examples. I shall have little that
is new to say about the individual examples. My interest is in the common pattern
that they exhibit.

EXAMPLE 3: DEFINITE DESCRIPTIONS3
It is not true that a definite description "the F" denotes x if and only if x is the
one and only F in existence. Neither is it true that "the F" denotes x if and only
3

Definice descriptions governed by salience are discussed in my Counterfactuals (Oxford: Blackwell,
1973), pp. 111-17; and in James McCawley, "Presupposition and Discourse Structure," in David

Score/keeping in a Language Game

241

if x is the one and only F in some contextually determined domain of discourse.
For consider this sentence: "The pig is grunting, but the pig with floppy ears is not
grunting" (Lewis). And this: "The dog got in a fight with another dog"
(McCawley). They could be true. But for them to be true, "the pig" or "the dog"
must denote one of two pigs or dogs, both of which belong to the domain of
discourse.
The proper treatment of descriptions must be more like this: "the F" denotes
x if and only if x is the most salient F in the domain of discourse, according to
some contextually determined salience ranking. The first of our two sentences
means that the most salient pig is grunting but the most salient pig with floppy
ears is not. The second means that the most salient dog got in a fight with some
less salient dog.
(I shall pass over some complications. Never mind what happens if two Fs are
tied for maximum salience, or if no F is at all salient. More important, I shall
ignore the possibility that something might be highly salient in one of its guises,
but less salient in another. Possibly we really need to appeal to a salience ranking
not of individuals but rather of individuals-in-guises—that is, of individual concepts.)
There are various ways for something to gain salience. Some have to do with the
course of conversation, others do not. Imagine yourself with me as I write these
words. In the room is a cat, Bruce, who has been making himself very salient by
dashing madly about. He is the only cat in the room, or in sight, or in earshot. I
start to speak to you:
The cat is in the carton. The cat will never meet our other cat, because our
other cat lives in New Zealand. Our New Zealand cat lives with the Cresswells. And there he'll stay, because Miriam would be sad if the cat went away.
At first, "the cat" denotes Bruce, he being the most salient cat for reasons having
nothing to do with the course of conversation. If I want to talk about Albert, our
New Zealand cat, I have to say "our other cat" or "our New Zealand cat." But as
I talk more and more about Albert, and not any more about Bruce, I raise Albert's
salience by conversational means. Finally, in the last sentence of my monologue, I
am in a position to say "the cat" and thereby denote not Bruce but rather the
newly-most-salient cat Albert.

Dinneen and Choon-Kyu Oh, eds., Syntax and Semantics 11 (New York: Academic Press, 1979). A
similar treatment of demonstratives is found in Isard, op. cit.
Manfred Pinkal, "How To Refer with Vague Descriptions" in Semantics from Different Points of
View, ed. by R. Bauerle et al., (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1979). notes a further complication: if some
highly salient things are borderline cases of F-hood, degree of F-hood and salience may trade off.
Indefinite descriptions that pave the way for referring expressions are discussed in Charles Chastain,
"Reference and Context," Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science 7 (1975): 194-269, and in
Saul Kripke, "Speaker's Reference and Semantic Reference," Midwest Studies in Philosophy 2 (1977):
255-76.

242

Philosophy of Language

The ranking of comparative salience, I take it, is another component of conversational score. Denotation of definite descriptions is score-dependent. Hence so is
the truth of sentences containing such descriptions, which is one aspect of the
acceptability of those sentences. Other aspects of acceptability in turn are scoredependent: non-triviality, for one, and possibility of warranted assertion, for
another.
One rule, among others, that governs the kinematics of salience is a rule of
accommodation. Suppose my monologue has left Albert more salient than Bruce;
but the next thing I say is "The cat is going to pounce on you!" If Albert remains
most salient and "the cat" denotes the most salient cat, then what I say is patently
false: Albert cannot pounce all the way from New Zealand to Princeton. What I
have said requires for its acceptability that "the cat" denote Bruce, and hence that
Bruce be once again more salient than Albert. If what I say requires that, then
straightway it is so. By saying what I did, I have made Bruce more salient than
Albert. If next I say "The cat prefers moist food," that is true if Bruce prefers moist
food, even if Albert doesn't.
The same thing would have happened if instead I had said "The cat is out of
the carton" or "The cat has gone upstairs." Again what I say is unacceptable unless
the salience ranking shifts so that Bruce rises above Albert, and hence so that "the
cat" again denotes Bruce. The difference is in the type of unacceptability that would
ensue without the shift. It is trivially true, hence not worth saying, that Albert is
out of the carton. ("The carton" denotes the same carton as before; nothing has
been done to raise the salience of any carton in New Zealand.) It may be true or it
may be false that Albert has gone upstairs in the Cresswells' house in New Zealand.
But I have no way of knowing, so I have no business saying that he has.
We can formulate a rule of accommodation for comparative salience more or less
as follows. It is best to speak simply of unacceptability, since it may well be that
the three sorts of unacceptability I have mentioned are not the only sorts that can
give rise to a shift in salience.
If a time / something is said that requires, if it is to be acceptable, that x be
more salient than y; and if, just before /, x is no more salient than y; then—
ceteris paribus and within certain limits—at /, x becomes more salient
than y.
Although a rule of accommodation, such as this one, states that shifts of score take
place when they are needed to preserve acceptability, we may note that the preservation is imperfect. It is not good conversational practice to rely too heavily on
rules of accommodation. The monologue just considered illustrates this. Because
"the cat" denotes first Bruce, then Albert, then Bruce again, what I say is to some
extent confusing and hard to follow. But even if my monologue is not perfectly
acceptable, its flaws are much less serious than the flaws that are averted by shifts
of salience in accordance with our rule of accommodation. Confusing shifts of

Scoreikeeping in a Language Game

243

salience and reference are not as bad as falsity, trivial truth, or unwarranted assertion.
(It is worth mentioning another way to shift comparative salience by conversational means. I may say "A cat is on the lawn" under circumstances in which it is
apparent to all parties to the conversation that there is some one particular cat that
is responsible for the truth of what I say, and for my saying it. Perhaps I am looking
out the window, and you rightly presume that I said what I did because I saw a
cat; and further (since I spoke in the singular) that I saw only one. What I said
was an existential quantification; hence, strictly speaking, it involves no reference
to any particular cat. Nevertheless it raises the salience of the cat that made me say
it. Hence this newly-most-salient cat may be denoted by brief definite descriptions,
or by pronouns, in subsequent dialogue: "No, it's on the sidewalk." "Has Bruce
noticed the cat?" As illustrated, this may happen even if the speaker contradicts
my initial existential statement. Thus although indefinite descriptions—that is, idioms of existential quantification—are not themselves referring expressions, they
may raise the salience of particular individuals in such a way as to pave the way
for referring expressions that follow.)

EXAMPLE 4: COMING AND GOING 4
Coming is movement toward a point of reference. Going is movement away from
it. Sometimes the point of reference is fixed by the location of speaker and hearer,
at the time of conversation or the time under discussion. But sometimes not. In
third-person narrative, whether fact or fiction, the chosen point of reference may
have nothing to do with the speaker's or the hearer's location.
One way to fix the point of reference at the beginning of a narrative, or to shift
it later, is by means of a sentence that describes the direction of some movement
both with respect to the point of reference and in some other way. "The beggars
are coming to town" requires for its acceptability, and perhaps even for its truth,
that the point of reference be in town. Else the beggars' town ward movement is
not properly called "coming." This sentence can be used to fix or to shift the point
of reference. When it is said, straightway the point of reference is in town where it
is required to be. Thereafter, unless something is done to shift it elsewhere, coming
is movement toward town and going is movement away. If later we are told that
when the soldiers came the beggars went, we know who ended up in town and
who did not.
Thus the point of reference in narrative is a component of conversational score,
4

See Charles Fillmore, "How To Know Whether You're Coming or Going," in Karl Hyldgaard-Jensen,
ed., Linguistic 1971 (Konigstein, W. Germ.: Athenaum-Verlag, 1972), and "Pragmatics and the
Description of Discourse," in Siegfried J. Schmidt, ed., Pragmatikl Pragmatics II (Wilhelm Fink Verlag, 1976).

244

Philosophy of Language

governed by a rule of accommodation. Note that the rule must provide for two
sorts of changes. The point of reference may simply go from one place to another,
as is required by the following text:
When the beggars came to town, the rich folk went to the shore. But soon
the beggars came after them, so they went home.
But also the point of reference is usually not fully determinate in its location. It
may become more or less determinate, as is required by the following:
After the beggars came to town, they held a meeting. All of them came to
the square. Afterwards they went to another part of town.
The first sentence puts the point of reference in town, but not in any determinate
part of town. The second sentence increases its determinacy by putting it in the
square. The initial fixing of the point of reference is likewise an increase in determinacy—-the point of reference starts out completely indeterminate and becomes
at least somewhat more definitely located.

EXAMPLE 5: VAGUENESS'
If Fred is a borderline case of baldness, the sentence "Fred is bald" may have no
determinate truth value. Whether it is true depends on where you draw the line.
Relative to some perfectly reasonable ways of drawing a precise boundary between
bald and not-bald, the sentence is true. Relative to other delineations, no less reasonable, it is false. Nothing in our use of language makes one of these delineations
right and all the others wrong. We cannot pick a delineation once and for all (not
if we are interested in ordinary language), but must consider the entire range of
reasonable delineations.
If a sentence is true over the entire range, true no matter how we draw the line,
surely we are entitled to treat it simply as true. But also we treat a sentence more
or less as if it is simply true, if it is true over a large enough part of the range of
delineations of its vagueness. (For short: if it is true enough.) If a sentence is true
enough (according to our beliefs) we are willing to assert it, assent to it without
qualification, file it away among our stocks of beliefs, and so forth. Mostly we do
not get into any trouble this way. (But sometimes we do, as witness the paradoxes
that arise because truth-preserving reasoning does not always preserve the property
of being true enough.)
When is a sentence true enough? Which are the "large enough" parts of the
range of delineations of its vagueness? This is itself a vague matter. More important
5

See the treatment of vagueness in my "Genetal Semantics," in this volume. For arguments that hardly
anything is flat or certain, see Peter Unger, Ignorance (Oxford University Press, 1975), pp. 65-68. For
another example of accommodating shifts in resolution of vagueness, see the discussion of back-tracking
counterfactuals in my "Counterfactual Dependence and Time's Arrow," in the sequel to this volume.

Score/keeping in a Language Game

245

for our present purposes, it is something that depends on context. What is true
enough on one occasion is not true enough on another. The standards of precision
in force are different from one conversation to another, and may change in the
course of a single conversation. Austin's "France is hexagonal" is a good example
of a sentence that is true enough for many contexts, but not true enough for many
others. Under low standards of precision it is acceptable. Raise the standards and
it loses its acceptability.
Taking standards of precision as a component of conversational score, we once
more find a rule of accommodation at work. One way to change the standards is
to say something that would be unacceptable if the standards remained unchanged.
If you say "Italy is boot-shaped" and get away with it, low standards are required
and the standards fall if need be; thereafter "France is hexagonal" is true enough.
But if you deny that Italy is boot-shaped, pointing out the differences, what you
have said requires high standards under which "France is hexagonal" is far from
true enough.
I take it that the rule of accommodation can go both ways. But for some reason
raising of standards goes more smoothly than lowering. If the standards have been
high, and something is said that is true enough only under lowered standards, and
nobody objects, then indeed the standards are shifted down. But what is said,
although true enough under the lowered standards, may still seem imperfectly
acceptable. Raising of standards, on the other hand, manages to seem commendable even when we know that it interferes with our conversational purpose. Because
of this asymmetry, a player of language games who is so inclined may get away
with it if he tries to raise the standards of precision as high as possible—so high,
perhaps, that no material object whatever is hexagonal.
Peter Unger has argued that hardly anything is flat. Take something you claim
is flat; he will find something else and get you to agree that it is even flatter. You
think the pavement is flat—but how can you deny that your desk is flatter? But
"flat" is an absolute term: it is inconsistent to say that something is flatter than
something that is flat. Having agreed that your desk is flatter than the pavement,
you must concede that the pavement is not flat after all. Perhaps you now claim
that your desk is flat; but doubtless Unger can think of something that you will
agree is even flatter than your desk. And so it goes.
Some might dispute Unger's premise that "flat" is an absolute term; but on that
score it seems to me that Unger is right. What he says is inconsistent does indeed
sound that way. I take this to mean that on no delineation of the correlative vagueness of "flatter" and "flat" is it true that something is flatter than something that
is flat.
The right response to Unger, I suggest, is that he is changing the score on you.
When he says that the desk is flatter than the pavement, what he says is acceptable
only under raised standards of precision. Under the original standards the bumps
on the pavement were too small to be relevant either to the question whether the
pavement is flat or to the question whether the pavement is flatter than the desk.

246

Philosophy of Language

Since what he says requires raised standards, the standards accommodatingly rise.
Then it is no longer true enough that the pavement is flat. That does not alter the
fact that it was true enough in its original context. "The desk is flatter than the
pavement" said under raised standards does not contradict "The pavement is flat"
said under unraised standards, any more than "It is morning" said in the morning
contradicts "It is afternoon" said in the afternoon. Nor has Unger shown in any
way that the new context is more legitimate than the old one. He can indeed create
an unnusual context in which hardly anything can acceptably be called "flat," but
he has not thereby cast any discredit on the more usual contexts in which lower
standards of precision are in force.
In parallel fashion Unger observes, I think correctly, that "certain" is an absolute
term; from this he argues that hardly ever is anyone certain of anything. A parallel
response is in order. Indeed the rule of accommodation permits Unger to create a
context in which all that he says is true, but that does not show that there is anything whatever wrong with the claims to certainty that we make in more ordinary
contexts. It is no fault in a context that we can move out of it.

EXAMPLE 6: RELATIVE MODALITY6
The "can" and "must" of ordinary language do nor often express absolute ("logical" or "metaphysical") possibility. Usually they express various relative modalities. Not all the possibilities there are enter into consideration. If we ignore those
possibilities that violate laws of nature, we get the physical modalities; if we ignore
those that are known not to obtain, we get the epistemic modalities; if we ignore
those that ought not to obtain—doubtless including actuality—we get the deontic
modalities; and so on. That suggests that "can" and "must" are ambiguous. But
on that hypothesis, as Kratzer has convincingly argued, the alleged senses are altogether too numerous. We do better to think of our modal verbs as unambiguous
but relative. Sometimes the relativity is made explicit. Modifying phrases like "in
view of what is known" or "in view of what custom requires" may be present to
indicate just which possibilities should be ignored.
But sometimes no such phrase is present. Then context must be our guide. The
boundary between the relevant possibilities and the ignored ones (formally, the
accessibility relation) is a component of conversational score, which enters into the
truth conditions of sentences with "can" or "must" or other modal verbs. It may
change in the course of conversation. A modifying phrase "in view of such-andsuch" does not only affect the sentence in which it appears, but also remains in
6

See Angelika Kratzer, "What 'Must' and 'Can' Must and Can Mean," Linguistics and Philosophy \
(1977): 337-55. The accessibility semantics considered here is equivalent to a slightly restricted form
of Kratzer's semantics for relative modality.
Knowledge and irrelevant possibilities of error are discussed in Alvin I. Goldman, "Discrimination
and Perceptual Knowledge, "Journal of Philosophy 73 (1976): 771-91.

Score keep ing in a Language Game

247

force until further notice to govern the interpretation of modal verbs in subsequent
sentences.
This boundary may also shift in accordance with a rule of accommodation. Suppose I am talking with some elected official about the ways he might deal with an
embarassment. So far, we have been ignoring those possibilities that would be
political suicide for him. He says: "You see, I must either destroy the evidence or
else claim that I did it to stop Communism. What else can I do?" I rudely reply:
"There is one other possibility—you can put the public interest first for once!"
That would be false if the boundary between relevant and ignored possibilities
remained stationary. But is is not false in its context, for hitherto ignored possibilities come into consideration and make it true. And the boundary, once shifted
outward, stays shifted. If he protests "I can't do that," he is mistaken.
Take another example. The commonsensical epistemologist says: "I know the cat
is in the carton—there he is before my eyes—I just can't be wrong about that!"
The sceptic replies: "You might be the victim of a deceiving demon." Thereby he
brings into consideration possibilities hitherto ignored, else what he says would be
false. The boundary shifts outward so that what he says is true. Once the boundary
is shifted, the commonsensical epistemologist must concede defeat. And yet he was
not in any way wrong when he laid claim to infallible knowledge. What he said
was true with respect to the score as it then was.
We get the impression that the sceptic, or the rude critic of the elected official,
has the last word. Again this is because the rule of accommodation is not fully
reversible. For some reason, I know not what, the boundary readily shifts outward
if what is said requires it, but does not so readily shift inward if what is said
requires that. Because of this asymmetry, we may think that what is true with
respect to the outward-shifted boundary must be somehow more true than what is
true with respect to the original boundary. I see no reason to respect this impression. Let us hope, by all means, that the advance toward truth is irreversible. That
is no reason to think that just any change that resists reversal is an advance toward
truth.

EXAMPLE 7: PERFORMATIVES7
Suppose we are unpersuaded by Austin's contention that explicit performatives
have no truth value. Suppose also that we wish to respect the seeming parallelism
of form between a performative like "I hereby name this ship the Generalissimo
7

See J. L. Austin, "Performative Utterances," in his Philosophical Papers (Oxford University Press,
196l)i for the original discussion of performatives. For treatments along the lines here preferred, see
E. J. Lemmon, "On Sentences Verifiable by Their Use," Analysis 22 (1962); 86-89; Ingemar Hedenius, "Performatives," Theoria 29(1963): 1-22; and Lennart Aqvist, Performatives and Verifiahility
by the Use of Language (Filosofiska Studier, Uppsala University, 1972). Isard (op. cit.) suggests as I do
that performative utterances are akin to other utterances that "change the context."

248

Philosophy of Language

Stalin" and such non-performative statements as "Fred thereby named that ship
the President Nixon." Then we shall find it natural to treat the performative, like
the non-performative, as a sentence with truth conditions. It is true, on a given
occasion of its utterance, if and only if the speaker brings it about, by means of
that very utterance, that the indicated ship begins to bear the name "Generalissimo
Stalin." If the circumstances are felicitous, then the speaker does indeed bring it
about, by means of his utterance, that the ship begins to bear the name. The performative sentence is therefore true on any occasion of its felicitious utterance. In
Lemmon's phrase, it is a sentence verifiable by its (felicitous) use.
When the ship gets its name and the performative is verfied by its use, what
happens may be described as a change in conversational score governed by a rule
of accommodation. The relevant component of score is the relation that pairs ships
with their names. The rule of accommodation is roughly as follows.
If at time / something is said that requires for its truth that ship s bear name
n; and if s does not bear n just before /; and if the form and circumstances of
what is said satisfy certain conditions of felicity; then s begins at / to bear n.
Our performative sentence does indeed require for its truth that the indicated ship
bear the name "Generalissimo Stalin" at the time of utterance. Therefore, when
the sentence is felicitously uttered, straightway the ship bears the name.
The sentence has other necessary conditions of truth: the ship must not have
borne the name beforehand, the speaker must bring it about that the ship begins
to bear the name, and he must bring it about by uttering the sentence. On any
felicitous occasion of utterance, these further conditions take care of themselves.
Our rule of accommodation is enough to explain why the sentence is verified by
its felicitous use, despite the fact that the rule deals only with part of what it takes
to make the sentence true.
A similar treatment could be given of many other performatives. In some cases
the proposal may seem surprising. "With this ring I thee wed" is verified by its
felicitous use, since the marriage relation is a component of conversational score
governed by a rule of accommodation. Is marriage then a linguistic phenomenon?
Of course not, but that was not implied. The lesson of performatives, on any theory, is that use of language blends into other social practices. We should not
assume that a change of conversational score has its impact only within, or by way
of, the realm of language. Indeed, we have already seen another counterexample:
the case of permissibility, considered as Example 2.

EXAMPLE 8: PLANNING
Suppose that you and I are making a plan—let us say, a plan to steal some plutonium from a reprocessing plant and make a bomb of it. As we talk, our plan
evolves. Mostly it grows more and more complete. Sometimes, however, parts that
had been definite are revised, or at least opened for reconsideration.

Scorskeeping in a Language Game

249

Much as some things said in ordinary conversation require suitable presuppositions, so some things we say in the course of our planning require, for their acceptability, that the plan contain suitable provisions. If I say "Then you drive the
getaway car up to the side gate," that is acceptable only if the plan includes provision for a getaway car. That might or might not have been part of the plan
already. If not, it may become part of the plan just because it is required by what
I said. (As usual the process is defeasible. You can keep the getaway car out of the
plan, for the time being at least, by saying "Wouldn't we do better with mopeds?")
The plan is a component of conversational score. The rules governing its evolution
parallel the rules governing the kinematics of presupposition, and they include a
rule of accommodation.
So good is the parallel between plan and presupposition that we might well ask
if our plan simply is part of what we presuppose. Call it that if you like, but there
is a distinction to be made. We might take for granted, or purport to take for
granted, that our plan will be carried out. Then we would both plan and presuppose that we are going to steal the plutonium. But we might not. We might be
making our plan not in order to carry it out, but rather in order to show that the
plant needs better security. Then plan and presupposition might well conflict. We
plan to steal the plutonium, all the while presupposing that we will not. And
indeed our planning may be interspersed with commentary that requires presuppositions contradicting the plan. "Then I'll shoot the guard (I'm glad I won't really
do that) while you smash the floodlights." Unless we distinguish plan from presupposition (or distinguish two levels of presupposition) we must think of presuppositions as constantly disappearing and reappearing throughout such a conversation.
The distinction between plan and presupposition is not the distinction between
what we purport to take for granted and what we really do. While planning that
we will steal the plutonium and presupposing that we will not, we might take for
granted neither that we will nor that we won't. Each of us might secretly hope to
recruit the other to the terrorist cause and carry out the plan after all.
One and the same sentence may require, and if need be create, both provisions
of the plan and presuppositions. "Then you drive the getaway car up to the side
gate" requires both a getaway car and a side gate. The car is planned for. The gate
is more likely presupposed.

FOURTEEN

'Tensions

I have a problem for those who, like myself, admire intensional formal semantics
and think it a key to understanding natural language. We can go to extremes of
intensionality, if we like. Semantic rules can be stated entirely in terms of intensions, while extensions go unmentioned. But when we do, it seems for all the world
as if we've gone purely extensional instead! Let me explain.

I. THE INTENSIONAL LANGUAGE L,
I begin by describing an intensional language L,. There are various categories of
expressions.
S is the category of sentences. A sentence takes as its extension one of the two
truth values, truth or falsehood. But the truth value of a sentence may depend on
facts which vary from one possible world to another; on the time, place, speaker,
and other features of context; on the values assigned to any free variables that may
be present; on the resolutions of various sorts of vagueness; and perhaps on other
things as well. So truth in L, is a three-place relation. A sentence has a truth value
as its extension relative to an index, that being a package of a world, a time,. . .,
and whatever else (apart from meaning) might be needed to determine an extension. Equivalently, for each sentence we have a function from indices to truth values. For any possible index, the function gives the truth value of the sentence at
250

'Tensions

251

that index. This extension-determining function is the intension (in L,) of the sentence.
N is the category of names. A name takes as its extension the thing named—
perhaps a concrete material object, perhaps some other sort of entity. Again, the
extension may vary; so for each name we have a function from indices that gives
the extension of the name at any possible index. This function is the intension (in
L,) of the name.
For any two categories X and Y, we have a third category X/Y of expressions
which can combine with expressions of category Y to form compound expressions
of category X. Examples: an S/N is something that can combine with a name to
make a sentence, so it is an intransitive verb. An (S/N)/N can combine with a
name to make an intransitive verb, so it is a transitive verb. An (S/S)/S can combine with a sentence to make something that in turn can combine with a sentence
to make a sentence, so it is a dyadic connective or operator. There are infinitely
many of these functor categories, though only finitely many are employed in L,. An
X/Y has no extension. Its intension is a function from appropriate intensions for
members of category Y to appropriate intensions for members of category X. All
the compositional semantic rules of L, are given by one simple schema, with various
categories put in for X and Y:
If a is an X/Y with intension A and ft is a Y with intension B, then the
result of combining a with /3 is an X with intension A(B), the value of the
function A for the argument B.
"Combining" may simply be concatenation; or it may be some more complicated
operation, perhaps different for different functor categories or even for different
members of one category. Or it may be that structures built up by many successive
combinations are subsequently transformed as a whole to give the "surface" expressions of L,.
I described L, as an intensional language. More precisely, (1) in any case of compounding, the intension of the compound is a function of the intensions of the
constituents, but (2) the extension of the compound is not always a function of the
extensions of the constituents. Part (1) follows from the given form for semantic
rules; part (2) is an additional stipulation.
This completes a partial description of L,, in a style that should be familiar
nowadays.1 It will be useful to give a shamelessly idealized reconstruction of the
way that style evolved.
'I have followed the treatment in my "General Semantics," in this volume, stripped of such frills as
many-place functors and a basic category of common nouns. The use of Ajdukiewicz's functor categories
makes for brevity in stating the rules. But I could make my point just as well by discussing one of
Richard Montague's well-known treatments of natural language. See his "The Proper Treatment of
Quantification in Ordinary Language," in Hintikka, Moravcsik, and Suppes, eds., Approaches to Natural Language (Dordrechr: Reidel, 1972), or Barbara Partee's paper in Milton K. Munitz and Peter
K. Unger, eds., Semantics and Philosophy (New York: New York University Press, 1974).

2f>2

Philosophy of Language

In the olden days, we knew only of extensions. We used semantic rules of this
form:
(IS)

If a is an X with extension A, then the result of combining a with j3
is a Z with extension f(A).

with a special rule for each j8; or, when generality was possible, of this form:
(1G)

If a is an X with extension A and j3 is a Y with extension B, then the
result of combining a. with fl is a Z with extension f(A,B).

Then we began to pay attention to languages in which extensions could depend on
features of context. We relativized to various sorts of indices, but still adhered to
the old dogma that the extension of the compound is a function of the extensions
of the constituents. We had special and general rules of these forms:
(2S)
(2G)

If a is an X with extension A at index i, then the result of combining
a with /3 is a Z with extension f(A,i) at index i.
If a is an X with extension A at index i and /3 is a Y with extension
B at index i, then the result of combining a with /3 is a Z with extension f(A,B,i) at index i.

But we knew that in a few cases, the extension of a compound at one index could
depend on the extensions of the constituents not just at that index but at other
indices as well. That was so for variable-binding quantifiers if we took the assignments of values to variables as indices; and for modal and tense operators, taking
the indices as worlds or times. So we learned to tolerate a few special nonextensional
rules of the form:
(3S)

If a is an X whose extension varies from index to index in manner A,
then the result of combining a with /3 is a Z with extension f(A,i) at
index i.

(For example: if a is a sentence which takes the truth value truth at all and only
the worlds in a set A, then the result of prefixing D to a is a sentence that takes
the value truth or falsehood at world i according as A does or does not contain all
worlds possible relative to i.) Often the manner of variation did not even need to
be explicitly mentioned as an entity, still less stigmatized as an intension. In the
case of quantification, at least, such rules were not considered a significant breach
of extensionality.
But these special rules proliferated in number when we considered languages
with many different modalities; and in variety when we admitted intensional predicate modifiers or intensional sentential operators that could not be handled as
modalities with telations of relative possibility. Generality requires quantification
over appropriate entities. Once these are at hand, it is natural to identify them with
intensions, since they carry all needed information about the meanings of the corresponding expressions. Thus we progressed to rules of the form:

"Tensions

(3G)

253

If a is an X with intension A and /3 is a Y with intension B, then the
result of combining a with /3 is a Z with extension f(A,B,i) at
index i.

When a rule specifies the extension at every index, it thereby specifies the extensiondetermining function that we have called an intension. It is only a short step, therefore, to rules of the form:
(4G)

If a is an X with intension A and /8 is a Y with intension B, then the
result of combining a. with /3 is a Z with intension f(A,B).

But this short step gives us a new freedom. For intension-specifying rules, unlike
any sort of extension-specifying rules, can apply even when the resulting compound
belongs to a category for which there are no appropriate extensions—for instance,
when it is a compound modifier or quantifier or connective. In such cases, of course,
the appropriate sort of intension can no longer be an extension-determining function from indices. We have seen already, in connection with the functor categories
of Lr, what else it might be.
When an intensional rule is needed, an extensional rule will not work. But when
an extensional rule will work, an intensional rule also will work. If we need some
intensional rules, then we may gain uniformity by using intensional rules throughout, even where extensional rules would have sufficed. (It is a matter of taste
whether this gain outweighs the waste of using needlessly intensional rules. For me
it does.) At this point, our compositional semantic rules always specify how intensions of compounds depend on the intensions of their constituents. The extensions
have faded away. We have come full circle, in a way: once again expressions are
assigned semantic values on a single level, not two different levels. My description
of L, exemplifies this final, purely intensional, stage in the evolution of formal
semantics.

II. THE EXTENSIONAL TRANSFORM LE
Now I shall describe another language LE; this time, an extensional language specified by purely extensional rules of the forms (1G) and (2S) above. LE and L, are
obviously not identical, since one is an extensional language and the other is not,
But they are closely related. All the structure of L, is mirrored in I.E. Following
Terence Parsons (more or less), I shall call LE an extensional transform of L,.
LE has a category of names; but we do best to divide this into two subcategories
according to the sort of thing that is named. S is the first category of names; an
S-name takes as its extension—that is, it names—a function from indices to truth
values. After all, any old entity is entitled to bear a name; nameability is not a
special privilege of concrete particulars! N is the second subcategory of names; an
N-name takes as its extension a function from indices to entities of any sort.

2")4

Philosophy of Language

(Although S-names are not N-names, an appropriate extension for an S-name
would also be an appropriate extension for an N-name). Names, in either subcategory, have their extensions rigidly. Their extensions do not vary from one index
to another. We could say that the intension of an S-name or an N-name in LE is
the function which gives, for each index, the extension of the name at that index.
(These are functions from indices whose values are themselves functions from
indices.) But since these intensions are constant functions, they are scarcely worth
mentioning.
LE also has infinitely many functor categories: for any suitable categories X and
Y, there is a third category X/Y of expressions which can combine with expressions
of category Y to form compound expressions of category X. The "suitable categories" are the subcategories S and N of names, and also the functor categories
themselves; but not the two further categories of LE that we have not yet mentioned.
The extension of an X/Y is a function from Y-extensions to X-extensions. All but
one of the compositional semantic rules of LE are given by this general, purely
extensional schema:
If a is an X/Y with extension A and /3 is a Y with extension B, then the
result of combining a with /? is an X with extension A(B), the value of the
function A for the argument B.
Functors also have their extensions rigidly in LE. We could take their intensions in
LE to be the constant functions from indices to their unvarying extensions. But why
bother?
Such are the lexica of noncompound expressions in L, and LE, and such are the
combining operations associated with functors (alternatively, the transformational
apparatus) in L, and LE, that L, is related as follows to the fragment of LE presented
so far. Let us say that the categories S of L, and S of LE are namesakes; also N of L,
and N of LE; also X/Y of L, and X/Y of Lfi, whenever the X's are namesakes and
the Y's are namesakes. Then for every pair of namesake categories of the two languages, exactly the same expressions belong to both. Further, whenever an expression a. has A as its iwtension in L,, then also a has A as it extensions in LE.
So far, LE scarcely deserves to be called a language, for a language needs sentences. It would be quite wrong to think that S of LE is the category of sentences.
Tradition makes clear that the extensions of sentences are supposed to be truth
values; whereas the extensions of members of S in LE, we recall, are functions from
indices to truth values. These are appropriate j«tensions, but inappropriate extensions, for sentences. They are appropriate extensions only for names.
LE does have a category of genuine sentences, however; and also a category of
predicates for use in forming sentences. But there is only one predicate: S. That
is our metalinguistic name for it; actually, it is written as a blank space and pronounced as a pause. The remaining compositional semantic rule of LE, again a
purely extensional rule but special to the predicate S , is as follows:

'Tensions

255

If a is an S with extension A, then the result of prefixing S to a is a sentence
having as its extension at an index i the truth value A(i) given by the function
A for the argument i.
So S is a sort of truth predicate; but a safe one, since there is no way in LE to
produce a paradoxical diagonalization.
We may note that whenever a is a sentence of L,, then S a is a sentence of LE
with exactly the same truth conditions. There are no other sentences of LE besides
these images of the sentences of L,.
This completes my description of LE. It is an extensional language, as I said it
would be. Inspection of the semantic rules confirms that the extension of a compound is always a function of the extensions of the constituents.

III. THE PARSONS TRANSFORM Lp
If we like, we can take the names and functors of LE and trade them in for predicates and quantified variables. For instance, if we have

s a sentence of LE, where /3 and 7 are in the category N and a is in the category
S/N)/N, we can replace it by

where R is a predicate meaning "—is the result of operating on the argument—by
the function . . . " and a, /3, 7 are monadic predicates uniquely satisfied by the
entities that are the extensions in LE of a, /?, and 7, respectively. In this way we go
from LE to another extensional language LP (if you consider quantifiers extensional).
I shall call Lp the Parsons transform of our original language L,, since when Terence
Parsons speaks of an "extensional transform" he means a language like LP.2 But LE
is just as extensional as Lp. There is nothing anti-extensional about names and functors per se. Eliminating them is one enterprise, going extensional is another.

IV. THE PROBLEM
L, can be a richly intensional language, whereas LE is strictly extensional. An important difference, as we all were taught. But almost the only difference there is
between the two!
2

See Parsons, A Semantics for English (duplicated, 1968), and "Some Problems Concerning the Logic
of Predicate Modifiers," Synthese 21 (1970): 327-29.

256

Philosophy of Language

Two field linguists, I and E, fully equipped to perpetrate Cartesian deviltry, go
to work on a certain tribe. They investigate the dispositions to verbal behavior
under a wide range of deceptive stimulation, the beliefs and desires that would
rationalize that behavior, and the neural hookup and laws that would explain it
materialistically. They study these things until there is nothing more to know. Then
I announce my conclusion: these tribesmen use the intensional language L,. My
colleague E, a keen extensionalist, disagrees. He thinks it gratuitous of me to
ascribe to them a language that requires the notoriously obscure apparatus of intensional semantics. After all, a better explanation lies close at hand! His opinion is
that they use the extensional language L E . Dumbfounded by E's perversity, I know
not what to say.

V. BAD REJOINDERS
I really don't know. I do know of several unsatisfactory arguments against E's
opinion, and we had better clear those out of the way.
First, I might try arguing that E's account is worse than mine just because it is
more complicated. He requires two more categories, one more lexical item, and
one more rule. Besides, his extra rule departs from the standard form of his other
rules.
But this argument is bad for two reasons. For one thing, extensionality itself is
generally thought to be an important dimension of simplicity. E may say that it is
cheap at the price. For another thing, I agree with E that a complete account should
mention that speakers pause (and writers leave extra spaces) at the beginnings of
their sentences. E has already covered this fact in his ascribed syntax and semantics.
I have not, and I must find a place for it, at some cost in complexity, elsewhere in
my total description of the tribe's use of language.
Second, I might try arguing that E's opinion goes against our paradigm cases of
extension-bearing. "Boston" names Boston, for instance, and does not rather name
some function from indices.
The paradigms, however, are cases of extension-bearing in certain particular languages: German, Polish, English, and some other familiar languages that can be
translated into these by well-established procedures. We have no paradigm cases
of extension-bearing in the language of these hitherto unstudied tribesmen.
Even if, in my opinion, their language does happen to be one of the familiar
ones, still E cannot be expected to agree that the paradigms apply. For E and I
disagree about which language is theirs.
Tarski's Convention T and its relatives will not help. Since the tribe's language
is not—not uncontroversially, anyway—the same as our metalanguage for it, the
only versions of these principles that apply are the ones stated in terms of translation. For instance, E and I may agree that a metalinguistic sentence of the form
"
names
in their language" (or "—
is a name having

'Tensions

257

as extension in their language") should be true whenever the first blank
is filled with a name (in our language) of some name a in the tribe's language and
the second blank is filled with a translation of a into our language. This gets us
nowhere. Disagreeing as we do about what the names are and what their extensions
are, E and I have no business agreeing about what the correct translations are.
Third, I might try arguing that their language cannot be an extensional language, as E claims, because certain inference patterns are invalid in it that are valid
in any extensional language. For instance, I might point to inferences by Leibniz's
Law, or by Existential Generalization, in which true premises yield false conclusions.
E should agree with me that Leibniz's Law (for example) preserves truth in any
extensional language. He should also agree with me that truth is not preserved in
the inferences I produce as counterexamples. 3 But he should not agree with me that
those inferences are instances of Leibniz's Law. An inference by Leibniz's Law needs
an identity premise, and how do we identify those? Not by looking for a stack of
two or three or four horizontal lines! Semanticaily, an expression with two gaps
expresses identity i f F ( l ) the result of inserting names in the gaps is a sentence, and
(2) the sentence so formed is true if the inserted names are coextensive, otherwise
false. An identity premise is a sentence formed by thus inserting names in the gaps
of an expression that expresses identity. Since E and I disagree about which are the
coextensive names, we will disagree also about which are the expressions that
express identity, which sentences are identity premises, and which inferences are
genuine instances of Leibniz's Law. If E identifies instances of Leibniz's Law correctly according to his opinions about names and their extensions, the inferences he
selects will indeed preserve truth.
Fourth, I might try arguing ad hominem that E has not really managed to escape
intensionality, since the things he takes for extensions are intensional entities. Functions from indices to truth values are commonly identified with propositions (especially if the indices consist of possible worlds and little else). Functions from indices
to things in general are likewise identified with individual concepts. How can
zwtensional entities be extensions?
But this is confusion. Intensionhood is relational. Intensions are things that play
a certain characteristic role in semantics, not things of a special sort. E and I agree
that in a suitable language (whether or not it happens in the language of this tribe)
the very same thing that is the intension of one expression is also the extension of
another. For instance, speaking in a fragment of technical English suited for use as
the metametalanguage of a smaller fragment of English, we agree that one and the
same thing is both the intension of the object-language expression "my hat" and
3

I am here ignoring our disagreement about whether an S must be preceded by 5 to make a sentence.
Strictly speaking, if a, $,/.',7 is a non-truth-preserving inference in LI, then S a, S /5,/.'. S T is a
non-truth-preserving inference in L E , The original «* -less version is not any sort of inference in LE, since
its "premises" and "conclusion" are S-names rather than sentences.

258

Philosophy of Language

the extension of the metalanguage expression "the intension of 'my hat'." In itself,
this thing is neither an intension nor an extension.
What is true is that some things can serve only as extensions, while other
things—functions from indices, for instance—can serve either as extensions or as
intensions. But there is no kind of thing that is ineligible by its nature to be an
extension.
Fifth, I might try arguing that E's opinion ascribes an extravagant ontology to
the tribesmen. When I say that a certain word of their language names a certain
concrete, material hill, E says that it names something rather more esoteric: a settheoretic object built up from a domain of individuals that contains unactualized
possibilia.
E and I, if we are consistent, believe in these esoteric entities ourselves. We do
not doubt that we can have names for them. Then on what grounds can I deny E's
claim that the tribesmen also have names for them? In fact, we both agree that
they have names for other entities far more suspect, to wit certain far-fetched gods
(according to me) or functions from indices to such gods (according to E).
I might do better to argue that the ontology ascribed by E is bad not because
certain esoteric things are present in it but rather because certain unesoteric things
are missing from it. Saul Kripke has suggested (in conversation, 1972) that it is
wrong to ascribe to someone an ontology that contains sets without their members,
functions without their arguments and values, or the like.
A plausible principle. But has E really violated it in ascribing the use of LE, a
language in which all the names are names of functions from indices and none are
names of the concrete, commonplace things that are among the values of those
functions? I think not. The ascribed ontology is not the same thing as the ascribed
set of name-bearers. If there is an ontology associated with our language, for
instance, it includes all the real numbers; not just the countable minority of them
that bear names. It is of no significance that the set of name-bearers violates
Kripke's closure principle, unless it can be shown to be the whole of the ascribed
ontology. But it is hard to say what ontology, if any, is ascribed in ascribing the
use of LE. One looks for the domain of quantification. But LE has no quantifiers!
Quantifiers are sentence-makers; but the only sentence-maker in LE is S , and that
is no quantifier. So Lt does not have a domain of quantification in any straightforward sense, either one that satisfies the closure principle or one that does not.
Unlike LE, the Parsons transform Lp does have a natural domain. More precisely,
there is a set D such that we get the intended truth conditions for those sentences
of Lp that are transforms of sentences of L, iff D is included in the range of the
quantified variables. (This assumes that the predicates of Lp have their intended
interpretations.) The set D, which is the same as the set of extensions of expressions
in LE, does violate Kripke's closure principle and so is unsuitable to be ascribed as
someone's ontology. If some extensionalist claimed that our tribesmen used Lp,
disguised by transformations, I think we would have a promising line of attack
against him. But how does that affect E, whose claim is different? Perhaps there is
some way to show that if it is bad to ascribe the use of Lp, then it is just as bad to

'Tensions

259

ascribe the use of LE. But so far, this looks to me like nothing better than guilt by
association.

VI. COMMON GROUND
So I have no way to argue against E's absurd opinion. But though we certainly
disagree about something, the extent of our differences should not be exaggerated.
In some sense, we have given equivalent descriptions of the phenomena. (That is
just what makes it so hard to build a case for one description against the other.)
More precisely, if we treat our semantic jargon as theoretical vocabulary and eliminate it by Ramsey's method of existential quantification, then our disagreement
will vanish. Our two accounts are equivalent in the sense that they have a common
Ramsification.
We can agree on the following description in neutral terms. There is a system
of categories: call them just S, N, and X/Y whenever X and Y are categories in
the system. There are three relations of expressions to things: call them the
l-'tension, 2-'tension, and 3-'tension relations. The l-'tension of an expression, but
not the 2-'tension or 3-'tension, may vary from one index to another. The l-'tension of an S at an index is a truth value; the l-'tension of an N at an index may
be anything; an expression in one of the other categories has no l-'tension. The
2-'tension of an S or an N is the function from indices that gives the proper
l-'tension at each index. The 2-'tension of an X/Y is a function from appropriate
2-'tensions for members of Y to appropriate 2-'tensions for members of X; if a is
an X/Y with 2-'tension A and j3 is a Y with 2-'tension B, then the result of combining a with ft is an X with 2-'tension A(B). The 3-'tension of any expression is
the constant function from indices to the unvarying 2-'tension. Finally, a tribesman speaks the truth in his language just when he utters an S preceded by a pause,
and the l-'tension of that S at the index (or set of indices) determined by the
occasion of utterance is truth.
So far, so good. To complete my account, I need only add a gloss: the 1-'tensions
are the extensions, the 2-'tensions are the intensions, the 3-'tensions are neither,
and S is the category of sentences. To complete his contrary account, E need only
add his contrary gloss: the 2-'tensions are the extensions, the 3-'tensions are the
intensions, the l-'tensions are neither, and S is a subcategory of names.
But these disputed additions do not add much. No matter which way we apply
our traditional semantic vocabulary of extension, intension, naming, and sentencehood, the facts of the matter are already covered by the unglossed neutral description which is the common Ramsification of both our opinions. That is all we would
need, for instance, in giving an account of the tribe's use of language as a rational
activity for imparting information, or as a physical phenomenon. The questions
under dispute are, so far as I can see, idle. If they are not, their import should give
us a way to settle them.

260

Philosophy of Language

VII. MORALS
This story has an abundance of morals. But most of them are available only if you
recklessly conclude that because I have not been able to solve my problem, therefore it must be insoluble. Actually I believe nothing of the sort. Probably there is
some perfectly good reason why L, and not LE is the tribe's language, and I have
just overlooked it. Still, what if the problem were insoluble?
First moral: we would have another good example of Quine's inscrutability of
reference. Different assignments of extensions would account equally well for the
solid facts of the matter, and there would be nothing to choose between them. But
at the same time the indeterminacy would be made to seem less formidable than
we might have thought. In view of the common Ramsifications, it seems that even
the semantic facts are not in dispute. E and I disagree about the proper way to
describe those facts in our traditional semantic jargon. That is only a localized indeterminacy in one small region of our language. Can Quine's other alarming indeterminacies be disarmed in the same way?
Second moral: intension and extension would be correlative concepts. Neither
would make sense except by contrast with the other. In a two-level semantic analysis, where expressions are assigned certain entities that are functions and other
entities that are the values of those functions at particular indices, clearly the functions are intensions vis-a-vis the values and the values are extensions vis-a-vis the
functions. But in a one-level analysis, whether we approach it by getting more and
more intensional or less and less, there is no more contrast and the correlative terms
might therfore be out of place.
Our final moral is unconditional. It stands whether or not my problem can be
solved. So elusive is the difference between using an intensional language and using
an extensional language that it can scarcely matter much which we do use. Those
who value the superior clarity of extensional languages as such4 are misguided.
There are differences that do matter. There is the difference between languages that
can be analyzed by the methods of formal semantics and ones that (so far as we
know) cannot. For any sort of ontic purist, there is the difference between languages
that can be analyzed without recourse to suspect entities and ones that cannot. And
there is the difference between standard first-order predicate calculus and all less
familiar and less well-investigated languages. But none of these real differences
between better and worse languages coincides with the difference between extensional and intensional.'
4

For instance, David Lewis when he wrote the opening lines of "Counterpart Theory and Quantified
Modal Logic," in this volume, as follows: "We can conduct formalized discourse about most topics
perfectly well by means of our all-purpose extensional logic. . . . Then we introduce modal operators
to create a special-purpose, nonextensional logic. Why this deparrure from our custom?" He proceeded
to put the departure right; but his views might just as well have been presented as an extensional
semantic analysis of an intensional language.
5
I am grateful to Graham Nerlich and Max Cressweli for the conversations in which this paper had its
origins, and to the National Science Foundation for research support.

FIFTEEN

Truth in Fiction

We can truly say that Sherlock Holmes lived in Baker Street, and that he liked to
show off his mental powers. We cannot truly say that he was a devoted family
man, or that he worked in close cooperation with the police.
It would be nice if we could take such descriptions of fictional characters at their
face value, ascribing to them the same subject-predicate form as parallel descriptions of real-life characters. Then the sentences "Holmes wears a silk top hat" and
"Nixon wears a silk top hat" would both be false because the referent of the subject
term—fictional Holmes or real-life Nixon, as the case may be—lacks the property,
expressed by the predicate, of wearing a silk top hat. The only difference would be
that the subject terms "Holmes" and "Nixon" have referents of radically different
sorts: one a fictional character, the other a real-life person of flesh and blood.
I don't question that a treatment along these Meinongian lines could be made
to work. Terence Parsons has done it. 1 But it is no simple matter to overcome the
difficulties that arise. For one thing, is there not some perfectly good sense in which
Holmes, like Nixon, is a real-life person of flesh and blood? There are stories about
the exploits of super-heroes from other planets, hobbits, fires and storms, vaporous
I thank the many friends and colleagues who have given me helpful comments on a previous version
of this paper, and I thank the American Council of Learned Societies for research support. Special
thanks are due to John G. Bennett and Saul Kripke for valuable discussions.
'in "A Prolegomenon to Meinongian Semantics," Journal of Philosophy 71 (1974); 561-80, and in "A
Meinongian Analysis of Fictional Objects," Grazer Philosophische Studien 1 (1975): 73-86.

261

262

Philosophy of Language

intelligences, and other non-persons. But what a mistake it would be to class the
Holmes stories with these! Unlike Clark Kent et at., Sherlock Holmes is just a
person—a person of flesh and blood, a being in the very same category as Nixon.
Consider also the problem of the chorus. We can truly say that Sir Joseph Porter,
K.C.B., is attended by a chorus of his sisters and his cousins and his aunts. To
make this true, it seems that the domain of fictional characters must contain not
only Sir Joseph himself, but also plenty of fictional sisters and counsins and aunts.
But how many—five dozen, perhaps? No, for we cannot truly say that the chorus
numbers five dozen exactly. We cannot truly say anything exact about its size. Then
do we perhaps have a fictional chorus, but no fictional members of this chorus and
hence no number of members? No, for we can truly say some things about the size.
We are told that the sisters and cousins, even without the aunts, number in dozens.
The Meinongian should not suppose that the quantifiers in descriptions of fictional characters range over all the things he thinks there are, both fictional and
non-fictional; but he may not find it easy to say just how the ranges of quantification
are to be restricted. Consider whether we can truly say that Holmes was more
intelligent than anyone else, before or since. It is certainly appropriate to compare
him with some fictional characters, such as Mycroft and Watson; but not with
others, such as Poirot or "Slipstick" Libby. It may be appropriate to compare him
with some non-fictional characters, such as Newton and Darwin; but probably not
with others, such as Conan Doyle or Frank Ramsey. "More intelligent than anyone
else" meant something like "more intelligent than anyone else in the world of
Sherlock Holmes." The inhabitants of this "world" are drawn partly from the
fictional side of the Meinongian domain and partly from the non-fictional side,
exhausting neither.
Finally, the Meinongian must tell us why truths about fictional characters are
cut off, sometimes though not always, from the consequences they ought to imply.
We can truly say that Holmes lived at 22 IB Baker Street. I have been told2 that
the only building at 2 2 I B Baker Street, then or now, was a bank. It does not
follow, and certainly is not true, that Holmes lived in a bank.
The way of the Meinongian is hard, and in this paper I shall explore a simpler
alternative. Let us not take our descriptions of fictional characters at face value, but
instead let us regard them as abbreviations for longer sentences beginning with an
operator "In such-and-such fiction. . . ." Such a phrase is an intensional operator
that may be prefixed to a sentence <p to form a new sentence. But then the prefixed
operator may be dropped by way of abbreviation, leaving us with what sounds like
the original sentence $ but differs from it in sense.
Thus if I say that Holmes liked to show off, you will take it that I have asserted
an abbreviated version of the true sentence "In the Sherlock Holmes stories,
Holmes liked to show off." As for the embedded sentence "Holmes liked to show
off," taken by itself with the prefixed operator neither explicitly present nor tacitly
2

I have also been told that there has never been any building at that address. It doesn't matter which
is correct.

Truth in Fiction

263

understood, we may abandon it to the common fate of subject-predicate sentences
with denotationless subject terms: automatic falsity or lack of truth value, according
to taste.
Many things we might say about Holmes are potentially ambiguous. They may
or may not be taken as abbreviations for sentences carrying the prefix "In the Sherlock Holmes stories . . . ." Context, content, and common sense will usually resolve
the ambiguity in practice. Consider these sentences:
Holmes lived in Baker Street.
Holmes lived nearer to Paddington Station than to Waterloo Station.
Holmes was just a person—a person of flesh and blood.
Holmes really existed.
Someone lived for many years at 2 2 I B Baker Street.
London's greatest detective in 1900 used cocaine.
All of them are false if taken as unprefixed, simply because Holmes did not actually
exist. (Or perhaps at least some of them lack truth value.) All are true if taken as
abbreviations for prefixed sentences. The first three would probably be taken in the
latter way, hence they seem true. The rest would probably be taken in the former
way, hence they seem false. The sentence
No detective ever solved almost all his cases.
would probably be taken as unprefixed and hence true, though it would be false if
taken as prefixed. The sentence
Holmes and Watson are identical.
is sure to be taken as prefixed and hence false, but that is no refutation of systems
of free logic3 which would count it as true if taken as unprefixed.
(I hasten to concede that some truths about Holmes are not abbreviations of
prefixed sentences, and also are not true just because "Holmes" is denotationless.
For instance these:
Holmes is a fictional character.
Holmes was killed off by Conan Doyle, but later resurrected.
Holmes has acquired a cultish following.
Holmes symbolizes mankind's ceaseless striving for truth.
Holmes would not have needed tapes to get the goods on Nixon.
Holmes could have solved the A.B.C. murders sooner than Poirot.
I shall have nothing to say here about the proper treatment of these sentences. If
the Meinongian can handle them with no special dodges, that is an advantage of
his approach over mine.)
The ambiguity of prefixing explains why truths about fictional characters are
*For instance, the system given in Dana Scott, "Existence and Description in Formal Logic," in Bertrand
Russell: Philosopher of the Century, ed. by Ralph Schoenman (London: Allen & Unwin, 1967).

264

Philosophy of Language

sometimes cut off from their seeming consequences. Suppose we have an argument
(with zero or more premisses) which is valid in the modal sense that it is impossible
for the premisses all to be true and the conclusion false.

Then it seems clear that we obtain another valid argument if we prefix an operator
"In the fiction /. . ." uniformly to each premiss and to the conclusion of the original argument. Truth in a given fiction is closed under implication.

But if we prefix the operator "In the fiction/. . ." to some of the original premisses
and not to others, or if we take some but not all of the premisses as tacitly prefixed,
then in general neither the original conclusion <f> nor the prefixed conclusion "In
the fiction/, cj>" will follow. In the inference we considered earlier there were two
premisses. The premiss that Holmes lived at 2 2 I B Baker Street was true only if
taken as prefixed. The premiss that the only building at 22 IB Baker Street was a
bank, on the other hand, was true only if taken as unprefixed; for in the stories
there was no bank there but rather a rooming house. Taking the premisses as we
naturally would in the ways that make them true, nothing follows: neither the
unprefixed conclusion that Holmes lived in a bank nor the prefixed conclusion that
in the stories he lived in a bank. Taking both premisses as unprefixed, the unprefixed conclusion follows but the first premiss is false. Taking both premisses as
prefixed, the prefixed conclusion follows but the second premiss is false.4
Our remaining task is to see what may be said about the analysis of the operators
"In such-and-such fiction . . . . " I have already noted that truth in a given fiction
is closed under implication. Such closure is the earmark of an operator of relative
necessity, an intensional operator that may be analyzed as a restricted universal
quantifier over possible worlds. So we might proceed as follows: a prefixed sentence
"In fiction / <j>" is true (or, as we shall also say, (f> is true in the fiction /) iff 0 is
true at every possible world in a certain set, this set being somehow determined by
thefiction/
As a first approximation, we might consider exactly those worlds where the plot
of the fiction is enacted, where a course of events takes place that matches the story.
What is true in the Sherlock Holmes stories would then be what is true at all of
those possible worlds where there are characters who have the attributes, stand in
the relations, and do the deeds that are ascribed in the stories to Holmes, Watson,
and the rest. (Whether these characters would then be Holmes, Watson, and the
rest is a vexed question that we must soon consider.)
4

Thus far, the account I have given closely follows that of John Heintz, "Reference and Inference in
Fiction." Poetics 8 (1979).

Truth in Fiction

265

I think this proposal is not quite right. For one thing, there is a threat of circularity. Even the Holmes stories, not to mention fiction written in less explicit
styles, are by no means in the form of straightforward chronicles. An intelligent
and informed reader can indeed discover the plot, and could write it down in the
form of a fully explicit chronicle if he liked. But this extraction of plot from text
is no trivial or automatic task. Perhaps the reader accomplishes it only by figuring
out what is true in the stories—that is, only by exercising his tacit mastery of the
very concept of truth in fiction that we are now investigating. If so, then an analysis
that starts by making uncritical use of the concept of the plot of a fiction might be
rather uninformative, even if correct so far as it goes.
A second problem arises out of an observation by Saul Kripke. 5 Let us assume
that Conan Doyle indeed wrote the stories as pure fiction. He just made them up.
He had no knowledge of anyone who did the deeds he ascribed to Holmes, nor
had he even picked up any garbled information originating in any such person. It
may nevertheless be, purely by coincidence, that our own world is one of the worlds
where the plot of the stories is enacted. Maybe there was a man whom Conan Doyle
never heard of whose actual adventures chanced to fit the stories in every detail.
Maybe he even was named "Sherlock Holmes." Improbable, incredible, but surely
possible! Now consider the name "Sherlock Holmes," as used in the stories. Does
the name, so used, refer to the man whom Conan Doyle never heard oP Surely not!
It is irrelevant that a homonymous name is used by some people, not including
Conan Doyle, to refer to this man. We must distinguish between the homonyms,
just as we would distinguish the name of London (England) from the homonymous
name of London (Ontario). It is false at our world that the name, "Sherlock
Holmes," as used in the stories, refers to someone. Yet it is true in the stories that
this name, as used in the stories, refers to someone. So we have found something
that is true in the stories but false (under our improbable supposition) at one of
the worlds where the plot of the stories is enacted.
In order to avoid this difficulty, it will be helpful if we do not think of a fiction
in the abstract, as a string of sentences or something of that sort. Rather, a fiction
is a story told by a storyteller on a particular occasion. He may tell his tales around
the campfire or he may type a manuscript and send it to his publisher, but in either
case there is an act of storytelling. Different acts of storytelling, different fictions.
When Pierre Menard re-tells Don Quixote, that is not the same fiction as Cervantes'
Don Quixote—not even if they are in the same language and match word for word. 6
'Briefly stated in his addenda to "Naming and Necessity," in Semantics of Natural Language, ed. by
Gilbert Harman and Donald Davidson (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1972); and discussed at greater length in
an unpublished lecture given at a conference held at the University of Western Ontario in 1973 and
on other occasions. My views and Kripke's overlap to some extent. He also stresses what I have called
the ambiguity of prefixing and regards the storyteller as engaged in pretence. The conclusions he draws
from the present observation, however, differ greatly from mine.
6
Jorge Luis Borges, "Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote" in Ficeiones (Buenos Aires, 1944; English
translation, New York: Grove, 1962).

266

Philosophy of Language

(It would have been different if Menard had copied Cervantes' fiction from memory, however; that would not have been what I call an act of storytelling at all.)
One act of storytelling might, however, be the telling of two different fictions: one
a harmless fantasy told to the children and the censors, the other a subversive allegory simultaneously told to the cognoscenti.
Storytelling is pretence. The storyteller purports to be telling the truth about
matters whereof he has knowledge. He purports to be talking about characters who
are known to him, and whom he refers to, typically, by means of their ordinary
proper names. But if his story is fiction, he is not really doing these things. Usually
his pretence has not the slightest tendency to deceive anyone, nor has he the slightest intent to deceive. Nevertheless he plays a false part, goes through a form of
telling known fact when he is not doing so. This is most apparent when the fiction
is told in the first person. Conan Doyle pretended to be a doctor named Watson,
engaged in publishing truthful memoirs of events he himself had witnessed. But
the case of third-person narrative is not essentially different. The author purports
to be telling the truth about matters he has somehow come to know about, though
how he has found out about them is left unsaid. That is why there is a pragmatic
paradox akin to contradiction in a third-person narrative that ends ". . .and so none
were left to tell the tale."
The worlds we should consider, I suggest, are the worlds where the fiction is
told, but as known fact rather than fiction. The act of storytelling occurs, just as it
does here at our world; but there it is what here it falsely purports to be: truthtelling about matters whereof the teller has knowledge.7 Our own world cannot be
such a world; for if it is really a fiction that we are dealing with, then the act of
storytelling at our world was not what it purported to be. It does not matter if,
unbeknownst to the author, our world is one where his plot is enacted. The reallife Sherlock Holmes would not have made Conan Doyle any less of a pretender,
if Conan Doyle had never heard of him. (This real-life Holmes might have had
his real-life Watson who told true stories about the adventures he had witnessed.
But even if his memoirs matched Conan Doyle's fiction word for word they would
not be the same stories, any more than Cervantes' Don Quixote is the same story as
Menard's. So our world would still not be one where the Holmes stories—the same
7

There are exceptions. Sometimes the storyteller purports to be uttering a mixture of truth and lies
about matters whereof he has knowledge, or ravings giving a distorted reflection of the events, or the
like. Tolkien explicitly purports to be the translator and editor of the Red Book of Westmarch, an
ancient book that has somehow come into his possession and that he somehow knows to be a reliable
record of the events. He does not purport to be its author, else he would not write in English. (Indeed,
the composition of the Red Book by several hobbits is recorded in the Red Book itself.) I should say
the same about a first-person historical novel written in English in which the narrator is an ancient
Greek. The author does not pretend to be the truthful narrator himself, but rather pretends to be
someone of our time who somehow has obtained the Greek narrator's story, knows it to be true, and
passes it on to us in translation. In these exceptional cases also, the thing to do is to consider those
worlds where the act of storytelling teally is whatever it purports to be—ravings, reliable translation
of a reliable source, or whatever—here at our world. I shall omit mention of these exceptional cases in
the remainder of this paper.

Truth in fiction

267

Holmes stories that Conan Doyle told as fiction—were told as known fact.) On
the other hand, any world where the story is told as known fact rather than fiction
must be among the worlds where the plot of the story is enacted. Else its enactment
could be neither known nor truly told of.
I rely on a notion of trans-world identity for stories; this is partly a matter of
word-for-word match and partly a matter of trans-world identity (or perhaps a
counterpart relation) for acts of storytelling. Here at our world we have a fiction /,
told in an act a of storytelling; at some other world we have an act a' of telling
the truth about known matters of fact; the stories told in a and a' match word for
word, and the words have the same meaning. Does that mean that the other world
is one where/is told as known fact rather than fiction? Not necessarily, as the case
of Menard shows. It is also required that a and a' be the same act of storytelling
(or at least counterparts). How bad is this? Surely you would like to know more
about the criteria of trans-world identity (or the counterpart relation) for acts of
storytelling, and so indeed would I. But I think we have enough of a grip to make
it worthwhile going on. I see no threat of circularity here, since I see no way of
using the concept of truth in fiction to help with the analysis of trans-world identity
of acts of storytelling.
Suppose a fiction employs such names as "Sherlock Holmes." At those worlds
where the same story is told as known fact rather than fiction, those names really
are what they here purport to be: ordinary proper names of existing characters
known to the storyteller. Here at our world, the storyteller only pretends that
"Sherlock Holmes" has the semantic character of an ordinary proper name. We
have no reason at all to suppose that the name, as used here at our world, really
does have that character. As we use it, it may be very unlike an ordinary proper
name. Indeed, it may have a highly non-rigid sense, governed largely by the
descriptions of Holmes and his deeds that are found in the stories. That is what I
suggest: the sense of "Sherlock Holmes" as we use it is such that, for any world w
where the Holmes stories are told as known fact rather than fiction, the name
denotes at w whichever inhabitant of w it is who there plays the role of Holmes.
Part of that role, of course, is to bear the ordinary proper name "Sherlock Holmes."
But that only goes to show that "Sherlock Holmes" is used at w as an ordinary
proper name, not that it is so used here.8'9
8

A rather similar treatment of fictional names, different from mine in that it allows the actual and
purported meanings of "Sherlock Holmes" to be the same, is given in Robert Stalnaker, "Assertion"
in Syntax and Semantics 9, ed. by Peter Cole, (New York: Academic Press, 1978).
9
Many of us have never read the srories, could not produce the descriptions that largely govern the nonrigid sense of "Sherlock Holmes," yet use this name in just the same sense as the most experr Baker
Srreet Irregular. There is no problem here. Kripke's causal picture of the contagion of meaning, in
"Naming and Necessity," (op. cit.), will do as well for non-rigid senses, as for rigid ones. The ignoramus uses "Sherlock Holmes" in its standard non-rigid sense if he has picked it up (in the right way)
from someone who knew the governing descriptions, or who picked it up from someone else who knew
rhem, or . . . . Kripke's doctrines of rigidity could not be defended without the aid of his doctrine of
contagion of meaning; contagion without rigidity, on the other hand, seems unproblematic.

26S

Philosophy of Language

I also suggest, less confidently, that whenever a world w is not one of the worlds
just considered, the sense of "Sherlock Holmes" as we use it is such as to assign it
no denotation at w. That is so even if the plot of the fiction is enacted by inhabitants of w. If we are right that Conan Doyle told the Holmes stories as fiction, then
it follows that "Sherlock Holmes" is denotationless here at our world. It does not
denote the real-life Sherlock Holmes whom Conan Doyle never heard of, if such
there be.
We have reached a proposal I shall call ANALYSIS 0: A sentence of the form "In
fiction f, cf>" is true iff (j) is true at every world where f is told as known fact rather
than fiction.
Is that right? There are some who never tire of telling us not to read anything
into a fiction that is not there explicitly, and Analysis 0 will serve to capture the
usage of those who hold this view in its most extreme form. I do not believe,
however, that such a usage is at all common. Most of us are content to read a
fiction against a background of well-known fact, "reading into" the fiction content
that is not there explicitly but that comes jointly from the explicit content and the
factual background. Analysis 0 disregards the background. Thereby it brings too
many possible worlds into consideration, so not enough comes out true in the fiction.
For example, I claim that in the Holmes stories, Holmes lives nearer to Paddington Station than to Waterloo Station. A glance at the map will show you that
his address in Baker Street is much nearer to Paddington. Yet the map is not part
of the stories; and so far as I know it is never stated or implied in the stories
themselves that Holmes lives nearer to Paddington. There are possible worlds
where the Holmes stories are told as known fact rather than fiction which differ in
all sorts of ways from ours. Among these are worlds where Holmes lives in a London arranged very differently from the London of our world, a London where
Holmes's address in Baker Street is much closer to Waterloo Station than to Paddington.
(I do not suppose that such a distortion of geography need prevent the otherworldly places there called "London," "Paddington Station," . . . from being the
same as, or counterparts of, their actual namesakes. But if I am wrong, that still
does not challenge my claim that there are worlds where the stories are told as
known fact but where it is true that Holmes lives closer to Waterloo than to Paddington. For it is open to us to regard the place-names, as used in the stories, as
fictional names with non-rigid senses like the non-rigid sense I have already
ascribed to "Sherlock Holmes." That would mean, incidentally, that "Paddington
Station," as used in the stories, does not denote the actual station of that name.)
Similarly, I claim that it is true, though not explicit, in the stories that Holmes
does not have a third nostril; that he never had a case in which the murderer turned
out to be a purple gnome; that he solved his cases without the aid of divine revelation; that he never visited the moons of Saturn; and that he wears underpants.
There are bizarre worlds where the Holmes stories are told as known fact but where
all of these things are false.

Truth in Fiction

269

Strictly speaking, it is fallacious to reason from a mixture of truth in fact and
truth in fiction to conclusions about truth in fiction. From a mixture of prefixed
and unprefixed premisses, nothing follows. But in practice the fallacy is often not
so bad. The factual premisses in mixed reasoning may be part of the background
against which we read the fiction. They may carry over into the fiction, not because
there is anything explicit in the fiction to make them true, but rather because there
is nothing to make them false. There is nothing in the Holmes stories, for instance,
that gives us any reason to bracket our background knowledge of the broad outlines
of London geography. Only a few details need changing—principally details having to do with 22 IB Baker Street. To move the stations around, or even to regard
their locations as an open question, would be uncalled for. What's true in fact
about their locations is true also in the stories. Then it is no error to reason from
such facts to conclusions about what else is true in the stories.
You've heard it all before. Reasoning about truth in fiction is very like counterfactual reasoning. We make a supposition contrary to fact—what if this match had
been struck? In reasoning about what would have happened in that counterfactual
situation, we use factual premisses. The match was dry, there was oxygen about,
and so forth. But we do not use factual premisses altogether freely, since some of
them would fall victim to the change that takes us from actuality to the envisaged
counterfactual situation. We do not use the factual premiss that the match was
inside the matchbox at the time in question, or that it was at room temperature a
second later. We depart from actuality as far as we must to reach a possible world
where the counterfactual supposition comes true (and that might be quite far if the
supposition is a fantastic one). But we do not make gratuitous changes. We hold
fixed the features of actuality that do not have to be changed as part of the least
disruptive way of making the supposition true. We can safely reason from the part
of our factual background that is thus held fixed.
By now, several authors have treated counterfactual conditionals along the lines
just sketched. Differences of detail between these treatments are unimportant for
our present purposes. My own version10 runs as follows. A counterfactual of the
form "If it were that <j>, then it would be that \j/" is non-vacuously true iff some
possible world where both $ and i/' are true differs less from our actual world, on
balance, then does any world where (j) is true but ^ is not true. It is vacuously true
iff (j) is true at no possible worlds. (I omit accessibility restrictions for simplicity.)
Getting back to truth in fiction, recall that the trouble with Analysis 0 was that
it ignored background, and thereby brought into consideration bizarre worlds that
differed gratuitously from our actual world. A fiction will in general require some
departures from actuality, the more so if it is a fantastic fiction. But we need to
keep the departures from actuality under control. It is wrong, or at least eccentric,
to read the Holmes stories as if they might for all we know be taking place at a
world where three-nostrilled detectives pursue purple gnomes. The remedy is,
roughly speaking, to analyze statements of truth in fiction as counterfactuals. What
'"Given in Counterfactuah (Oxford: Blackwell, 1973).

270

Philosophy of Language

is true in the Sherlock Holmes stories is what would be true if those stories were
told as known fact rather than fiction.
Spelling this out according to my treatment of counterfactuals, we have
ANALYSIS I: A sentence of the form "In the fiction f, 0" is non-vacuously true iff some
world where f is told as known fact and <t> is true differs less from our actual world,
on balance, than does any world where f is told as known fact and (j> is not true. It
is vacuously true iff there are no possible worlds where f is told as known fact. (I
postpone consideration of the vacuous case.)
We sometimes speak of the world of a fiction. What is true in the Holmes stories
is what is true, as we say, "in the world of Sherlock Holmes." That we speak this
way should suggest that it is right to consider less than all the worlds where the
plot of the stories is enacted, and less even than all the worlds where the stories are
told as known fact. "In the world of Sherlock Holmes," as in actuality, Baker Street
is closer to Paddington Station than to Waterloo Station and there are no purple
gnomes. But it will not do to follow ordinary language to the extent of supposing
that we can somehow single out a single one of the worlds where the stories are
told as known fact. Is the world of Sherlock Holmes a world where Holmes has
an even or an odd number of hairs on his head at the moment when he first meets
Watson? What is Inspector Lestrade's blood type? It is absurd to suppose that these
questions about the world of Sherlock Holmes have answers. The best explanation
of that is that the world/ of Sherlock Holmes are plural, and the questions have
different answers at different ones. If we may assume that some of the worlds where
the stories are told as known fact differ least from our world, then these are the
worlds of Sherlock Homes. What is true throughout them is true in the stories;
what is false throughout them is false in the stories; what is true at some and false
at others is neither true nor false in the stories. Any answer to the silly questions
just asked would doubtless fall in the last category. It is for the same reason that
the chorus of Sir Joseph Porter's sisters and cousins and aunts has no determinate
size: it has different sizes at different ones of the worlds of H.M.S. Pinafore."
Under Analysis I, truth in a given fiction depends on matters of contingent fact.
I am not thinking of the remote possibility that accidental properties of the fiction
might somehow enter into determining which are the worlds where that fiction is
told as known fact. Rather, it is a contingent matter which of those worlds differ
more from ours and which less, and which (if any) differ least. That is because it
is a contingent fact—indeed it is the contingent fact on which all others depend—
which possible world is our actual world. To the extent that the character of our
world carries over into the worlds of Sherlock Holmes, what is true in the stories
depends on what our world is like. If the stations of London had been differently
located, it might have been true in the stories (and not because the stories would
"Heintz (of. f i t . ) disagrees; he supposes that for each fiction there is a single world to be considered,
but a world that is in some respects indeterminate. I do not know what to make of an indeterminate
world, unless I regard it as a superposition of all possible ways of resolving the indeterminacy—or, in
plainer language, as a set of determinate worlds that differ in the respects in question.

Truth in Fiction

271

then have been different) that Holmes lived nearer to Waterloo Station than to
Paddington Station.
This contingency is all very well when truth in fiction depends on well-known
contingent facts about our world, as it does in the examples I have so far given to
motivate Analysis I. It is more disturbing if truth in fiction turns out to depend on
contingent facts that are not well known. In an article setting forth little-known
facts about the movement of snakes, Carl Gans has argued as follows:
In "The Adventure of the Speckled Band" Sherlock Holmes solves a murder mystery
by showing that the victim has been killed by a Russell's viper that has climbed up a
bell-rope. What Holmes did not realize was that Russell's viper is not a constrictor.
The snake is therefore incapable of concertina movement and could not have climbed
the rope. Either the snake reached its victim some other way or the case remains open.' 2
We may well look askance at this reasoning. But if Analysis I is correct then so is
Gans's argument. The story never quite says that Holmes was right that the snake
climbed the rope. Hence there are worlds where the Holmes stories are told as
known fact, where the snake reached the victim some other way, and where Holmes
therefore bungled. Presumably some of these worlds differ less from ours than their
rivals where Holmes was right and where Russell's viper is capable of concertina
movement up a rope. Holmes's infallibility, of course, is not a countervailing
resemblance to actuality; our world contains no infallible Holmes.
Psychoanalysis of fictional characters provides a more important example. The
critic uses (what he believes to be) little-known facts of human psychology as premisses, and reasons to conclusions that are far from obvious about the childhood or
the adult mental state of the fictional character. Under Analysis I his procedure is
justified. Unless countervailing considerations can be found, to consider worlds
where the little-known fact of psychology does not hold would be to depart gratuitously from actuality.
The psychoanalysis of fictional characters has aroused vigorous objections. So
would Gans's argument, if anyone cared. I shall keep neutral in these quarrels, and
try to provide for the needs of both sides. Analysis I, or something close to it,
should capture the usage of Gans and the literary psychoanalysts. Let us find an
alternative analysis to capture the conflicting usage of their opponents. I shall not
try to say which usage is more conducive to appreciation of fiction and critical
insight.
Suppose we decide, contra Gans and the literary psychoanalysts, that littleknown or unknown facts about our world are irrelevant to truth in fiction. But let
us not fall back to Analysis 0; it is not our only alternative. Let us still recognize
that it is perfectly legitimate to reason to truth in fiction from a background of
well-known facts.
12

Carl Gans, "How Snakes Move," Scientific American, 222 (1970): 93.

2 72

Philosophy of Language

Must they really be facts? It seems that if little-known or unknown facts are
irrelevant, then so are little-known or unknown errors in the body of shared opinion
that is generally taken for fact. We think we all know that there are no purple
gnomes, but what if there really are a few, unknown to anyone except themselves,
living in a secluded cabin near Loch Ness? Once we set aside the usage given by
Analysis I, it seems clear that whatever purple gnomes may be hidden in odd corners of our actual world, there are still none of them in the worlds of Sherlock
Holmes. We have shifted to viewing truth in fiction as the joint product of explicit
content and a background of generally prevalent beliefs.
Our own beliefs? I think not. That would mean that what is true in a fiction is
constantly changing. Gans might not be right yet, but he would eventually become
right about Holmes's error if enough people read his article and learned that Russell's viper could not climb a rope. When the map of Victorian London was finally
forgotten, it would cease to be true that Holmes lived nearer to Paddington than
to Waterloo. Strange to say, the historical scholar would be in no better position
to know what was true in the fictions of his period than the ignorant layman. That
cannot be right. What was true in a fiction when it was first told is true in it
forevermore. It is our knowledge of what is true in the fiction that may wax or
wane.
The proper background, then, consists of the beliefs that generally prevailed in
the community where the fiction originated: the beliefs of the author and his
intended audience. And indeed the factual premisses that seemed to us acceptable
in reasoning about Sherlock Holmes were generally believed in the community of
origin of the stories. Everyone knew roughly where the principal stations of London
were, everyone disbelieved in purple gnomes, and so forth.
One last complication. Suppose Conan Doyle was a secret believer in purple
gnomes; thinking that his belief in them was not shared by anyone else he kept it
carefully to himself for fear of ridicule. In particular, he left no trace of this belief
in his stories. Suppose also that some of his original readers likewise were secret
believers in purple gnomes. Suppose, in fact, that everyone alive at the time was a
secret believer in purple gnomes, each thinking that his own belief was not shared
by anyone else. Then it is clear (to the extent that anything is clear about such a
strange situation) that the belief in purple gnomes does not "generally prevail" in
quite the right way, and there are still no purple gnomes in the worlds of Sherlock
Holmes. Call a belief overt in a community at a time iff more or less everyone
shares it, more or less everyone thinks that more or less everyone else shares it, and
so on." The proper background, we may conclude, comprises the beliefs that are
overt in the community of origin of the fiction.
13

A better definition of overt belief, under the name of "common knowledge," may be found in my
Convention (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1969), pp. 52-60. That name was unforrunate, since there is no assurance that it will be knowledge, or even that it will be true. See also the
discussion of "mutual knowledge*" in Stephen Schiffer, Meaning (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1972), pp. 30-42.

Truth in Fiction

273

Assume, by way of idealization, that the beliefs overt in the community are each
possible and jointly compossible. Then we can assign to the community a set of
possible worlds, called the collective belief worlds of the community, comprising
exactly those worlds where the overt beliefs all come true. Only if the community
is uncommonly lucky will the actual world belong to this set. Indeed, the actual
world determines the collective belief worlds of the community of origin of the
fiction and then drops out of the analysis. (It is of course a contingent matter what
that community is and what is overtly believed there.) We are left with two sets
of worlds: the worlds where the fiction is told as known fact, and the collective
belief worlds of the community of origin. The first set gives the content of the
fiction; the second gives the background of prevalent beliefs.
It would be a mistake simply to consider the worlds that belong to both sets.
Fictions usually contravene at least some of the community's overt beliefs. I can
certainly tell a story in which there are purple gnomes, though there are none at
our collective belief worlds. Further, it will usually be overtly believed in the community of origin of a fiction that the story is not told as known fact—storytellers
seldom deceive—so none of the worlds where the fiction is told as known fact can
be a collective belief world of the community. Even if the two sets do overlap (the
fiction is plausible and the author palms it off as fact) the worlds that belong to
both sets are apt to be special in ways having nothing to do with what is true in
the fiction. Suppose the story tells of a bungled burglary in recent times, and suppose it ends just as the police reach the scene. Any collective belief world of ours
where this story is told as known fact is a world where the burglary was successfully
covered up; for it is an overt belief among us that no such burglary ever hit the
news. That does not make it true in the story that the burglary was covered up.
What we need is something like Analysis I, but applied from the standpoint of
the collective belief worlds rather than the actual world. What is true in the Sherlock Holmes stories is what would be true, according to the overt beliefs of the
community of origin, if those stories were told as known fact rather than fiction.
Spelling this out, we have ANALYSIS 2: A sentence of the form "In the fiction f,
<f>" is non-vacuously true iff, whenever w is one of the collective belief worlds of the
community of origin off, then some world where f is told as known fact and (j> is true
differs less from the world w, on balance, than does any world where f is told as known
fact and <j> is not true. It is vacuously true iff there are no possible worlds where f is
told as known fact. It is Analysis 2, or something close to it, that I offer to opponents
of Cans and the literary psychoanalysts.
I shall briefly consider two remaining areas of difficulty and sketch strategies for
dealing with them. I shall not propose improved analyses, however; partly because
I am not quite sure what changes to make, and partly because Analysis 2 is quite
complicated enough already.
I have said that truth in fiction is the joint product of two sources: the explicit
content of the fiction, and a background consisting either of the facts about our
world (Analysis i) or of the beliefs overt in the community of origin (Analysis 2).

2 74

Philosophy of Language

Perhaps there is a third source which also contributes: carry-over from other truth
in fiction. There are two cases: intra-fictional and inter-fictional.
In the Threepenny Opera, the principal characters are a treacherous crew. They
constantly betray one another, for gain or to escape danger. There is also a streetsinger. He shows up, sings the ballad of Mack the Knife, and goes about his business without betraying anyone. Is he also a treacherous fellow.' The explicit content
does not make him so. Real people are not so very treacherous, and even in Weimar
Germany it was not overtly believed that they were, so background does not make
him so either. Yet there is a moderately good reason to say that he is treacherous:
in the Threepenny Opera, that's how people are. In the worlds of the Threepenny
Opera, everyone put to the test proves treacherous, the streetsinger is there along
with the rest, so doubtless he too would turn out to be treacherous if we saw more
of him. His treacherous nature is an intra-fictional carry-over from the treacherous
natures in the story of Macheath, Polly, Tiger Brown, and the rest.
Suppose I write a story about the dragon Scrulch, a beautiful princess, a bold
knight, and what not. It is a perfectly typical instance of its stylized genre, except
that I never say that Scrulch breathes fire. Does he nevertheless breathe fire in my
story? Perhaps so, because dragons in that sort of story do breathe fire. But the
explicit content does not make him breathe fire. Neither does background, since
in actuality and according to our beliefs there are no animals that breathe fire. (It
just might be analytic that nothing is a dragon unless it breathes fire. But suppose
I never called Scrulch a dragon; I merely endowed him with all the standard dragonly attributes except fire-breathing.) If Scrulch does breathe fire in my story, it is
by inter-fictional carry-over from what is true of dragons in other stories.
I have spoken of Conan Doyle's Holmes stories; but many other authors also
have written Holmes stories. These would have little point without inter-fictional
carry-over. Surely many things are true in these satellite stories not because of the
explicit content of the satellite story itself, and not because they are part of the
background, but rather because they carry over from Conan Doyle's original
Holmes stories. Similarly, if instead of asking what is true in the entire corpus of
Conan Doyle's Holmes stories we ask what is true in "The Hound of the Baskervilles," we will doubtless find many things that are true in that story only by virtue
of carry-over from Conan Doyle's other Holmes stories.
I turn finally to vacuous truth in impossible fictions. Let us call a fiction impossible iff there is no world where it is told as known fact rather than fiction. That
might happen in either of two ways. First, the plot might be impossible. Second,
a possible plot might imply that there could be nobody in a position to know or
tell of the events in question. If a fiction is impossible in the second way, then to
tell it as known fact would be to know its truth and tell truly something that
implies that its truth could not be known; which is impossible.
According to all three of my analyses, anything whatever is vacuously true in an
impossible fiction. That seems entirely satisfactory if the impossibility is blatant: if

Truth in Fiction

275

we are dealing with a fantasy about the troubles of the man who squared the circle,
or with the worst sort of incoherent time-travel story. We should not expect to
have a non-trivial concept of truth in blatantly impossible fiction, or perhaps we
should expect to have one only under the pretence—not to be taken too seriously—
that there are impossible possible worlds as well as the possible possible worlds.
But what should we do with a fiction that is not blatantly impossible, but
impossible only because the author has been forgetful? I have spoken of truth in
the Sherlock Holmes stories. Strictly speaking, these (taken together) are an impossible fiction. Conan Doyle contradicted himself from one story to another about
the location of Watson's old war wound. Still, I do not want to say that just anything is true in the Holmes stories!
I suppose that we might proceed in two steps to say what is true in a venially
impossible fiction such as the Holmes stories. First, go from the original impossible
fiction to the several possible revised versions that stay closest to the original. Then
say that what is true in the original is what is true, according to one of our analyses
of non-vacuous truth in fiction, in all of these revised versions. Then nothing definite will be true in the Holmes stories about the location of Watson's wound.
Since Conan Doyle put it in different places, the different revised versions will
differ. But at least it will be true in the stories that Watson was wounded elsewhere
than in the left big toe. Conan Doyle put the wound in various places, but never
there. So no revised version will put the wound in the left big toe, since that would
change the story more than consistency demands.
The revised versions, like the original fiction, will be associated with acts of
storytelling. The revised versions, unlike the original, will not actually be told
either as fiction or as known fact. But there are worlds where they are told as fiction,
and worlds where they are told as known fact.
Even when the original fiction is not quite impossible, there may be cases in
which it would be better to consider not truth in the original fiction but rather
truth in all suitably revised versions. We have a three-volume novel set in 1878.
We learn in the first volume that the hero had lunch in Glasgow on a certain day.
In the third volume, it turns out that he showed up in London that same afternoon.
In no other way does this novel purport to be a fantasy of rapid transit. The author
was just careless. We could without vacuity apply our analyses directly to the novel
as written. Since the closest worlds where it is told as known fact are worlds with
remarkable means of travel, the results would astonish anyone—for instance, our
forgetful author—who had not troubled to work out a careful timetable of the
hero's movements. It would be more charitable to apply the analyses not to the
original story but instead to the minimally revised versions that make the hero's
movements feasible by the means of travel that were available in 1878. At least,
that would be best if there were ways to set the times right without major changes
in the plot. There might not be, and in that case perhaps truth in the original
version—surprising though some of it may be—is the best we can do.

276

Philosophy of Language

Postscripts to
"Truth in Fiction"

A. MAKE-BELIEVE TELLING, MAKE-BELIEVE LEARNING
The storyteller purports—normally, if not invariably—to be telling the truth about
matters whereof he has knowledge. I take the actual telling of the story, in effect,
as part of the story itself; or in other words, I subsume the pretended truth of the
story under the pretence of truthful telling. Thus I dodge Kripke's objection that
the story might come true by accident, yet be as fictional as ever. For the part about
the deeds of Holmes might come true by accident, but not the part about the
historical origins of the stories we were told.
I thought this an artificial dodge to meet a technical difficulty. But Kendall
Walton's papers on fiction' have persuaded me, first, that it is not at all artificial;
and second, that the storyteller's pretence of truth and knowledge is only the tip
of the iceberg. There is a cooperative game of make-believe, governed by conventional understandings, with players in (at least) two roles. The storytellers pretend
to pass on historical information to their audience; the audience pretends to learn
from their words, and to respond accordingly.
Attention to this broader game of make-believe ties up some of the loose ends.
The audience may make-believedly learn their history from several different storytellers. They make-believedly do what real students of history really do: they
combine information from several sources. Consider the worlds where all our accumulated make-believe learning about the doings of dragons is honest history: in
the closest of these, Scrulch the dragon breathes fire. (Or better, some where he
does are closer than any where he doesn't.) It doesn't matter how much about firebreathing we get from the tale of Scrulch, how much from other stories in the same
game. Likewise, take the worlds where we learn the true history of famous mysteries partly from Conan Doyle and Christie, and partly from the newspapers. (The
fact that we really do trust the newspapers need not stop us from putting them to
use in this game.) In the closest of these worlds, arguably, Holmes could have
solved the A.B.C. murders sooner than Poirot, and he would not have needed tapes
to get the goods on Nixon.

'in particular, his "On Fearing Fictions," Journal of Philosophy 75 (1978): 5-27, and others cited
therein.

Truth in Fiction

277

B. IMPOSSIBLE FICTIONS
An inconsistent fiction is not to be treated directly, else everything comes out true
in it indiscriminately. But where we have an inconsistent fiction, there also we have
several consistent fictions that may be extracted from it. (Perhaps not in the very
hardest cases—but I think those cases are meant to defy our efforts to figure out
what's true in the story.) I spoke of the consistent corrections of the original fiction.
But perhaps it will be enough to consider fragments: corrections by deletion, with
nothing written in to replace the deleted bits.
Perhaps we should take the maximal consistent fragments, obtained by deleting
the bare minimum that will give us consistency. But I think it might be better to
respect the salient divisions of the story into parts, even if that means taking lessthan-maximal consistent fragments. I believe that Isaac Asimov's The End of
Eternity2 falls into inconsistency by changing its conception of time travel part way
through. If so, perhaps the book less its final chapters would make a salient consistent fragment, even if we leave out scattered bits from the final chapters that
could consistently have been left in.
Be that as it may, what do we do with our several consistent fragments (or
corrections) when we have them? See what is true in each according to my analysis
of non-vacuous truth in fiction (in whichever version seems called for). Then what?
I suggested this method of intersection', 0 is true in the original fiction iff 0 is true
in every fragment. Now I would favor instead this method of union: ip is true in the
original fiction iff (p is true in some fragment. (Not that we need choose once and
for all—we can have both methods, distinguishing two senses of truth in inconsistent fiction.)
Intersection is the conservative method. Even if the fiction was inconsistent,
what's true in it will still comprise a consistent theory, fully closed under implication. (I mean, to speak redundantly, classical implication.) But we pay a price:
some of what's explicit in the fiction gets lost. That price now seems to me too
high.
The method of union gives us all the truth in inconsistent fiction that the
method of intersection does, and more besides. What's explicit will not get lost,
for presumably it will be true in its own fragment. But we lose consistency and we
lose closure under implication. Suppose two fragments disagree: $ is true in one,
not-0 in the other. Then </> and not-0 both are true in the fiction as a whole. But
their inconsistent conjunction is not, though they jointly imply it. Likewise many
other things are not true in the fiction, though every one of them is implied jointly
by two premisses both true in the fiction.
All this is as it should be. If we deny that contradictory pairs are true in inconsistent fiction, we deny its distinctive peculiarity. Then we must not close under
2

(New York: Fawcett, 1955).

278

Philosophy of Language

implication, on pain of obliterating the distinction between what's true in the story
and what isn't. We should not even close under the most obvious and uncontroversial sort of implication: the inference from conjuncts to conjunction. (Here is
where the relevantists go wrong, seduced by their hope that truth in inconsistent
fiction might after all be closed under some relation that might colorably bear the
name of implication.) It is true in the Holmes stories that Watson was wounded
in the shoulder; it is true in the stories that he was wounded in the leg. It is simply
not true in the stories that he was wounded in the shoulder and the leg both—he
had only one wound, despite the discrepancy over its location.3

C. FICTION IN THE SERVICE OF TRUTH
There are some who value fiction mostly as a means for the discovery of truth, or
for the communication of truth. "Truth in Fiction" had nothing to say about fiction
as a means to truth. But the topics can indeed be connected.
Most simply, there may be an understanding between the author and his readers
to the effect that what is true in his fiction, on general questions if not on particulars, is not to depart from what he takes to be the truth. (Indeed, such an understanding might extend to particular matters as well. Imagine a scandalous political
expose, by an insider, with characters called "Nicksen," "Hague," "Wagoner,"
"Bondsman,". . . .) Then the audience, if they know that the author is well
informed, could learn the truth by figuring out what is true in his fictions. Further,
the author might discover some truth in the course of trying to keep his side of
the bargain.—Doubtless this is not quite what people have in mind when they
speak of the cognitive value of literature! Let us find something a bit loftier for
them to mean.
Fiction might serve as a means for discovery of modal truth. I find it very hard
to tell whether there could possibly be such a thing as a dignified beggar. If there
could be, a story could prove it. The author of a story in which it is true that there
is a dignified beggar would both discover and demonstrate that there does exist
such a possibility. An actor or a painter might accomplish the same. Here the
fiction serves the same purpose as an example in philosophy, though it will not
work unless the story of the dignified beggar is more fully worked out than our
usual examples. Conversely, note that the philosophical example is just a concise
bit of fiction.
More importantly, fiction can offer us contingent truths about this world. It
cannot take the place of nonfictional evidence, to be sure. But sometimes evidence
3

The method of union goes back to Stanistew Jaskowski, "Prepositional Calculus for Contradictory
Deductive Systems," Stadia Logica 24 (1969): 143-57, and has been revived in several recent discussions of how to tolerate inconsistency. See my "Logic for Equivocators," Now 16 (1982): 431-441,
and works there cited.

Truth in fiction

279

is not lacking. We who have lived in the world for a while have plenty of evidence,
but we may not have learned as much from it as we could have done. This evidence
bears on a certain proposition. If only that proposition is formulated, straightway
it will be apparent that we have very good evidence for it. If not, we will continue
not to know it. Here, fiction can help us. If we are given a fiction such that the
proposition is obviously true in it, we are led to ask: and is it also true simpiiciter'
And sometimes, when we have plenty of unappreciated evidence, to ask the question is to know the answer. Then the author of the fiction has made a discovery,
and he gives his readers the means to make that same discovery for themselves.
Sometimes the proposition learned may be one that we could formulate, once
we have it in mind, without reference to the fiction that drew our attention to it.
Not so in general. Sometimes reference to a fiction is the only way we have, in
practice if not in principle, to formulate the truths that the fiction has called to our
attention. A schlemiel is someone such that what is true of him strikingly resembles
what is true in a certain fiction of a certain character therein, Schlemiel by name.
Temporarily or permanently, first for those who know the story and then for others
(like myself) who don't, the word "schlemiel" is indispensable in stating various
truths.
So fiction can indeed serve truth. But we must beware, for also it can spread
error. (1) Whatever understandings to the contrary might prevail, what is true in
an author's fiction might not be true, either because the author is mistaken or
because he wishes to deceive those who rely on the supposed understanding. (2)
Under the method of union, several things might be true together in a fiction, but
not really compossible. Then the fiction might persuade us of a modal falsehood,
leading us to believe in a possibility that doesn't really exist. (3) If we have plenty
of misleading evidence stored up, there may well be falsehoods that need only be
stated to be believed.

D. THE PUZZLE OF THE FLASH STOCKMAN
The singer sings this song.
I'm a stockman to my trade, and they call me Ugly Dave.
I'm old and grey and only got one eye.
In a yard I'm good, of course, but just put me on a horse,
And I'll go where lots of young-'uns daren't try.

The boasting gets ever steeper: riding, whipping, branding, shearing, . . . .
In fact, I'm duke of every blasted thing.
Plainly, this is fiction. What is true in it?

280

Philosophy of Language

The answer should be that in the fiction a stockman called Ugly Dave tells a
boastful pack of lies.4 And that is indeed the answer we get if we take the closest
worlds where the storyteller really is doing what he here pretends to be doing. For
this is one of those exceptional cases, covered briefly in my footnote 7, in which
the storyteller does not pretend to be telling the truth about matters whereof he
has knowledge. The singer makes believe that he is Ugly Dave telling boastful lies.
There is a fiction in the fiction: Ugly Dave's lies are themselves a fiction, and his
boasting is make-believe truthtelling. In the fiction in the fiction, he really is duke
of everything. In the outer fiction he is not, but only claims to be. This iteration,
in itself, is not a problem.
But there is a real problem nearby, and I have no solution to offer. Why doesn't
the iteration collapse? When the singer pretends to be Ugly Dave pretending to
tell the truth about himself, how does this differ from pretending to be Ugly Dave
really telling the truth about himself* It must be the former, not the latter; else
we should conclude that there is no inner fiction and that what is true in the outer
fiction—now the only fiction-—is that Ugly Dave is duke of everything and tells
us so. That would be to miss the point entirely. We must distinguish pretending
to pretend from really pretending. Intuitively it seems that we can make this distinction, but how is it to be analyzed?

4

Or, at least, it is not true in the fiction that he is telling the truth. Even that would be enough to serve
my purpose here. But it is simpler, and credible enough, to stick with the stronger answer.

Index

Acquaintance, 131, 154-56
Actuality, 17-20, 22, 24-25, 137, 148, 15758, 270
Adams, Robett M., 140, 146, 148
Ajdukiewicz, Kazimierz, 191, 193, 210, 251
Ambiguity, 171-72, 205; of "actual", 19, 22;
in the ontological argument, 13-15; of
performatives, 225; of prefixing, 26364
Analyticity, 29, 82, 104-5, 112, 118, 163,
187-88, 203, 205
Anselm, 10-15
Anthropic Principle, 23-24
Aqvist, Lennart, 247
Armstrong, D. M., 40, 124-29
Asimov, Isaac, 277
Attitudes, 46, 75-76, 100, 108-18, 121,
133-59,232
Atypical individuals, 119-29
Austin.J. L., 222, 224, 245, 247

Bar-Hillel, Yehoshua, 191
Barcan's Principle, 36
Becker's Principle, 36, 38-39
Behaviorism, 103-5, 123-24, 179
Belief, 46, 108-18, 121, 133-44, 149-59

Benacerraf, Paul, 156, 201
Bennett, John G., 157, 261
Bennett, Jonathan, 170
Bodies and persons, 47-54
Borges, Jorge Luis, 265
Brandt, Richard, 100
Bridge laws, 78, 90-94
Brouwer's Principle, 36, 39
Bruce, 126, 133-34, 156-57, 241-43, 247

Carnap, Rudolf, 28, 78, 81-85, 88-89, 174,
175, 190-91, 194, 201, 212
Carnap sentences, 81-83, 85
Castaneda, Hector-Neri, 139-40
Categories, grammatical, 191-92, 216, 217,
219, 250-51, 253-54, 259
Centered worlds, 147, 149
Charity, Principle of, 112-13
Chastain, Charles, 9, 155, 189, 241
Chomsky, Noam, 176, 206
Christie, Agatha, 263, 276
Common knowledge, 165-66, 168, 272
Community. See population
Constraints on interpretation, 112-15
Context dependence, 18-20, 109-10, 17173, 195, 226-28, 230-31, 233-49
281

282
Continuants and stages: across worlds, 39-42,
136-37, 141-42; over time, 41, 47-52,
58-77, 143-44, 146, 177, 182
Contradictions: in fiction, 21, 274-75, 27778; in worlds, 11, 21, 275
Conventions of language, 114-15, 164-88,
190
Countetfactuals, 43, 244, 269-70
Counterparts, 12, 26-54, 120, 125, 129, 136,
141-42, 145-46, 148, 153-54, 195,
268
Cresswell, Maxwell J., 47, 156, 231, 241-42,
260
Cresswell, Miriam, 241
Davidson, Donald, 4, 112, 114, 115-17, 191
De Camp, L. Sprague, 28
De dido: attitudes, 109-18, 121, 133-57;
modality, 33, 49, 54
De re: attitudes, 121, 151-57; modality, 3335, 44-45, 47-54, 153-54
De se attitudes, 46, 75-76, 121, 133-59,
232
Decision theory, 113-14, 149-50
Definite descriptions, 11, 32-34, 38, 80-81,
87-88, 208, 227-28, 240-43
Denotation. See extensions, reference
Desire, 108-18, 133-34, 145-49, 158; for
survival, 55-56, 73-76
Dodgson, Charles L., 208
Donnellan, Keith, 34, 228
Double indexing, 19, 22, 230-31
Doyle, Sir Arthur Conan, 265-68, 272, 27476
Dualism, 102-3, 105-7, 109

Efficacy: of experiences, 102-4, 106-7; of
possibilia, 158-59
Epiphenomenalism, 102-3, 105-7
Equilibrium of opinions, x
Ersatz worlds, 21, 148, 157-58, 173-74
Essence, 32-35, 42-43, 54, 153-55
Existing in a world, 12, 27, 39-40, 157-58
Experiences, 99-107, 122-32
Explanation: anthropic, 23-24; covering law,
90, of linguistic competence, 178;
physical, 105; rational, 113-14, 149-50
Extensionality, 26, 46, 197, 199-200, 218,
227, 252-60
Extensions, 194, 199-200, 218, 219, 25060. See also reference

Index
Feldman, Fred, 43
Feyerabend, Paul, 94
Fiction, 21, 261-80
Fillmore, Charles, 243
Fission of persons, 61-65, 67, 70-76
Fallesdal, Dagfinn, 32, 37
Forrest, Peter, xi, 23
Frege, Gottlob, 88, 101, 140, 150, 190
Functionalism, xi, 120-21, 123-24, 130-31,
148-49. See also role occupancy,
theoretical terms
Fusion of persons, 61-65, 67

Gale, George, 23
Gans, Carl, 271
Geach, Peter, 7, 26, 139
Generic objects, 218-20. See also Meinongian
objects
Gettier, Edmund, x
Godel, Kurt, x
Gods, xi, 10-20, 139-41, 145, 152, 258
Goguen, J. A., 228
Goldman, Alvin L, 246
Goodman, Nelson, 7
Grammar, 110, 115, 118, 175-78, 180, 186,
189-232, 251, 254
Greatness, 11-20
Grice, H. P., 115, 164

Haecceitism, 140-41
Harman, Gilbert, 176
Hazen, Allen, 22, 43, 45, 136
Hedenius, Ingemar, 247
Heintz, John, 264, 270
Hempel, Carl G., 90
Heny, Frank, 189
Hintikka, Jaakko, 28, 34, 37, 43
Holes, 3-9
Hume, 141-43, 151-52, 154-55

I-relation, 58-75
Identity: across worlds, 12, 27-28, 39-42, 46,
136-37, 140-42, 147, 267; at a time,
47, 63-65, 67, 72; of bodies and
persons, 47-54; contingent, 45-46, 4853,99, 125-26, 141; premises,
identification of, 257; psychophysical,
99-107, 119, 123-30; substitutes for,
6-7, 27-29, 47, 48, 63-65, 67, 71-72

Index
Imperatives, 171-72, 220-26, 232, 234-36,
240
Impossibilities, 11, 21, 274-75, 277-78
Indeterminacy of interpretation, 112, 118,
120, 128-29, 177-78, 187-88, 260.
See also vagueness
Indexicality, 18-20, 109-10, 171-73, 195,
226-28,230-31, 233-49
Indices, 194-96, 226-31, 250
Intensions, 175, 194, 197-200, 217-19,
250-60
Interpretation, See constraints on interpretation,
indeterminacy of interpretation
Inverted spectra, 128
Isard, Stephen, 233, 241, 247

Jackson, Frank, 131
Jaskowski, Stanistew, 278
Jeffrey, Richard, 114, 174
Johnston, Mark, 157

Kamp, Hans, 19, 198
Kanger, Stig, 28, 37
Kaplan, David, 26, 31, 47, 88, 95, 140, 153,
156, 189, 191, 198, 227, 228, 229, 230
Katz, Jerrold, 189, 190
Keenan, Edward, 191, 196
Kemeny, John, 91
Kitcher, Patricia, 122
Knowledge. See acquaintance, belief, common
knowledge, scepticism
Kratzer, Angelika, 246
Kripke, Saul, 10, 28, 37, 41-42, 43, 45, 76,
121, 125, 174, 175, 190-91, 241, 258,
261, 265, 267, 276

LakofT, George, 189, 206, 234
Language: conventions of, 114-15, 164-88,
190; extensional, 250-60; intensional,
250-60; learnable, 4; observational, 79,
82, 84; as semantic system, 163, 16688, 190; as social practice, 164-88, 190;
theoretical, 78-95; used to afford objects
of attitudes, 109-10, 150. See aim
pragmatics
Leiber, Justin, 75
Leibniz, 219
Lemmon, E. J., 247
Leslie, John, 23

283
Lewis, Clarence I., 201
Lewis, Stephanie, 3-9
Linguistic intuition, x
Loar, Brian, 138
Longevity, 65—69, 72
Lumsden, David, 153, 156
Lyons, John, 193

McCawley, James, 196, 202, 211, 240-41
Madmen, 119-29
Make-believe, 265-67, 276, 280
Martians, 123-29
Match of origins, 43, 142, 153
Materialism, xi, 3, 47, 99-107, 111, 123-24,
130-32
Mates, Benson, 218-19
Meanings, structuted, 176, 196, 200-207
Meehl, Paul, 131
Meinongian objects, 133-34, 261-62. See also
generic objects
Mellor, D. H., 77
Mental states. See attitudes, experiences
Modal logic, 10, 26-39, 45-46, 50
Modal realism, xi, 11-20, 27-54, 77, 85,
135-37, 140-41, 149-50, 157-59,
174; moderate, 21, 148, 157-58, 17374
Montague, Richard, 18, 28, 37, 101, 189,
191, 194, 198, 208, 216, 218, 251
Moods of sentences, 172, 220-22, 225-26
Mutual knowledge, 165-66, 168, 272

Nagel, Thomas, 131
Naming. See reference
Narrow psychology, 121, 142-43, 152, 157,
172-73, 228. See also atypical
individuals, de re attitudes, New Theory
of Reference
Natural kinds, 35, 135
Nemirow, Laurence, 131
Nerlich, Graham, 260
New Theory of Reference, 95, 143, 172-73,
228, 267
Nominalism, 3
Nozick, Robert, x

Objects of thought, 100, 109-18, 121, 13359
Observation language, 79, 82, 84

284
Ontic commitment, 4-5, 258
Ontological Argument, 10-20
Opinion, x-xi
Oppenheim, Paul, 91, 105
Overt beliefs, 272. See also common
knowledge

Parfit, Derek, 57, 65, 73-74
Parsons, Terence, 191, 198, 253, 255, 258,
261
Partee, Barbara, 189, 251
Patchwork principle, 76-77
Performatives, 222-26, 232, 247-48
Permissibility, 234-36, 240
Perry, John, 47, 48, 70-72, 138-41, 150-52
Persons, 47-77
Peters, P. Stanley, 205
Phenomenal character of experience, 129-32
Philosophical method, x-xi, 8-9, 188
Physicalism, xi, 3, 47, 99-107, 111, 123-24,
130-32
Pinkal, Manfred, 241
Plantinga, Alvin, 10
Population: beliefs overt in, 272-73; language
of, 166-88; of logical space, 136-38;
occupancy of a role for, 119-21, 12629
Possible worlds and individuals, xi, 11-20,
27-54, 77, 85, 135-37, 140-41, 14950, 157-59, 174. See also actuality,
ersatz worlds, impossibilities
Pragmatics, 114-15, 164-88, 190, 233-49.
See also indexicality
Presupposition, 196, 200, 233-34, 240, 24849
Pretence, storytelling as, 265-67, 276, 280
Priest, Graham, 2 1
Prior, A. N., 18, 19, 20, 26, 37, 139, 146
Properties: bundles of, 218-19; essential and
accidental, 32-35, 42-43, 54, 153-55;
experiences as, 99; of having properties,
xi, 87, 101-3; modal, 41-42; named by
theoretical terms, 80; natural, 35, 135; as
objects of attitudes, 46, 75-76, 121,
133-59, 232; as sets of possible
individuals, 135; and universals, 40
Propositions, 134-35; as objects of attitudes,
109-18, 121, 133-57
Psychoanalysis of fictional characters, 27 1
Putnam, Hilary, 79, 85-86, 103, 105, 143

Index
Qualia, 129-32
Quantification, 207-20, 252, 258, 262
Quine, Willard V., 4, 7, 27, 32, 34, 42, 104,
110, 118, 147-48, 177-78, 260

R-relation, 58-75
Ramsey, F. P., 78, 81-82, 259, 262
Ramsey sentences, 81-82, 89, 259-60
Rational conduct, 112-14, 149-50, 164-65,
181
Recognition of experiences, 131-32
Reduction of theories, 78, 90-94
Reference: in fiction, 267-68; of mental terms,
101-5, 125; New Theory of, 95, 143,
172-73, 228, 267; to salient things,
227-28, 240-43; of theoretical terms,
80-95. See also extensions
Relative modality, 12, 37-39, 246-47, 264
Relevantism, 21
Resemblance, 28-29, 42-43, 51-52, 153,
268-70
Rigidity: of "actual", 19, 22; of fictional
names, 267; of mental tetms, xi, 101,
125-26, of property names, 86-87
Ritchie, R. W., 205
Robinson, Denis, 43, 76
Role occupancy, 78-95, 102-5, 111-12,
119-21, 124-30, 143, 148-49, 15859, 267-68. See also functionalism
Ross, John R., 224-25
Routley, Richard, 2 1
Routley, Valerie, 2 1
Rules, 179-80, 192, 198-200, 221, 233-49,
251-55
Russell, Bertrand, 88

Salience, 227-28, 240-43
Saturation, Principle of, 16
Scepticism, 19, 22-23, 246-47
Schiffer, Stephen, 115, 187, 272
Score, conversational, 233-49
Scott, Dana, 80, 88, 191, 194, 198, 263
Self-ascription of properties, 46, 75-76, 121,
133-59, 232
Sense: of mental terms, 101-5, 111-12, 11921, 124-30; of theoretical terms, 85-87.
See also intensions
Shaffer, Jerome, 48, 100-1
Similarity, 28-29, 42-43, 51-52, 153, 268-70

285

Index
Slote, Michael, 28
Smart.J. J. C, 102
Smuilyan, Arthur, 33
Social contract, 184-85
Stages and continuants, 41, 47-52, 58-77,
143-44, 146, 177, 182
Stalnaker, Robert, 148-49, 212, 230, 233,
267
Stenius, Erik, 115, 167, 220-21
Strawson, P. F., 88, 196
Subjects of attitudes, 41-42, 73-76, 108-21,
136-37, 143-44, 146
Survival, desire for, 55-56, 73-76

Tarski, Alfred, 115, 190, 197, 256
Tensed identity, 47, 63-65, 67, 72
Theology, xi, 10-20, 139-41, 145, 152,
258
Theoretical entities, 79
Theoretical terms, 78-95, 111-12
Theories: commonsense, 111-18, 124-25,
148-49; scientific, 78-95
Thomason, Richmond, 212
Time-slices, 41, 47-52, 58-77, 143-44, 146,
177, 182
Tolkien.J. R. R., 266
Transformations, grammatical, 175-76, 193,
204-7,251,254
Trees, 201-2
Truthfulness, 114-15, 167-88, 278

Understandable beings, 12
Unger, Peter, 244-46
Universals, 40

Vagueness, 187-88, 228-30, 244-46; of
counterpart relations, 42-43, 54, 153;
and degrees of survival, 69-70. See also
indeterminacy of interpretation
Van Fraassen, Bas, 70
Van Inwagen, Peter, 22, 25
Variable binding, 45-46, 195, 209-17, 220,
231, 252
Vegemite, 131
Vermazen, Bruce, 190
Von Stechow, Arnim, 230

Wallace, ;ohn, 210
Walton, Kendall, 276
Williams, Donald C., 99
Wilson, N. L., 33
Winnie, ;ohn, 84
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 182
Worlds and individuals, possible, xi, 11-20,
27-54, 77, 85, 135-37, 140-41, 14950, 157-59, 174..See also actuality,
ersatz worlds, impossibilities

Ziff, Paul, 179

