CAMBRIDGE TEXTS I~ THE
HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY

NICOLAS

M:\LEBRA~CHE

The Search after Truth

CAMBRIDGE TEXTS IN THE
HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
Series editors

KARL AMERIKS
Professor ofPhilosophy at the University ofNotre Dame
DESMOND M. CLARKE
Professor ofPhilosophy at University College Cork
The main objective of Cambridge Texts in the History of Philosophy is to expand the range,
variety and quality of texts in the history of philosophy which are available in English. The
series includes texts by familiar names (such as Descanes and Kant) and also by less wellknown authors. Wherever possible, texts are published in complete and unabridged fonn,
and translations are specially commissioned for the series. Each volume contains a critical
introduction together with a guide to funher reading and any necessary glossaries and
textual apparatus. The volumes are designed for student use at undergraduate and postgraduate level and will be of interest not only to students of philosophy, but also to a wider
audience of readers in the history of science, the history of theology and the history of ideas.

For a list oftitles published in the series, please see end ofbook.

NICOLAS MALEBRANCHE

The Search after Truth
TRANSLATED AND EDITED BY

THOMAS M. LENNON
University o[Wtsttm Ontario

AND

PAUL J. OLSCAMP
BoiiJiing Grten Statt University

Elucidations of The Search after Truth
TRANSLATED AND EDITED BY

THOMAS M. LENNON

. :·: ... CAMBRIDGE
:::

UNIVERSITY PRESS

Published by the Preis Syndicate of the University of Cambriclse
The Pin Buildin1, TnunpinJIOII S - , Cambriclae CB2 IRP
40 West 20ih Succt, New York, NY 10011-4211, USA
10 Stamford llold, Ollleip, Mdboume 3166, Allllnlia
~The tnt of Tile Sttmll 11/itr TI'WIII, tnnslated by '1'11onw M. Lennon and Paul J. Olsamp,
is c:opyrisht Cll980 by the Ohio State University Preis. All ripb rcsen·ed. C in the editorial matter
Cambridse University Praa.

First publishecll997
Printed in Great Britain at the University Press, Cambridse

Malebnndte, Nicolas, 1638-1715.
(Recherche de Ia •-crite. EnsJish)
The reudl after truth: with ducidations of The search after truth/ Nicolas Malebnnc:he; tnnslated and
edited by Tbomas M. Lennon, Paul J. Olscamp.
p. an. - (Cambridse tnb in the hislary of philc.Jphy)
Includes bibliop-lphial noferences and index.
I. Knowledse, Theory of. I. Lennon, Tbomas M. II. Ollamp, Paul J. Ill. Title. IV. Series.

BI893.R332ES 1997
96-23819 ap

121~c20

ISBN 0 521 SII004 8 hordbaciL
ISBN 0 521 Sllfl95 9 paperbod

Contents
ltttrodwtiotr
Cl~nmology

Furthtr rtatlirrg
Trt~rrslaton 'prtfort

The Search after Truth
Preface
Foreword
Book One
Book Two

The Senses
Part One: The Imagination
Part Two: The Imagination
Part Three: The Contagious Communications of

p11gtvii
xxiv
xxvi
xxviii
xxxi
xxxiii
xlv
1
87
130
161

S~glmaginations

Book Three Part One: The Understanding; or, Pure Mind
Part Two: The Pure Understanding. The Nature ofldeas
Book Four The Inclinations; or, the Mind's Natural Impulses
The Passions
Book Five
Book Six
Method

197
217

Elucidations of The Search after Truth

531

Translator's preface
Preface
Foreword

537

Elucidation One
Elucidation Two
Elucidation Three
Elucidation Four
Elucidation Five

547
559

265
337
408

539

545

561
563
566

vi

Contmts

568

Elucidation Six
Elucidation Seven
Elucidation Eight
Elucidation Nine
Elucidation Ten
Elucidation Eleven
Elucidation Twelve
Elucidation Thirteen
Elucidation Fourteen
Elucidation Fifteen
Elucidation Sixteen
Last Elucidation
Addendum

720
748

Tramlations ofLatirt aruJ Gruk passages
Reftre'IICes by Malebranche to other authors
Gmeral irtdtx

754
764
766

5n

579
607
612

633
639
644

653
657
687

Introduction
Nicolas Malebranche shared the birth and death dates of the Sun King, Louis
XIV: 163~1715. The happenstance is suggestive. Malebranche may be regarded
as the philosopher of French classicism as Hardouin-Mansan was its architect,
Le Notre its gardener, Lebrun its painter, and Moliere, Racine, and Corneille its
playwrights. The same sharp division between kinds, the conceptual angularity,
as it were, and precise definition for beginnings and conclusions of every sort that
characterized the work of these classicists is to be found also in the philosophy of
Malebranche. The clear distinction that he sought between mind and body,
reason and sense, grace and nature, God and man, theology and philosophy yield
a view of the world so spare and precise that, for all its comprehensiveness, can
only be described as classical.
Certainly, these terms of clear division distinguish Malebranche from Leibniz,
for example, whose preference for the curved over the rectilinear, for gradation
and continuity over division and discreteness, made him rather the philosopher
of the baroque. Most of Leibniz's years also fell within the Sun King's span, and
there were sufficient rationalist similarities between him and Malebranche that
they competed for preeminence in this heyday of rationalism. In the event, it was
Malebranche who prevailed--at least during that time and for some time thereafter, not least of all for the reason that he did express the classicism of the era. 1
Malebranche was born into a prosperous family, the youngest of thirteen
children. His father was a kind of tax-farmer, among other state occupations, and
was ennobled the year of Malebranche's birth. The family was very much in the
ascendancy, financially and socially, during Malebranche's childhood. But he himself was less lucky, having been born with a curvature of the spine and sunken
chest that complicated his health. His constitution in childhood was so frail that
a private tutor was required for his education. Only at age sixteen was he strong
1

Sec Gilles Dcleuze. 1M Foltl: Lnlnaz. •"" tlu Bt~rtJ~~W (Minneapolis. Univcrsiry ofMinncsora Pras, 1994),
cspccially p. llS. Although he usa the term baroque in thcnrhcrdiffcrcnr liltDSCofCarlj. Friedrich., Cnit
WaJron dnws anmtion 10 both the dichoromics in Malebnncbc and his coincidmc:c wilh Louis XIV in Dr
ill rrtlwrrluiM#Iinr: A StruJyofM.Jm.,.JuiStinl,ufEtltks(fhc Hap, Martinus NijhofT, 1972), pp ..J..-.4.

vii

lr~troductior~

viii

enough to leave the home, to enroll at the College de La Marche. Although
originally destined by his family for the law, he went from there to the Sorbonne,
completing his studies in scholastic philosophy and theology, none of which, however, was much to his liking.
In 1660, soon after the death of his parents, Malebranche entered the Oratory,
where he was to remain until his death fifty-five years later. The Oratory was a
community of ecclesiastics founded by Cardinal Berulle as part of the French
effort at reform from within the Catholic Church. While aimed at promoting piety,
the Oratory did not require of its members the sort of discipline exacted by the
rules of monastic orders, and in nonreligious intellectual matters the ani tude was
one of openness and toleration. The Oratory was approved by the Pope in 1613,
and by 1615 the first of its schools had opened-schools that succeeded and proliferated to such an extent that they came to rival those of the Jesuits. Initially the
Oratory found royal favor, but by the time Malebranche joined, it had become
associated with both Cartesianism and Jansenism, both of which were then viewed
as threatening the infrastructure of the French state. These associations were
exploited by the Jesuits, and by the late 1670s, with the Oratory close to being
suppressed, Malebranche considered leaving. The crisis was abated when certain
members were driven out, an upheaval whose effects Malebranche was not entirely
to escape.
Perhaps the most important year in Malebranche's life was 1664, when he was
both ordained a priest and converted to a new philosophy. His ordination was to
be expected, but his discovery of Descartes was so dramatic, at least according to
his first biographer, that the retelling of its story has been de rip#ur in the literature ever since. It seems that while walking the quai des Augwtim, or perhaps the
rut St. Jacques, Malebranche came across a bookseller who in response to his
request for something new put in his hands Descartes's Treatig or1 Mar~. ''The
joy of learning about so many recent discoveries caused him such violent palpitations of the heart that he was forced to put the book down and interrupt his
reading in order to breathe more easily."2
What had he picked up that might have occasioned such cardio-pulmonary
enthusiasm? The Treatise or~ Mar~ is one of two surviving parts of what was
intended to be a single work that would, as Descanes boasted in correspondence,
"explain all the phenomena of nature, i.e. aU of physics. "l As the weD-known story
has it, Descartes learned of the Church's condemnation of certain of Galileo's
views and decided therefore not to publish his own. The manuscript was found
among his other papers in Stockholm after his death there in 1650, and was published by his literary heir Oaude Clerselier in 1664.4 This first appearance of the
Andre, p. 12. See Further reading, pp. uvi-xnii, for this and other shortened titles below.
' To Mersenne, 13 No.....,ber, 1M PltiltMIItiu.l Wrililrp •f/Jn&•rrn, trans. J. Coltingham, R. Stoothoff
and D. Murdoch (CambridF, CambridF Univenity Press, 1991), vol. 3, p. 7.
' See Dac:artes, Trr•life'"'
translation and mmmenwy by Thomas Steele HaU (CambridF, Han-an!

2

M••·

Univasitv Press. 19721. o. xxiv.

lntroduttion

IX

French text would have thus been a recent publication when it found its way into
the hands ofMalebranche.SThe edition is also of interest since it contains illustrations and notes by the physician Louis de La Forge, whose Trait/ tk l'tsprit
rle l'horrune of two years later was to be an important source for Malebranche's
doctrine of occasionalism.
What Malebranche would have found in Descartes's treatise is a mechanical
account of human physiology. By the slim means of a homogeneous matter whose
motion changes upon contact, Descartes attempted to explain the entire working
of the human body. Although certain topics such as excretion and reproduction
are either given short shrift or ignored altogether, others such as the circulation
of the blood, the operation of the muscles and nerves, and sensation are treated at
length. The physiology of vision is given special attention. The obvious significance of this mechanical physiology is that it would have upset the basis for the
scholastic theories of matter and form in which Malebranche had until then exclusively been trained. A new world was opened to him. Certainly, the range of
Descartes's topics and his principles in dealing with them were immediately
embraced and never relinquished by Malebranche.
What kind of picture might we form, literally and otherwise, of this man?
Malebranche's modesty was such that he long refused the entreaties of friends to
sit for a portrait, to the extent that they resorted to ruse. A portraitist was engaged
and sent to Malebranche under pretext of presenting problems in geometry for
his solution. While Malebranche was working on them, the draft portrait was
done, to be completed later; but when with the ruse discovered and the likeness
remarked, Malebranche agreed reluctantly to sit. In the end, we possess at least a
few portraits, in oil, pencil engraving, and lithograph, the best of which is the
painting by Santerre, done in 1713, two years before Malebranche's death. This
portrait largely confirms a number of physiognomical features that are ascribed to
Malebranche by written descriptions from the period. Of aU people, it is Bertrand
Russell whose face is most brought to mind. The portrait also suggests the great
bodily height that is inevitably mentioned in the contemporary descriptions. But
in one respect, at least, the portrait falsifies what we know, for it shows the
Russellian head atop a huge body, the stockiness of which suggests alongshoreman. However, according to his friend Lelong, Malebranche was so thin that his
heartbeat seemed visible beneath his clothes. His clavicles were said to be widefortunately, since his breathing was thus made easier given his malformation of
the chest-but it seems likely that if he sat at all, it was only for the head to which
a body was later added.
In addition to his malformation, Malebranche suffered from an acidic stomach
and was able to digest but little wine and no vinegar or onions. 6 On the other hand,
s Ibid. nxiv. The work had apparecl two yean earlier in a problematic Larin translation by Flomniuo
Scbuyl. We do no1 know for ccnain 1ha11his •• no11hc IClllllw Malcbranchc picked up; nor is lhcrc any
hdp from lhe inveniOr}' of his library, which, curiously, conwns no edition ofil.
' CurioiUiy, lhe lllcienl sounzofwh11 mip11 be c:alled liliaa:auo idolauy. Sec pp. 447,451 below.

X

I ntrodu,tion

Malebranche chewed tobacco, which was thought to contribute to his gauntness,
and he was one of the first coffee drinkers in Paris, coming to depend on its
comforting effect in dealing with an unpleasant task. This dependence caused
him problems when during Lent he drank it only in the evening. In addition,
from an early age he passed kidney stones and eventually had to be operated on
for them. He also suffered from fevers, and he discovered, apparently to general
surprise, that drinking large quantities of water was of help. He never shirked his
ecclesiastical duty, although its ceremonies often required him to stand for long
periods of time, thus causing him severe back pain. Despite all, he was said to be
dexterous, exhibiting skill at billiards, for example, and also supple, since he was
capable of placing his feet behind his head. Why he should ever have engaged in
the latter, or how he discovered the capacity, is not recorded.
In 1673 Malebranche sold a house that he owned which left him an annual
income, initially over three times what he paid for his room and board at the
Oratory; although diminishing somewhat over time, this investment freed him
from worries about money. Visitors remarked on how well furnished his quarters
there were, but the inventory of his postmortem remains suggests a humble
material existence. More impressive was his library of some l,l SO volumes, comprising 723 titles, which along with the rest of his belongings were left to the
Oratory. The major investment of Malebranche's life, in any event, was one of a
very different kind, one being made at the same time he sold his house.

Malebranche and Cartesianism
After his dramatic first encounter with the philosophy of Descartes, Malebranche
turned to other works by the great man: the Dis(ours~ on M~tlrod, the M~dito.tiolfS,
and the Prinopl~s ofPlrilosoplry. Not that he was entirely convinced by everything
that he found there. While fully persuaded by what Descartes had to say about
the physical world, Malebranche felt that certain correctives were necessary in
metaphysics, especially with respect to the mind. He therefore read, or reread, St.
Augustine. The upshot was a philosophical balance that Malebranche built into
Tire Sto.r(/r 4/ter Truth and carefully preserved thereafter. The balance is in
evidence right from the Preface of the Sto.r(/r, where the human mind is viewed
as located in an intermediary position in the cosmological scheme of things.
Infinitely above the mind stands its Creator, while below it is all of material
creation. The mind's relation to God is such a close and essential relation, according to Malebranche, that without it, the mind would not exist. This union with
God "raises the mind above all things. Through it, the mind receives its life, its
light, and its entire felicity." The mind's relation to material creation through the
human body, on the other hand, "debases man and is ... the main cause of all his
errors and miseries" (p. xxxiii).
For the distinction between mind and matter, Malebranche took over
Descartes's dualistic ontology according to which the world exhaustively divides

Introduction

xi

into thinking things and extended things. This is a division for which Malebranche
along with many other Cartesians saw a source and thus an authority in the
writings of Augustine. Despite withering criticism from the likes ofLeibniz, for
example, Malebranche steadfasdy adhered to the Cartesian ontology in all of his
scientific work and in his theorizing about the material world generally. When he
turned to the mind and its relation to God, however, Malebranche argued that
the Cartesian theory was in need of a correction that was derived from Augustine.
Malebranche's central criticism of Descartes, introduced in Book Three and
made explicit in the tenth Elucidation, concerns the nature of ideas. No issue is
more important in early modem philosophy. Its importance is reflected in the
complexity ofMalebranche's treatment of it and by its systematic significance for
his philosophy. Suffice it to say here that on this question rest his views concerning the method of doubt, clarity and distinctness as criteria of truth, skepticism,
the ontology of perception, the faith--n:ason distinction, among other important
issues. The criticism itself, in any case, was that, whatever Descartes himself might
have held, the immediate object of human perception is an idea in the mind of
God. According to Malebranche, when I open my eyes, for example, and look at
a tree by the roadside, what I actually stt is something in the mind of God. The
idea in the mind of God is the exemplar after which the tree was created, with the
necessary result that the tree resembles that idea. By knowing the idea we are thus
able to know the material thing. This theory of ideas, Malebranche's signature
doctrine of the vision of all things in God, finds support in Augustine, at least in
broad outline, and certainly comports with Augustine's insistence on man's
dependence on God in all things, including even cognition.
The other doctrine that came to be most closely associated with the name of
Malebranche is, at best, only implicit in Descartes. It is, of course, occasionalism.
Here human dependence on God is even more in evidence. The thesis is that
natural causes, be they collisions of material bodies or human volitions, are not
real causes but only occasional causes. That is, they provide the occasion for the
operation of the one and only real cause, which is God. When one body collides
with another with the result that their motion is changed, it is God who has really
changed the motion, and similarly for human volitions and changes in the
body. Whatever problems this doctrine may pose for human freedom and moral
responsibility-and Malebranche is not unaware of them--it is a doctrine that
reflects Malebranche's classical outlook, for the system of occasional causes
necessarily reflects the balance between God's aims in creation and His attributes,
His omniscience and immutability no less than His omnipotence. It is a system
that embraces both the natural domains of material collision and mind-body interaction, and the supernatural domain of the distribution of grace and perhaps even
the occurrence of miracles. At this level of generality, in fact, the doctrine of
occasionalism is just an account of divine Providence.
Because occasionalism lies so near the core of his thinking, the fundamental
arguments for it lack the logical tidiness that one finds in Malebranche's argu-

xii

lntroduttion

ments for the epistemic unreliability of the senses in Book One, for example, or
even for the vision of all things in God in Book Three. The doctrine reflects
a basic commitment more than it does a reasoned conclusion. It is treated
explicitly in the fifteenth Elucidation and, to some extent, in the tenth, but its
introduction in the Sea"h itself belies its later prominence. Although the ascription of real powers to created things is described, in chapter three of the second
part of Book Six, as ..the most dangerous error ... ofthe ancients," the topic arises
only as an iUustration of a methodological point, viz. that our assertions sometimes outstrip what we are able to conceive.
The subtitle of the Sea"h after Truth is long and almost never included when
the work is cited; yet it epitomizes its objective: Wherein Are Treated the Nature
afMan's Mirul and the Use He Must Make afIt to Avoid E"ar in the Srientes. The
pursuit of truth calls for the evasion of error not just in the prudential sense
that the one should not be mistaken for the other, but because the avoidance of
error is in a sense sufficient for the possession of truth. This very conservative
epistemology, which today would be the polar opposite of Popper's bold method
of conjecture and refutation, for example, is nonetheless finnly rooted in
Malebranche's metaphysics of freedom, will, and method. The implications of
this metaphysics give the Search after Truth its problematic, its structure, and its
main argument.
It is judgment, according to Malebranche, that allows us to go beyond the
passive perception of logical simples to something with sufficient logical complexity to assume a truth value. The perception of the diameter of a circle is for
him the passive perception of a logical simple; that the diameter of a circle is the
hypotenuse of an inscribed right triangle, by contrast, has sufficient complexity
to assume a truth value. Malebranche follows Descartes in his account of the
cognitive division of labor between the will and the understanding. He construes
judgment as dependent on an active will, rather than on the understanding, which
is the faculty of passive perception.
In order to guarantee the clarity and distinctness of a perception as an infallible
criterion ofits truth, Descartes had to eliminate the possibility of a demon deceiver
who might mislead us about everything, including that criterion. By proving the
existence of a veracious God, Descartes achieves this goal, but is then faced with
just the opposite problem of showing how even infrequent error is possible, for
anything less than universal truth seems incompatible with a veracious God. He
solves this problem by attributing error to man, whose judgment permits the
voluntary acceptance as true of what is not clearly and distinctly perceived to be
true. Since the clarity and distinctness of perception forces us to accept it as true,
the will in effect becomes a faculty of error when it gratuitously accepts as
true what is not clearly and distinctly perceived. This negative role for the will of
resisting except when overwhelmed by evidence is only implicit in Descartes. But
Malebranche, at the very outset of the Search, erects it into his fundamental rule
of method: accept as true only what one must.

Introduction

XIII

Such a rule recalls the doubt of the Pyrrhonian skeptic, who advocates suspension of judgment whenever possible, the goal being not truth, or even the
avoidance of error, so much as the well-being which was thought to result from
the suspension of judgment and avoidance of error. A permanent state of doubt
is avoided by Malebranche, however, because judgment-inducing evidence is not
only achievable but inescapable. The cognitive means for knowing all that it
is capable of knowing is always present to the mind and, if it fails to realize that
capability, the fault lies with a willful inattention to the cognitive means. Our
search after truth, therefore, is less a matter of seeking something out of sight, still
less of constructing it, than of realizing fully what is already present to us. The
actual method that Malebranche details in Book Six of the Search, along with the
specific rules for implementing it, is therefore designed to preserve the evidence
of our perceptions. Evidence is not something induced into our perceptions, but
is a quality of what is perceived, and is therefore prior to our perceptions, there
to be discovered.
Leading up to this method, Malebranche analyzes at length the principal
circumstances that occasion the will's misuse of its freedom. There are three ways
in which we perceive and each of them can lead the will to precipitate judgment.
First, there is sensation, in which an object such as an apple operates on the
sensory apparatus in a mechanical way, causing an impression in the brain which
in turn occasions a sensory awareness. While the causal operation is purely
mechanical at every stage, involving only the motion of matter, the awareness is
purely qualitative--an awareness of redness or sweetness, for example. The most
typical error connected with this operation is to attribute the awareness to the
object causing the impression-to believe, for example, that the awareness of
redness or sweetness, which in fact is nothing but a modification of the mind, is
in the apple. That sensory awarencsses of this sort be perceived as if in objects is
crucial to their biological function, which is to indicate, not the true nature
of things, but their relevance to our survival. In order for us to see, and act
accordingly, that an apple is beneficial and that a hot coal is potentially very
dangerous, the sweetness and the heat must be perceived as if they were in the
objects themselves.
The second way in which we perceive is the imagination, in which absent
objects are perceived by means of images of them formed in the brain. As with
sensation, imagination operates in a way that most contributes to the survival of
the body, especially in social relations. Thus children, for example, are led by their
imagination to imitate the behavior of those around them and later to adopt their
opinions. The interests of a smoothly functioning society require uniformity of
opinion and conduct even more than truth, which therefore suffers at its expense.
The third form of perception operates independently of the body in
apprehending incorporeal things such as universals, God, and those ideas of things
that succeed in representing them as they truly are, i.e. the ideas in the mind of
God. Although this pure perception or understanding is a proper means of

xiv

Introduction

arriving at the truth-indeed, it is our only means apan from faith, which is
appropriate in matters of religion-it too can be a cause of error. For example, the
mind's capacity for knowing is finite and thus it cannot understand the infinite
divisibility of matter, which might lead the mind to the mistake of denying it. In
religion, the mind's inability to fathom the infinite can lead it to hen:sy, by denying the Incarnation or the Trinity, for example.
The errors of the senses, of the imagination, and of the pun: understanding an:
the topics of the first three books of the Search. These errors, or occasions of error,
relate to the general faculty of the understanding. In addition, there are errors that
relate to the faculty of the will, for the inclinations and passions "dazzle our mind
with false lights, cover it, and fill it with shadows" (p. 17). Malebranche's unfonunate mixture of metaphors is intended to indicate the noncognitive sources
of error. The will has a natural and ineradicable impulse to seek certain ends that
has been corrupted by Original Sin. The will's impulse has been divened, or made
capable of being divened, from its true good into inclinations which precipitate
false judgments in their favor. The passions are those inclinations that are
occasioned by agitations in the state of the body and that are concerned with the
good of the body. Malebranche's psychology of these inclinations and passions,
the physiology of them, especially of the passions, his illustrations of the errors
they occasion, especially of the philosophical and religious ones over the course
of history, all make for fascinating reading and certainly n:veal the prejudices and
values of Malebranche's worldview. The inclinations and the passions are the
topics, respectively, of the founh and fifth Books, leading to the general method
for preserving evidence, and the specific rules for doing so, in Book Six. Such is
the problematic, structure, and main argument ofthe Search after Truth.

Malebranche and his critics
The Search was not even entirely in print when it came under attack by Simon
Foucher, a cleric of Dijon moving in Parisian intellectual circles. Between the
publication of the first three books ofthe Search in 1674 and the latter three the
following year, Foucher launched his Critique ofthe Search, in which he attacked
Malebranche on, among other things, method, even though Malebranche's discussion of method is to be found in Book Six, which therefore had not yet been
published. Malebranche responded in a preface to the second volume of the
Search. Another round in the debate was guaranteed by the strident tone of
Malebranche's reply, which contains, among other gems, the oft-quoted line,
"when one criticizes a book, it seems to me necessary at least to have read it." 7
Foucher answered with a Reply on Behalfofthe Critique and an additional set of
Dissertations on the Search after Truth, which had been the title of a work he had
published prior to Malebranche's Starch.
7

OCII-496.

Introduction

ltV

Throughout these works, Foucher argues from the perspective of Academic
skepticism, the significance of which for the seventeenth century is only now
beginning to be appreciated. The aim is not the Pyrrhonian suspension of belief,
but the restriction of certainty to the narrow range of mathematics and the
characterization of all else as at best probable. From this perspective, Foucher
criticized a long list of what he saw as groundless assertions and assumptions made
by Malebranche. A recent commentator has systematized them in such a way that
they amount to nothing less than the downfall of Cartesianism. 8 Very briefly, the
thesis is that because of their dualism, according to which the essence of mind as
thought differs from the essence of matter as extension, the Cartesians cannot
satisfy two essential-likeness principles. One is that a cause must be essentially
like its effect, and the other is that knower and known must be essentially alike.
Since mind is essentially different from body, mind can neither know nor act on
body. The logical neatness of this exchange was historically complicated by the
intrusion of the Benedictine Robert Desgabets on behalfofMalebranche. But such
was Desgabets's Cartesianism, and such his understanding of Malebranche, that
the Oratorian dismissed his Critiqw of Foucher's Critiqu~ with the comment, "it
seems to me that those who involve themselves in attacking or defending others
should read their works with some care in order fully to understand their views. "9
This was only the beginning ofMalebranche's career in polemic, the results of
which were often reflected by changes introduced to the successive editions of
the s~artlr. To understand fully the philosophy of Malebranche, and his s~arch
in particular, it is often more than useful to be aware of these debates. Even
when the results did not result in major alterations in the s~arch, the debates draw
attention to, probe, and elucidate many of its most difficult and philosophically
most significant points.
The second debate to emerge from the s~ardl took place in 1678, with Anselme,
a Parisian cleric of whom nothing is known. The position Ansebne defends is a
commonsense realism with respect to the status of light and colors, contrary to
the Cartesian position that only shape and motion characterize material things and
that the colors we experience are but modifications of our own minds. He attacked
the Cartesian basis for Malebranche's view in a Discoum, to which Malebranche
replied, condescendingly and unhelpfully, in a Lttur, occasioning Observations
from Ansclme. Against Descartes, Anselme argued that God would be no less a
deceiver if we were deceived about colors than about bodies, that ideas of tickling
do resemble something in the world even if not the feather occasioning them, and
that the Cartesians themselves belie their rejection of real colors with the sorts
of experiments they perform with the camera obscura, for example. Against
Malebranche he offers a pari passu argument with respec:t to shape and color (if
color is only a mode of the mind, then so is shape); he criticizes the perception of
I

WabOn, 0...{.0 ll{c.nn;..;,.

• ocnsoo.

XVI

Jntroauctltm

pain as a model for the perception oflight and color; and he undoes the conceptual
argument against the reality of color on the basis that since the Canesians admit
that modes are not included in the concept of a substance, the failure to notice
color in the concept of matter shows nothing. The core of Book One of the Search
is very much under attack. to
Anselme relates that he was encouraged to criticize Malebranche by the
preface to the second volume of the Search, in which Malebranche had responded
to Foucher. At the end of that preface, Malebranche said that while his peace of
mind would not permit responses to all his critics, he would try to satisfy all those
motivated by love for truth. With the dispute with Foucher at an end, he suppressed this preface in the edition of 1678 and thereafter. Although the invitation
to critics was thereby suppressed, it nonetheless continued to be accepted.
Potentially the most explosive ofMalebranche's debates was with the jesuit Le
Valois who, in 1680 under the pseudonym of Louis de La Ville, attacked the
Cartesian explanation of the Eucharist. The background to this technical
theological dispute was the struggle over hegemony in the schools between the
Jesuits, who championed Aristotle, and the Canesians, who would have replaced
him with Descartes. Pan of the Canesian program was to show that Descanes
could better explain all that Aristotle had been called upon to do, including such
theological questions as transubstantiation. Since Descartes had abandoned the
Aristotelian doctrine of matter and form that at least since the Council of Trent
had been the basis for understanding this dogma, some new explanation was
required. Descanes himself carefully eschewed theological controversy, but his
followers were less cautious, including Malebranche, who in the Search boasted
that if there were any point in doing so, he could give a clear and distinct account
of how his view of matter agrees with transubstantiation (p. 246). As might be
expected, the context for this remark was very complex, involving a bewildering
amount of intrigue. For example, La Ville's argument was that the Cartesian
account was inconsistent with transubstantiation and therefore false; his attack
was published by Pierre Bayle, who clearly agreed with La Ville's premise, but
concluded from it that the dogma of transubstantiation was false. Bayle at the same
time also published, among other related documents, a reply to La Ville which
was taken to be from Malebranche. (Perhaps because of his friendship with
Malebranche, Bayle did not disclose the authorship.) This was the sort of issue
that got one on the Church's Index offorbidden books, although Malebranche
landed there for other reasons, because the engineer of his condemnation was
Arnauld, who on this issue, for once, was in agreement with the Oratorian.
Probably the most imponant ofMalebranche's disputes, cenainly the longest
and most bitter, was with Antoine Arnauld, the scourge not only ofMalebranche,
but of Leibniz, Bayle, Descanes himself, and others in the seventeenth century.
In the period, Arnauld was most recognized as a proponent ofjansenism, a highly
to For more on this ii!IJ(IIed POlemic.- OC XVII-I 637-73.

Introduction

xvii

contentious doctrine concerning the grounds for Christian salvation. Malebranche
addressed this topic in his Trtatise on Naturt and Gra(t, the !leCOnd edition of
which notes that for a proper understanding of it, the Stard1, and particularly
its doctrine on the nature of ideas, must first be understood. The doctrine
that Arnauld found in the Stardr was the vision of all things in God, which he
criticized from a more orthodox Cartesian point of view in a work called On Trut
and Faist Idtas (1683). Malebranche answered in the same year with his Rtply,
and Arnauld only months later with his De[mst against tlrt Rtply, each of them
book-length works. Although new and important points continued to be made on
both sides, the dispute was rapidly degenerating to the level of personal recrimination and intrigue. The scholarly world grew bored and disgusted with the dispute, but it went on, even beyond the death of Arnauld in 1694, as Malebranche
continued to attack his views. Meanwhile, Arnauld and then his supporters
succeeded in getting various works of Malebranche, including the Star(/r, placed
on the Index. When asked on his deathbed by his confessor whether, as the
Jansenists claimed, he had written too strongly against Arnauld, Malebranche
reflected a bit and then, raising his eyes to heaven, answered no, that the attack
on Arnauld was useful in elucidating many truths.
Despite the nonsense surrounding it, the exchange between the two Cartesians
was a tour dt for(t in seventeenth-century theory of ideas. Arnauld correctly interpreted the vision of all things in God to involve two essential claims: ( 1) we directly
perceive, not material things, but ideas that represent them by taking their place
in the mind; and (2) these ideas are different from, and independent of, our perceptions. According to Arnauld, who defended a view much closer to Descartes's
own, ideas are not different from perceptions that are modifications of the mind,
and they represent material things by presenting them to the mind, which thus
directly perceives material things by means of ideas. The philosophical substance
of this exchange has in recent years generated a fair amount of sophisticated
commentary, which is not yet in agreement on the exact nature of the views being
contested, but all of it indicates that Malebranche and Arnauld explored the dialectic of representationalist theories of perception to an extent that no one had
previously. Very much in evidence in their debate were issues that have dominated perception theory to the present: direct perception, representation, the veil
of perception, presence to the mind, and so on.
Arnauld's position was later assumed by Pierre-Sylvain Regis as part of still
another dispute rooted in the Starch. Regis was, in the later half of the century,
the most outspoken propagandist on behalf of the Cartesian cause, having been
designated as its missionary to the south of France and later giving public lectures
in Paris. In 1690 he published the Cartesian textbook, Systtm o[Pirilosoplry, which
attacked Malebranche at many points. Malebranche responded in 1693, addressing three issues in particular. One was the explanation of the apparent larger size
of the horizontal sun over the meridional sun. As against Malebranche's psychological explanation, Regis had made the mistake of attributing the difference to

xviii

Introduction

differing refraction caused by the atmosphere. The Journal des savants eventually
went so far as to print attestations of his error. Another issue was the significance
of pleasures of the senses; Regis, like Arnauld, attacked Malebranche's view that
pleasure qua pleasure is capable of making us happy. Also like Arnauld, Regis
opposed Malebranche on the nature of ideas.
An important upshot of this exchange concerned the last point, for from it
emerged the clear statement of Malebranche's doctrine on the efficacy of ideas.
Regis had been prepared to concede that God creates and preserves the soul, and
causes all its ideas and sensations, but he insisted that this dependence is the only
union that the soul has with God. In reply, Malebranche underlined the soul's
dependence on God, not only as the efficient cause of its perceptions, but also on
God's ideas as the formal cause of those perceptions. Because a perception is of a
certain kind in virtue of its formal cause, it can represent to the mind the kind of
object that it does. The idea of a triangle in the mind of God in this sense causes
a perception to be the kind of perception that represents a triangle in the world.
Without such a formal cause, the perception would be a mere modification of the
mind and thus would represent, according to Malebranche, nothing but the mind
itself. Having been led to make this notion of cause explicit, Malebranche in the
final edition of the Starch was led to append to one of its most important sentences
an explication that without that notion is unintelligible. "By the word Ulta, I mean
here nothing other than the immediate object, or the object closest to the mind,
when it perceives something, i.e., that which affects and modifies the mind with
the perception it has of an object" (p. 217). Only as the formal cause of its
perception can an idea be understood to affect and modify the mind.
What should have been the most productive of Malebranche's disputes-for it
involved the other great fin-de-siidt rationalist-unfortunately proved fragmentary, sporadic, and largely inconclusive. The fault was not Leibniz's. Before
leaving Paris after a four-year stay which began as a diplomatic mission, Leibniz
visited Malebranche in the Oratory, in early 1675, probably having met him previously in some more public sening. The visit was occasioned by the publication
of a mathematical work by Jean Prestet, a disciple of Malebranche. Not much is
known about the meeting, but it did lead directly to a brief correspondence in
which the Cartesian doctrine of the real identity of space and maner was in dispute. Leibniz later broadened his attack to include virtually the whole of
Cartesianism and so, despite Leibniz's nominal approval of his vision of all things
in God, Malebranche also came under an attack that included his views that
thought is the essence of the mind and that natural causes are but occasional
causes. Malebranche here preferred to ignore his opponent or to let others defend
his views--Amauld defended occasionalism against Leibniz's doctrine of the
preestablished harmony, for example. In one area he was forced by Leibniz's arguments to respond and that was the debate over conservation laws in physics.
Malebranche was led by Leibniz first to abandon Descartes's account of the
cohesion of maner and then systematically to revise his laws of collision, but he

Introduction

xix

never relinquished extension as the essence of matter, which is the doctrine that
Leibniz saw as the mistaken basis of Malebranche's original views. Something of
1 rapprochement was reached in one area, at least: theodicy. Leibniz's celebrated
doctrine of this world as the best of all possible worlds may have been derived
from Malebranche's concept of God as the divine strategist who weighs ends and
means. 11 That Malebranche did not engage Leibniz more closely is to be regretted,
for the great German rationalist was a close and not entirely unsympathetic reader
of the Stt~rch fl/ttr Tnuh.
Another debate that emerged from the Stt~rch concerned Malebranche's
doctrine ofoccasionalism. In an anonymous work of 1686, Fontenellc: argued that
the impenetrability of bodies provided the ground for a necessary connection
between their collision and subsequent states, and that to this extent they are not
just occasional but real causes. Although he responded with a brief anonymous
work of his own, here Malebranche was again content to play a less active role
since his cause was taken up by no less than Pierre Bayle. This Huguenot refugee
in Holland, who became the so-called Arsenal of the Enlightenment, was a friend
who, for example, corrected page proofs of Malebranche's work published in
Holland. In oa:asionalism Bayle likely saw a block against doctrines of mechanism, both metaphysical and physical, that would have threatened Providence as
he conceived of it. The: opposition was joined meanwhile, by the Benedictine
Fra~is Lamy and another Huguenot refugee, Pierre de Villemandi. Although
it is debatable whether Malebranche or Bayle: ever appreciated the full force of
Fontenelle's objection, there is, as Hume saw, an answer to it.l2
The last polemic to emerge from the Starch was a rather sad affair. Dortous de
Mairan, who was a former student of Malebranche's, raised 1 charge against him
that had been raised explicitly three decades earlier by Noel Aubert de: Verse and
at least implicitly by Arnauld. The charge was a serious one, that there was no
difference between Malebranche's views and those of the pantheist Spinoza.
Malebranche was not in a position to mount a vigorous defense, for he was old
and failing. "I'm having difficulty regaining my health, he wrote to his former
student; 1 have been bled again. I'm seventy-six years old." He says, and his handwriting demonstrates, that his hand trembles, restricting him to produce but a line
with the effort that previously yielded a page.u
Even with the tenacity and rigor that he exhibited in the polemic with Arnauld,
however, it is not clear how Malebranche might have: dc:alt with Dortous. He:
argues that the main source of Spinoza's errors, and presumably the point on
which they differ, is the connection between ideas and things. According to
Malebranche, Spinoza supposes that things are perceived in themselves and this
endows them with the eternality, nec:c:ssity, and infinity of ideas properly understood. Dortous replied that the problem belonged, rather, to Malebranchc:, whom
Calhcrinc Wilmn, •J...eibnizian Optimism," J--1-J l'ltu...,t;y,IIO (1983), 765-U
For more oa this dd.le, see OC XVU-1 565-94.
" 12June 1714, OCXIX 882-9.

II

IZ

XX

Introduction

he regarded as incapable of distinguishing created extension from the uncreated
idea of it. As Arnauld had seen the divine ideas as being collapsed into matter, so
Dortous saw the reverse. 1+In either case, the transcendence of God is threatened.
Another symptom of Malebranche's slide toward Spinozism in this exchange
is his inability to defend an ontology of individual and independent material
substances. The status of material things seemed more like that of modes than of
substances, indeed, of one single substance, perhaps of the only substance. This
was not a happy drift at all for the aged philosopher at the end of his life.

Malebranche's influence
Despite his widely acknowledged genius and prolific writing, the name of
Malebranche was not associated with any movement in philosophy; nor was he
founder of any eponymous school, certainly not of the Cartesian sort of which he
himself was a member. He was not attended by any great number of notable
disciples. But this is not to say that he was without influence or support. On the
conttary, before falling into the neglect from which he has just recently been
recovered, Malebranche enjoyed an audience that was diverse, numerous, and
widespread. His actual influence was, however, often surprising and sometimes
contrary to some of his most profound intentions.
He had a certain following among the nobility-the Marquis d' Allemans most
notably--and his work, like that of Descartes, managed to penetrate the salons-Mme de Grignan, for example, was an admirer, and Mile de Vailly hosted conferences at which the philosophy ofMalebranche was discussed (among this group
was Miron, who later defended Malebranche against the Jesuit Dutertre on the
sensitive issue of freedom of the will).
Within the Oratory itself, which since the time of its founder BC:rulle had been
more than sympathetic with Canesianism, Malebranche had an entourage whose
acceptance ofhis views came in the end to characterize the Oratory generally. The
situation was complicated politically by a period of royal opposition to Jansenist
elements in the Oratory, of which Malebranche was temporarily the victim. Only
when his own anti-Jansenist credentials were established by his polemic with
Arnauld over the issue of Providence did Malebranche begin to achieve a
measure of security. But then he was the object of attack from the other side,
resulting eventually in the inclusion of his works on the Index. Malebranche 's
closest friend and philosophically most important supporter in the Oratory was
Bernard Lamy, who unfortunately was less successful in avoiding the repercussions of opposing authority-he was exiled twice for his views.
The most outspoken of Malebranche's defenders was the one-time Oratorian
Henri Lelevel, about whom not a great deal of relevance is known other than that
he was thoroughly imbued with the philosophy of Malebranche, teaching it in

Introduction

xxi

lessons given in Paris and applying its principles even in literary theory. He undertook a defense of Malebranche against Regis in a two-volume work published
in 1694, Trw tnul Ft~lse Mttt~plrysics. The first volume dates from before
Malebranche's own reply to Regis so that Malebranche initially had hopes that it
would spare him his own reply. The second volume appeared in the midst of the
polemical literature and is very much a product of that milieu. Lclevel criticized
Regis, on several topics, perhaps most notably for his adherence to Descartes's
doctrine of the created eternal truths, which according to Lclevel leads to
skepticism. Essentially elaborating Malebranche's argument from the tenth
Elucidation, Lclevel nied to show that if everything depends on the divine will,
including what we take to be eternal truths, then since the divine will is not known
to us, we can know nothing.
Another sphere of Malebranchian influence embraced the leading scientific
institution in France. Malebranche's intellectual career may be divided into three
fairly datable stages. During his period of religious training his attention was fixed
on biblical, historical, and linguistic matters. With the discovery of Descartes's
Trtt~tist on Mt~n his attention shifted to philosophy and remained there until the
last decade of the century when, his works under scrutiny by the compilers ofthe
Index, it focused on politically neutral topics in science.u No stage was entirely
free, obviously, from the concerns of the others, but in the last part of his life,
Malebranche's concern with science was very prominent. Now in evidence were
his interests in microscopy, mechanics, biology, anatomy, medicine, etc.-interests reflected in the scientific material incorporated into the successive editions of
the Stt~rdt. (The inventory of his library revealed that nearly half its titles were of
scientific works.)
Appropriately enough, Malebranche was elected to the Royal Academy of
Sciences upon its reformation in 1699 by Fontenelle, who despite the earlier
debate over occasionalism, clearly was a supporter of his. Malebranche nied, with
no little success, to rise to the new mathematics of his time, and he was a partisan
of the infinitesimal calculus against more orthodox Cartesians such as Regis. The
register of the Academy shows him to have attended regularly, and he was involved
in the administration of it. Within the Academy, there was a circle around
Malebranche that included such names as L'Hcipital, Carre, Ri:mond de
Montmon, and Reyneau. The identity of this group as Malebranchian was
recognized not only by its members but also, repeatedly, by Fontenelle, the
permanent secretary of the Academy.
Malebranche's importance to British philosophy into the eighteenth century
has been massively and conclusively documented. His admirers "ranged from a
deposed English king who made France his home to defrocked French priests
who made England theirs, from London booksellers to Oxford dons, from ladies
who wrote essays on divinity to soldiers who had a penchant for metaphysics."l 6
" Sec A. Robinct, OC XX 14711".
" Mc:Cndlcn, Mllk,_,<ite •w Britilll Pllu_,lly, p. IS6.

xxii

Introduction

Beyond these amateurs, Thomas Taylor not only translated the Starch as well
as the TrtatiY on Nature and Grace, but also consciously applied Malebranche's
principles to theological questions surrounding Providence, free will, grace, and
the problem of evil. The most prominent of Malebranche's advocates in Britain,
however, was john Norris, a onetime friend of Locke who came to criticize him
from a Malebranchian perspective. Locke's view was that Malebranche's theory
was not likely to gain adherents, but he engaged Norris in a bitter dispute, producing An Examination of Maltbrancht's Opinion of Stting All Things in God, a
very important document for understanding, among other things, Locke's theory
of P'!rception. Norris himself, meanwhile, was independently espousing
Malebranche's philosophy in works such as An Essay towards the Theory of the
Ideal (1701) to the point that the Aristotelian John Sergeant dubbed him "the
English Malebranche."
That Berkeley was a Malebranchian was claimed immediately upon publication
of his Principlts in 1710, was repeated frequently thereafter, but was denied by
him in no uncertain terms. The claim was more than plausible, for Malebranche
was a source for Berkeley's views on the variability of perceived primary qualities, the indemonstrability of matter, human dependence on God, among others.
Berkeley's notebooks refer to Malebranche more frequently than to any other
author save Locke and show him to have been an early and close reader of the
Starch. The challenge to Berkeley was to separate himself from the Oratorian,
which he attempted to do, finaUy, in the second of the Thrtt Dialogues by actuaUy
listing his putative differences from the "enthusiasm ofMalebranche,'' who is said
to assert, while Berkeley himself denies, abstract ideas, "an absolute external
world,'' the deceptiveness of the senses, and our ignorance of "the true forms and
figures of external things."l7
Hume's debt to Malebranche is, if anything, greater than that of his illustrious
predecessor in British empiricism. Rarely do authors cite other authors in this
period, but the name ofMalebranche appears four times in the Enquiries, and only
seven other names are cited in the Trtatist. Perhaps more indicatively, Hume himself wrote to a friend three years before publication of the Treatise that if he wished
to understand the metaphysical parts of that work, he should first read four other
works, the first of which being the Search. Malebranche not only anticipated
Hume's concerns over necessary connections between natural causes and effects,
but supplied him with the arguments that he used to show that mental causation
provides no counterexample to the claim that necessary connections are never
perceived. The slogan that Hume's theory of causation is occasionalism minus
God is not a bad approximation. In addition, Malebranche was a source for
Hume's thoughts on judgment, belief, imagination, knowledge of the self, human
physiology, and other topics.
With respect to the Continental Enlightenment, meanwhile, Malebranche had
17

T1u Wora •fe-r< Bnlttky, cd. A. A. Lua: and T. E. Jasop (London, Thomas Nelson, 1949), vol. Z,
pp. 211-13.

lruroduction

xxiii

an influence that he would have found no less repellent than the use made of his
work by Hume. His conceptions of God and nature, for example, were construed
as deistic conceptions of blind, impersonal forces. His mechanism of natural
judgment endowed sensation with epistemic value and anticipated the sensationalism of Condillac. And his theory of the will found a no less unlikely audience.
Responding to the requirements of reason, faith, and introspection, Malebranche
distinguished---as Descanes did not-between the will, a general impulse toward
goodness and truth for which God was responsible, and freedom, a power to arrest
this impulse on some particular object. Malebranche thought that man was
responsible for his use of freedom, but without thereby acting as a real cause since
rest has no force. But the detennination itself he saw as resulting from a variety
of factors (heredity, temperament, education, etc.) which made the notion acceptable to Helvetius, Halbach, and especially Voltain:.IB
The influence of Malebranche and the notice taken of his work were, during
his first century at least, commensurate with the intrinsic interest of his philosophy. Such arc the vagaries of philosophical fate, however, that his star then went
into decline, not to say eclipse, until the recent restoration to its original place in
the firmament. The latter half of the twentieth century has returned to the view
of Malebranche as philosopher of the first rank, and has recognized his s~tmh
8/in- Truth as a philosophical classic. Moreover, we have realized that not the least
sense in which Malebranche can be seen as the philosopher of French classicism
is his very use of the language, which comes across, or should come across, even
in English translation. In addition to his importance in the history of philosophy
and the intrinsic value of his thought, Malebranche is a delight to read.
TML

11

F..- mo.., CHI Malebruche's C...lincnw imporance, indudins hil relation to Kant, see AlquiC,
,....,_MM•k...wlw.

u

Chronology
1637 Publication of Descartes's Discourse on the Method
1638 Binh of Nicolas Malebranche, in Paris, S August; binh of Louis XIV
1644 Publication of Descartes's Principles ofPhilosophy
1648 Treaty ofWestphalia, end of the Thirty Years War
1650 Death of Descartes, aged 53
1660 Malebranche enters the Oratory
1664 Malebranche is ordained a priest and also discovers Descartes
1674 Publication of Books One-Three of The Sear&h after Truth, with Books
Four-Six the following year

1677 Death of Spinoza, aged 44, and publication of his posthumous works,
including the Ethi&s
1678 Publication of the third edition of the Sear&h, with the Elu&idations
1680 Publication of Treatise on Nature and Grare (second edition, 1681)
1683 Publication of Arnauld's On True and False Idtas
1684 Publication of Treatise on Ethics
1685 Revocation ofthe Edict of Nantes; binh of Berkeley
1688 Publication of Dialogues on Metaphysia and on Religion (and Dialogues on
Death with the third edition, 1696)
1689 Publication ofLocke's Epistola tit tolerantia, TTl)() Treatises on Government,
and Essay Conreming Human Undtntanding
1690 Publication of Regis's System ofPhilosophy
1694 Death of Arnauld, aged 84
1696 Publication of Bayle's Di&tionnaire historique et critique
1699 Election to the Academic des Sciences
1704 Death of Locke, aged 72
1708 Publication of Dialogue Bewem a Christian Philosopher and a Chinese
Philosopher
1709 Search placed on the Index of Forbidden Books
1710 Publication of Berkeley's Treatise Con&eming the Prin&iples of Human
Understanding, followed by the Three Dialogues in 1713
xxiv

Chronoloo

XXV

1712 Publication of the "sixth" edition of the Starch, actually the seventh, the
last in Malcbranche's lifetime
1715 Death ofMalcbranche, 13 October, aged 77; death of Louis XIV
1716 Death ofLeibniz, aged 70

Further reading
The standard original language edition of Malebranche's work is the CEuvrts
complitts tit Maltbrancht (Paris, J. Vrin, 195~-84) under the general editorship of
Andre Robinet, in twenty volumes with two unnumbered volumes of indices
(referred to as OC). The edition is a model of its kind. The individual works were
edited by various Malebranche scholars including Robinet himself, and contain
very thorough annotation, histories of the works, the varia of the different
editions, historical documentation including contemporary reviews, and other
useful material. The edition is indeed complete, containing Malebranche's
correspondence, his polemical works as well as excerpts from his opponents',
and previously unpublished texts. The subsequent Pleiade publication of
Malebranche's CEuvrts (Paris, GaUimard, 1979-92) in two volumes edited by
Genevieve Rodis-Lewis with the collaboration of Germain Malbreil, contains an
updated set of annotations and is both practical and scholarly.
Whatever may be its shoncomings (see OC XIX 21 0) the standardly employed
biography ofMalebranche is by the Jesuit Y. M. Andre (1675-1764), who knew
Malebranche and many of those who figured in his life. This La Vit du R. P.
Maltbrandtt was published only in 1886 (Geneva, Slatkin Reprints, 1970). While
Andre's work is useful, a modem biography would be most welcome.
The Bibliographia Maltbra11Chi111111 by Patricia Easton, Thomas M. Lennon and
Gregor Sebba (Carbondale, Southern Illinois University Press, 1992) is, as the
subtitle indicates, a critical guide to the Malebranche literature into 1989. One
will find there, not only all that Malebranche wrote, including such translations
as there are, but also all that has ever been written about him, primarily in French
and English, but in other languages as well.
The best general account of Malebranche's philosophy is by Oaisie Radner,
Maltbrancht: A Study of 11 Carttsian Systtm (Assem and Amsterdam, Van
Gorcum, 1978). A very fine, but briefer account is to be found in Charles J.
McCracken's Maltbrancht and British Philosophy (Oxford, Clarendon Press,
1983), which not incidentally is the definitive treatment of the topic indicated in
its title. Also as a general account, Ralph W. Church's Study intht Philosophy of
XXVI

Further reading

xxvii

Malebrtlntlre (London, George Allen & Unwin, 1931) is still a useful book.
With respect to more particular topics, Steven Nadler has contributed two

books that are essential in dealing with Malebranche's theory of ideas: Arnt~uld
tiM tire Ct~rtesia" Philosophy ofJdtas (Manchester, Manchester University Press,
1989) and Mt~leilrt~nthe tiM ldtt~~ (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1992).
Surprisingly, Malebranche's views on consciousness had hardly been examined
at all until Tad Schmalz's Mt~lebranche's Theory of the Soul: A Cartesia11
lnterprtttltion (New York, Oxford University Press, 1996). Richard A. Watson's
The Do,fa/1 ofCarttsit~nism /673-1712 (The Hague, Martinus Nijhoff, 1966)
contains a classic account of Malebranche's confrontation with Foucher.
Desmond Connell's Tht Visio11 i" God: Mt~ltbra,dre 's Scholastic Sources (Lou vain
and Paris, Nauwelaerts, 1967) opens up previously unexplored terrain. A
surprising alliance between Descartes and Leibniz against Malebranche is argued
by Nicholas Jolley in The Light oftht Soul: Tlrtorits ofldtt~~ ;, Ltilmiz., Maltbrt~ncht
t1nd Dtsctlrtts (Oxford, Oarendon Press, 1990).
There are two collections of essays that will be found of use to those working
on a variety of topics in Malebranche. Nitolt~~ Mt~ltilrt~nche (New York, Garland
Publishing, 1992) ed. Vere Chappel, is a selection from amongst the most
important of previously published articles on Malebranche, and Nicolt1s
Mt~ltbranclrt: His Plrilosophictll Critics t1rul Sucmson, ed. Stuart Brown (Assen and
Maastricht, Van Gorcum, 1991) contains new papers dealing with Malebranche's
relations to Arnauld, Leibniz, et t~l.
For those who read French, there is, of course, a substantial amount of excellent literature. Pride of place perhaps goes to Andre Robinet, Systimt et existmct
dans l'otiiVre dt Malt,rt~nclre (Paris, J. Vrin, 1965). An excellent introduction is
provided by Genevieve Rodis-Lewis, Nitolt~~ Mt~ltbrt~ntlre (Paris, Presses
Universitaires de France, 1963). Its wide usefulness is not indicated by the tide
of Ginene Dreyfus's Lt1 volonti stlo" Maltilranclre (Paris, J. Vrin, 1958). Lt
ttlrtisit~ninrlt dt Mt~ltilrtlndte (Paris, J. Vrin, 1974) by Ferdinand Alquie, examines
both Malebranchc's major source and, to a lesser extent, his Continental influence. The following are classic works worth consulting: Martial Gueroult,
Mt~lebranclrt (3 vols., Paris, Aubier, 1955-9); Henri Gouhier, Lfl philosoplrit dt
Maltbrancht et son expirimtt religinut, 2nd edn. (Paris, J. Vrin,. 1948) and Lfl
wct1ti011 dt Mfllebrt~nclre (Paris,}. Vrin, 1926).

Translators' preface
Tht Starch after Truth is Malebranche's first, longest, and most important work.
From the first edition of 1674-75 to the final one of 1712, each of its editions
underwent modifications, often significant and of considerable scope, that
reflected Malebranche's developing thought. The work is therefore an account of
his initial interests, mature thought, and abiding philosophical concerns.
Tht Starch afttr Truth has been translated into at least nine languages (including, in this century, Russian, Japanese, and Turkish) but not into English for over
two hundred and fifty years. Thomas Taylor produced an English translation in
1694, with a second edition appearing in 1700; a possible third edition of 1720
is no longer extant. Another translation was published in 1694-5, the work
presumably of Richard Sault, who signed the dedication. Neither of these translations is now of much use. Both are archaic: Taylor hopelessly so, Sault to a lesser
degree but occasionally to the point of being genuinely misleading. Both contain
numerous mistakes, some major, and in Sault's case there are also many of the
annoying minor variety. Both have biases that sometimes lead them to corrupt the
text, for example, the suppression of a reference to I'Eglise (OC I 393) by Taylor
in favor of the "Gospel" (p. 106), and by Sault in favor of"mysteries ofReligion''
(Book Three, p. 12). Finally, neither had the benefit ofthe last edition, but only
of the founh (first published in 1678), which lacks, for example, the varia resulting from the controversies with Arnauld.
It is a particularly propitous time to satisfy the demand for a modem English
translation that growing interest in Malebranche has created. Malebranche complained ofTaylor's translation of the Eclaircisstmtrtt sur lalumitrt (Elucidation 16)
that translators should inquire of authors as to the most exact editions of their
work. We have the nearest thing to Malebranche's own endorsement of an
edition and the text itself in the remarkable production of his CEIIVrts complttts
by the French Centre National de Ia Recherche Scientifique under the general
editorship of Andre Robinet. This is the first edition of Malebranche's complete
works; the care with which it was produced is indeed remarkable. In particular,
Genevieve Rodis-Lewis's edition of Dt Ia rtchtrcht dt Ia viriti at last makes the
xxviii

Translators' prtfoct

xxix

attempt to translate it wonhwhilc. The text here translated is that of the sixth and
last edition exactly as she has established it ( OC 1-11, 1962) and docs not include
the addenda Lois gblbalts tk Ia communication tks mouvements and Riporut
Monsieur Rtgis (reprinted in OC XVII-I). Our thanks are due to the Librairic
Philosophiquc]. Vrin, Paris, for its permission to usc its edition of this text,
including completed references and illustrations.
Some of the typographical and stylistic conventions of the original and the Vrin
editions have not been retained (quotations, for example, arc set off by quotation
marks rather than the italics used in those editions); and present-day practice in
the capitalization of words and special terms has been observed. W c have likewise
attempted to regularize the many inconsistencies in Malcbranchc's forms of
source citation and to conform them to present-day practice. Material enclosed
in square brackets is either references completed by Mmc Rodis-Lcwis or expressions from the original French we felt obliged to include for reader clarification.
Angle brackets denote all other insertions by the translators.
We wish to thank Professor John Moran, who carefully read and checked the
entire translation of the Starch, making many valuable suggestions for improvement. Naturally, he is responsible for none of its defects.
Each of us has labored over the entire work, butT. M. L. is particularly responsible for the odd-numbered books and the first half of the sixth, P. J. 0. for the
even-numbered ones and the second half of the sixth.

a

September 1975

TML
PJO

When the 1959 bibliography of everything written by or about Malebranche was
updated to 1989, the number of entries nearly doubled (sec Funhcr reading).
This increase reflects, of course, the explosion of interest in Malebranche over
those three decades. This shows no sign of abating and seems, rather, to be
accelerating. Malebranche has progressed from a footnote, to the subject of
articles and, now, of whole books. He has again become what he was in his own
lifetime, a philosopher of the first rank.
This renaissance maltbranchistt undoubtedly traces its source to the publication of OC, and has, no less undoubtedly, been sustained by English translations
of Malebranche's works. The ann us mirabilis of 1980 saw the coincidental publications of Malebnnche's Dialogrus on Metaphysics and on Rtligitnt, Dialogue
Btt'IHtn 11 Christian Philosopher and a Chinest Philosopher, and, of course, Tht
Starch after Truth. More recently, his Trtalist on Naturt andgriiCt and Treatise on
Ethics have appeared. A new translation of the Dialogrus on Metaphysics and on
Religion is appearing simultaneously in this series.
The present edition of 1M Starch after Truth and the Elucililltioru thereof is
essentially that of the 1980 publication (Columbus, Ohio State University Press).
Some three dozen alterations have been made, ranging from typographical

XXX

Trans/at on' preface

corrections to inclusion of a few omitted phrases and some plainly better renderings. Thanks for supplying some of them are due to D. Garber, D. Radner and
R. Watson. Malebranche's citations of Latin texts, previously left standing, have
been rendered into English. The Introduction, Chronology, and Further reading
have been produced especially for this edition. Patricia Easton read the
Introduction and made many useful suggestions for improvement.
TML

1996

PJO

THE SEARCH AFI'ER TRUTH

t

Wherein Are Treated the Nature of
Man's Mind and the Use He Must Make of It to
Avoid Error in the Sciences

Preface

t

The mind of man is by its na~ure situated, as it were, between its CreaiOr and
corporeal creatures, for, according to Saint Augustine,• there is nothing but God
above it and nothing but bodies below it. But as the mind's position above all
material things does not prevent it from being joined 10 them, and even depending in a way on a part of matter, so the infinite distance between the sovereign
Being and the mind of man does not prevent it from being immediately joined to
it in a very intimate way. The latter union raises the mind above all things.
Through it, the mind receives its life, its light, and its entire felicity, and at many
points in his works Saint Augustine speaks of this union as the one most natural
and essential to the mind. The mind's union with the body, on the contrary,
infinitely debases man and is today the main cause of all his enon and miseries.
I am not surprised that ordinary men or pagan philosophen consider only the
soul's relation and union with the body, without recognizing lbe relation and union
it hu with God; but I am surprised thal Christian philosopben, who ought 10 prefer
the mind of God to the mind of man, Moses 10 ArisiOtle, and Saint Augustine to
some worthless commentalOr on a pagan philosopher, should regard the soul
more as the form of the body than as being made in the image and for the image
of God, i.e., according 10 Saint Augustine,b for the Truth to which alone it is
immediately joined. It is true that the soul is joined to the body and is nalUrally its
form; but it is also true that it is united to God in a much closer and more essential
way. The relation it has to its body may cease; but the relation it has to God is so
essential that Ood could not conceivably create a mind without it.
•' 'Nihil cit polcntius ilia crcatun, quae mens dicitur ralionalis. nihil cit aublimius. ·'
"Quidquid supra illam est, jam crcatol" CSI." TnJCt. 23 on 51. John.
"Quod mionali anim• mclius ell, omnibus conscnticntibus Deus ell." Aua. [lH immonalitau
animae, ch. 13.)
• "Ad ipsam similitudiacm non omnia f.ct8 sunt, sed sola sub5t8ntia rational is; quare omnia per
ipam, sed ad ipsam noa nisi anim•mionlllis. lt8quc subst8atia mionalis &: per ipsam fact8 ell,&: ad
ipsam; non cnim est ull• nllura in~rpositll." Ub. imp. tk c;.,,.. ad li11. [Ch. 60.]
"Rcctissimc dicitur f.ctusad imqincm &: similitudincm Dei. non cnim
veritaiCm possct mente conspicerc." lH l'f'ra rd. [Ch. 44.]

xxxiii

•li~r

incommUt8bilcm

xxxiv

Preface

It is evident that God can act only for Himself, that He can create minds only
to know and love Him, and that He can endow them with no knowledge or love
that is not for Him or that does not tend toward Him; but He need not have joined
to bodies the minds now joined to them. Hence, the relation that minds have to
God is natural, necessiiJ}', and absolutely indispensable; but our mind's relation
to our body, although natural to our mind, is neither absolutely necessary nor
indispensable.
This is not the place to adduce all the arguments and appeals to authority that
might lead one to believe that it is more of the nature of the mind to be joined to
God than to be joined to the body; these matters would lead us too far afield. To
present this truth properly, it would be necessiiJ}' to overthrow the fundamental
principles of pagan philosophy, to explicate the disorders of sin, to combat what
is falsely called experience, and to argue against the prejudices and illusions of
the senses. Hence it is too difficult an undertaking in a preface to make this truth
perfectly comprehensible to ordiniiJ}' men.
But it is not so difficult to prove this to attentive minds who have been
instructed in the true Philosophy. For it suffices to have them recall that as the
will of God orders the nature of each thing, it is more of the nature of the soul to
be joined to God through its knowledge of the truth and its love of good than to
be joined to the body. since it is certain, as we have just said, that God made
minds to know and love Him rather than for informing bodies. This proof is
capable of initially arousing minds that are somewhat enlightened, making them
attentive and then convincing them; but it is morally impossible that minds of
flesh and blood, which are capable of knowing only what can be sensed, should
ever be convinced by such reasoning. For these sorts of people, gross sensible
proofs are required, because to them nothing appears solid unless it makes some
impression on their senses.
The first man's sin has so weakened our mind's union with God 8 that it can be
felt only by those whose heart is purified and whose mind is enlightened, for this
union appears imaginiiJ}' to all those who blindly follow the judgments of the
senses and the impulses of the passions.
On the contrary, Original Sin has so strengthened our soul's union with our
body that it seems to us that these two parts of us are but one and the same
substance; or, rather, it has subjected us to our senses and passions in such a way
that we are led to believe that our body is the more important of the two parts of
which we are composed.
When we consider the various occupations of men, we have every reason to
believe that they have such a low and crude opinion of themselves. For as they all
love felicity and the perfection of their being, and as they strive only to make
themselves happier and more perfect, are we not compelled to judge that they
have a higher estimate of their body and the goods of their body than of their
•"Mens, quod non sentit, nisi cum purissima &: beatissima est. nulli cohaeret, nisi ipsi veritati,
quae similitudo & imago patris, & sapientia dicitur.'' Aug. Lib. imp. dr Grn. ad lin. [par. 60.]

Preface

XXXV

mind and its goods? For we see them almost constantly occupied with things
n:lated to the body, and they hardly think at all about things that are absolutely
necessary for the perfection of their mind.
Most of them toil and struggle only to eke out a miserable existence, and to
leave to their childn:n some of the assistance necessary for the pn:servation of
their bodies.
Those who, through good fonune or through their luck at binh, are not subject
to this necessity, give no better evidence by their conduct that they n:gard their
soul as the most noble pan of their being. Hunting, dancing, gambling, and good
living are their usual pursuits. Their soul, as the slave of the body, prizes these•
diversions, though they are completely unwonhy of it. But because their body is
n:lated to all sensible objects, their soul not only is the slave of the body but is,
moreover, the slave of all sensible things through or because of the body. For
through the body, they are n:lated to their family, their friends, their town, their
positions, and to all sensible goods whose pn:servation seems to them as necessary and wonhwhile as the preservation of their own being. Thus, care for their
goods and desin: to incn:ase them, the passion for glory and grandeur, move
them and occupy them infinitely mon: than the perfection of their soul.
Even the learned and those who pride themselves on their intelligence spend
mon: than half their life in pun:ly animal actions or ones that lead one to believe
they care mon: for their health, their goods, and their n:putations than for the
perfection of their mind. They study mon: to acquin: a spurious grandeur in the
imagination of other men than to stn:ngthen and extend their mind. They tum
their head into a kind of fumitun: warehouse into which they indiscriminately
cram anything bearing some mark of erudition, i.e., anything that might appear
rare and extraordinary and that might excite other men's admiration. They glory
in assembling those collections of curiosities and antiques, which have no value
or solidity and whose price depends only on whim, passion, and chance; they
hardly ever strive to set their mind in order and control the impulses of their
he an.
Yet men are not altogether unawan: that they have a soul and that the soul is
the most imponant pan of their being.• They have also been convinced a
thousand times over by both n:ason and experience that it is no gn:at advantage to
have fame, riches, and health for a few yean;, and, in general, that all bodily
goods and those we possess only through or because of the body are passing.
imaginary goods. Men know that it is better to be just than to be rich, to be
n:asonable than to be learned, to have a lively and penetrating mind than' to have
a swift and agile body. These truths cannot be erased from their mind, and they
infallibly discover them when it pleases them to think about them. For example,
Homer, who praises the swiftness of his hero, could have seen, had he wished to,
that this is the praise one should give to hunting dogs and horses. Alexander, so
celebrated in history for his plundering exploits, sometimes heard in the most
"'"Non exi11111 hominis portio. sed 101ius humanae. uni\'a'sitatis substantia est.'" Amb. 6. hexa. 7.

xxxvi

Preface

secret recesses of his reason the same reproaches that murderers and thieves hear,
in spite of the tumultuous din made by the crowd of flatterers surrounding him.
And Caesar crossing the Rubicon could not conceal the reproaches that terrified
him when he finally resolved to sacrifice his country's freedom to his own
ambition.
Although closely joined to the body, the soul is still joined to God, and even
while it receives these lively and confused sensations through the body and is
moved by its passions, it is infonned of its duty and its disorders by the eternal
Truth that presides over its mind.• When its body misleads it, God sets it right;
when the body flatters it, God castigates it; when the body praises and acclaims
it, God afflicts it internally with bitter reproaches and condemns it by the manifestations of a law that is purer and more holy than the law of the flesh it has
followed.
Alexander did not need the Scythians to come and teach him his duty in a
foreign tongue;b he knew the rules of justice he should have followed from the
same one who instructs the Scythians and the most barbaric nations. The light of
truth that illumines everyone illumined him as well; and the voice of nature,c
which speaks neither Greek nor Scythian nor any barbarian tongue, spoke to him,
as it does to the rest of men, a very clear and very intelligible language. The
Scythians reproached him in vain for his conduct; they spoke only to his ears.
Since God did not speak to his heart or, rather, since God did speak to his heart,
but while he was listening only to the Scythians, who succeeded but in arousing
his passions and in directing his attention away from himself, he failed to hear the
voice of truth (though it had struck him), and to see its light (though it had
penetrated him).
It is true that our union with God is diminished and weakened to the extent that
our union with sensible things is increased and strengthened; but it is impossible
that this union should be entirely broken without the destruction of our being, for
while those plunged in vice and intoxicated with pleasures might be insensible to
the truth, they are yet joined to it.d The truth does not abandon them, it is they
who abandon the truth. Its light shines in the darkness but does not always dispel
it, just as the sun's light surrounds those who are blind or who shut their eyes,
although it enlightens neither of them.e
The same is true of our mind's union with our body. r This union diminishes as
our union with God increases, but it is entirely broken only ·by our death. For
""Ubiquc vcritas pracsidcs omnibus tonsulcntibus le, simulquc rcspondcs omnibus etiam diversa
tonsulentibus. Liquide tu rcspondes, sed non liquide omnc:s audiunt. Omnc:s uncle volunt consulunt,
sed non semper quod volunt audiunt." Aug. Conf~ss. bk. 10. ch. 26.
0 Vid.

Quint. Cure. bk. 7. ch. 8.

•"Intus in domitilio togitationis, net Hebraca. net Gracc:a. net Latina, net Barbara VERITAS,
sine oris & ling1181: org111is, sine strcpilu syllabarum." Aug. Conf~..... bk. II. th. 3.
•"Videtur quasi ipse a te occiderc tum tu ab ipso occidas." Aug. on Ps. 25 (Ennar. 2:3).
•"Nam etiam sol iste. & vide ntis faciem illustrat & caeti; ambobus sol praesens est, sed praesente
sole unus &biens est. Sit & Sapientia Dei Dominus Jesus Christus ubique praesens est, quia ubiquc
est veritas, ubiquc Sapientia." Aug. on St. John, Trocr. 35.
'What I say here about the mind's two union• with God and the body should be understood
according to the ordinary way of conceiving things. For it is true that the mind c111 be immediately

Preface

xxxvii

even if we were as enlightened and as detached from all sensible things as were
the Apostles, there is still the necessity stemming from Original Sin that our mind
should depend on our body, and that we should feel the law of our flesh resisting
and constantly opposing the law of our mind.
The mind becomes purer, more luminous, stronger, and of greater scope as its
union with God increases, because this union constitutes its entire perfection. It
becomes corrupted, blind, weakened, and restricted as its union with its body is
increased and strengthened, because this union constitutes all its imperfection.
Thus, a man who judges all things by his senses, who follows the impulses of his
passions in all things, who perceives only whal he sens.es and loves only what
flatters him, is in the most wretched state of mind possible. In this state he is
infinitely removed from the ttuth and from his good. But when a man• judges
things only according to the mind's pure ideas, when he carefully avoids the
noisy confusion of creatures, and, when entering iniO himself, he listens 10 his
sovereign Master with his senses and passions silent, it is impossible for him 10
fall in10 enor.
God never deceives those who consult Him with serious purpose and with
their mind turned fully IOward Him, although He does not always make them
hear His responses; but when the mind turns from God and expends itself externally, when it consults only its body 10 be instructed in the truth, when it listens
only to its senses, imagination, and passions, which speak 10 it constantly, then it
must of necessity be deceived. Wisdom and perfection and felicity are not goods
10 be hoped for from the body; He who alone is above us, and from whom we
have received our being, is the only one who can perfect it.
This is what Saint Augustine teaches us with these elegant words. b ''Eternal
wisdom," he says, "is the source [principe] of all creatures capable of understanding, and this immutable wisdom never ceases speaking 10 His creatures
in the most secret recesses of their reason so thai they might be inclined IOward
Him, their source, because only the vision of eternal wisdom gives minds being,
only eternal wisdom can complete them, so 10 speak, and give them the ultimate
perfection of which they are capable.'' ''When we see God as He is in Himself, we
will be like uniO Him," says the apostle Saint John. e Through this contemplation
of eternal truth, we shall be exalted to the heights 10ward which all spiritual
creatures tend by the necessity of their nature. But while we are on earth, the

joined only 10 God, i.e., it depends only on Him. And it is joined 10, or depends on the body, only
because the will of God is eft"K:~eious in establishing this union, whith since the Fall has had its order
of depellclenee rew:ned, but all this will be made clearer in what follows.
"Quis enim bene se inspic:iens 11011 expenus est. a.n10 se aliquid intellb.isse sincerius. quan10
remow:re lllque subducere intentionem mentis a corporis sensibus potuit." Aug. D~ immonalirat~
anim« ch. 10.
... Priru:ipium creaturae intellectualis est aetema sapientia. quod principium manens in se incommutabiliter, nullo modo cessat oc:culta inspiratione vocationis loqui ei creawrae. cui principium est. ut
convertatur ad id ex quo est: quod aliter formalll ac perfecta esse non possil." Lib. imp. d~ Gen. ad
lin. ch. SO [cb. SJ.
•"Sc:imus quoniam cum eppuuerit similes ei erimus, quoniam videbimus eum situti est." Traer.
on St. John's Epistle One, ch. 3, v. 2.

XXXVIJI

Preface

body "weighs down the mind," • constantly withdraws it from the presence of
God or the inner light that illumines it; it strives constantly to strengthen its union
with sensible objects, and it forces it to represent things not as they are in
themselves, but according to the relation they have to the preservation of life.
The body, according to the Book of Wisdom, h fills the mind with so many
sensations that it becomes incapable of knowing things that are at all hidden.
Corporeal vision dazzles and distracts the mind's vision so that there is great
difficuhy in clearly seeing a given truth with the soul's eyes while we are using
the body's eyes to know it. This shows that it is only by the mind's attention that
any truths are discovered or any sciences acquired, because the mind's attention
is in fact only its conversion and return to God, who is our sole Master,r who
alone teaches us all truth through the manifestation of His substance, as Saint
Augustine says,d and without the intervention of any creature.
From all this it is clear that we must constantly resist the body's influence on
the mind, and that because we should not pause over, or occupy ourselves with,
anything that belongs to the sensible order, we must gradually become accustomed to disbelieving the reports our senses make about all the bodies surrounding us, which they always portray as worthy of our application and respect. This
is one of the truths that the eternal Wisdom apparently wished to teach us by His
lncamation;r for after having exalted a body to the highest conceivable dignity,
He showed us through the degradation to which He reduced this same body (i.e.,
through the degradation of the most estimable of sensible things) the scorn we
should have for all the objects of our senses. Saint Paul perhaps had the same
reason for saying that he no longer knew Christ according to the flesh. 1 Not the
flesh of Christ, but the mind concealed by the flesh should be the object of our
attention-"Caro vas fuit, quod habebat attende, non quod erat," says Saint
Augustine. • Whatever of Christ is perceptible deserves our reverence only because of its union with the Word, which cannot be the object of anything but the
mind alone.
It is absolutely necessary for those who wish to become happy and wise to be
convinced to the core of what I have just said. It is not enough that they should
•''Corpus quod c:onumpitur aagravatlllilllllm." Wild. 9:10 (9:15).
"Tem:na inhabitatio dcprimit sensum multa c:ogilantem. &. diff~c:ilc aestimamus quae in 11em sunt,
&. quae in prospcc:tu sunt invenimus c:um Iabore." Wild. 9: IS.
<"Aul. Dt magistro (11-12).
• "Deus intelligibilis lux. in quo, &. a quo. & per quem inrelligibililer luc:ent. quae inrellisibilirer
lucent omnia." I Sol. [I :3).
"lnsinuavit nobis [Christusl animam humanam &. menrem rationalem non vegetari. non illuminari,
non beatific:ari, nisi ab ipsa SUBSTANTIA Dei." Au1. Troct. 23 on St. John. "Nulla natura
inrerposita." Quest. 83, q. S I.
• "lila auc:toritas divina dic:enda est. quae non solum in sensibilibus sipis transc:c:ndit omnem
humanam f~~:ultatem, sed & ipsum hominem agens, ostendit ei quo usque se propter ipsum dcptesserit, & non lleneri sensibus quibus vidcntur ilia miranda, sed ad intellect urn jubet evolan:, simul
dcmonsrraos & quanta hie: possit, & cur haec: f111:ial, & quam parvi pendal." Aug. 2 Dt ord. 9.
1"Et si copovimus sec:undum carnem Christum. jam non sec:undum carnem novimus." 2 Cor.
[S:I6).

"fr«l. 27 on St. John.

Preface

XXXIX

take my word, or that they should be persuaded by the luster of some fleeting
light; they must be convinced of it by a thousand unquestionable proofs and
experiences. 1bese truths must be indelible in their mind and must always be
present to them while they pursue their studies and all the other activities of their
life.
Those who take the trouble to read carefully the work that 1 am now publishing
will, unless 1 am mistaken, enter into this frame of mind; for in it 1 demonstrate in
several ways that our senses, our imagination, and our passions are altogether
useless for discovering the truth and our good, that, on the contrary, they dazzle
us and seduce us in every instance, and generally that all the knowledge the mind
receives through the body, or on account of some motion occuring in the body, is
false and confused in relation to the objects it represents (although this knowledge is quite useful to the preservation of the body and of goods related to the
body).
In this work 1 combat several enors and especially those most universally
received or those that cause a greater disorder of the mind, and 1 show that these
enors are almost all consequences of the mind's union with the body. In several
places 1 try to make the mind realize its servitude and dependence relative to all
sensible things so that it might be awakened from its somnolence and make an
effort to free itself.
I am not content simply to present our enors, but I go further and partially
explain the mind's nature. I do not bother, for example, to make a detailed
enumeration of all the particular enors of the senses or of the imagination, but I
consider mainly the causes of these enors. In the explanation of these faculties
and the general enors into which we fall, I show in a single perspective the
almost infinite number of particular enors into which we can fall. Thus, the
subject of this work is the mind of man in its entirety. I consider it in itself, in
relation to the body, and in relation to God. 1 examine the nature of all its
faculties and set out the uses we ought to make of them in order to avoid enor.
Finally, I explain most of the things I have believed useful for advancing the
knowledge of man.
1be most beautiful, the most pleasant, and the most necessary of all our
knowledge is, undoubtedly, the knowledge of ourselves. Of all the human sciences, the science of man is the most worthy. Yet this science is neither the most
cultivated nor the most complete that we possess; ordinary men neglect it altogether. Even among those who take pride in science, there are very few who
apply themselves to this science, and there are still fewer who apply themselves
to it with any success. Most of those whom everyone regards as competent see in
only very confused fashion the essential difference between the mind and the
body. Saint Augustine himself, who distinguished these two beings so well,
confesses that for a long while he was unable to see the difference.• And
although it must be agreed that he explained the properties of the soul and the
body better than all those who preceeded him and who have followed him until
"Cor{ess. bk. 4. cb. 5.

xi

Preface

our own time, nonetheless, he would have done better not to attribute to the
bodies surrounding us all the sensible qualities we perceive by means of them,
for in the final analysis these qualities are not clearly contained in the idea that he
had of matter. As a result, it can be said with some assurance that the difference
between the mind and the body has been known with sufficient clarity for only a
few years.
Some people imagine that they fully understand the nature of the mind; others
are convinced that it is impossible to know anything about it; but the greatest
number do not see of what use this knowledge would be and therefore scorn it
altogether. But these views, which are so widespread, are more the effects of
men's imagination and inclination than the consequences of a clear and distinct
perception of their mind. They have these views because they find it bothersome
and distasteful to enter into themselves in order to seek out their weaknesses and
infirmities, and because they take pleasure in exotic studies and in those sciences
that are glamorous. Never being within themselves, they do not see the disorder
occurring there; they think they are well because they do not sense themselves.
They even find fault with those who, in realizing their own illness, begin to
remedy it; they say they make themselves sick because they try to cure themselves.
But these great geniuses who unlock nature's most hidden secrets, and who in
spirit reach the heavens and descend into th.e abysses, should remember what
they are. These great objects might only dazzle them. In order to attain such
things, the mind must go out of itself, but it can do so only at the cost of its own
dissipation.
Men were not born to become astronomers or chemists, spending their whole
life hanging onto a telescope or attached to a burner, and then drawing useless
conclusions from their painstaking observations. I grant that an astronomer first
discovered the regions, seas, and mountains on the moon, first noticed the spots
on the sun and calculated their precise motion. I grant that a chemist finally
discovered the secret of stabilizing mercury and fabricated the alkahest by means
of which Van Helmont boasted he could dissolve all bodies. Have they become
any wiser or happier for having done so? They have made a name for themselves
in the world, perhaps, but let them beware lest this reputation only extend their
servitude.
Astronomy, chemistry, and practically all the other sciences might be regarded
as pastimes of an upright man; but men should not let themselves be deceived by
their glamour, nor should they prefer them to the science of man. For although
the imagination attaches a certain idea of grandeur to astronomy because this
science considers great and magnificent objects, which are infinitely above everything around us, still the mind need not blindly reverence this idea. Rather it
should become its judge and master, and should strip it of this sensible display
that so impresses reason. The mind must judge all things according to its inner
lights, paying no heed to the false and confused testimony of its senses and
imagination; and if it examines all the human sciences in the pure light of the

Preface

xli

truth that illumines it, then assuredly it will scorn practically all ofthem and will
have a higher regard for the science that teaches us what we are than for all the
others combined.
I prefer, then, to exhort those who have any love for truth to judge the subject
of this work according to the responses they receive from the sovereign Master of
all men after they have consulted Him through some serious reflection; (I prefer
this rather than] prejudicing them with some great discourse that they might take
for either mere commonplaces or for the vain ornamentation of a preface. But
should they judge this subject to be worthy of their serious attention, I again beg
them not 10 judge the things contained in this work according 10 how well they are
expressed, but always to enter into themselves in order to hear the decisions they
must follow and according to which they must judge.
Convinced as we are" that men cannot teach one another and that those who
listen 10 us do not Jearn the truths we address 10 their em unless He who has
revealed them 10 us at the same time reveals them to their mind as well, we still
find ourselves obliged to warn those who wish to understand this work not to
believe us at our word through inclination, nor to oppose what we say through
aversion. For while I do not think I have proposed anything new without having
been convinced of it after serious thought, still it would be very regrettable for
others to content themselves with merely remembering and believing my views
without really knowing them, or for them to fall into error either for misunderstanding my views or because I was mistaken.
The pride of certain scholars who would have us believe them on their word
seems to us intolerable. They complain should we consult God after they have
spoken, because they themselves have not consulted Him; they become annoyed
as soon as any of their views are opposed, and they really want the darkness of
their imagination to be given preference over the pure light of truth that illumines
the mind.
This is far from our sort of behavior, thanks be to God, although it is often
attributed to us. We consider previous authors as butprompters.b We would be
very unjust and vain, then, to wish to be listened to like doctors and masters. We
ask that the facts and experiences we relate be believed (for these things are not
learned by applying the mind to sovereign and universal Reason); but as for all
the truths that are discovered within the true ideas of things (which the eternal
Truth represents 10 us in the most secret recesses of our reason), we expressly
warn that our opinions about them should not be taken as fmal, for we take it to
""Nolite pUIIII'e quemquam bomillem aliquid di!Cere all bomille. Admonere possumus per
11011 sic incus qui doccal, inanis Iii strepiiUsnoster." Aug. on Sc. Jobu (ad
Panbos. 3. 13).
'' Audilus per me f.:IUI, intellec:lus per quem? Dixie aliquis ol ad cor -wellrWJl, sed non eiDII videlis.
Si illllellexiscis, fratres, dictum esc ol cordi -wescro. Munus Dei esc inll:lliaencia." Aug. Trat:t. 40 on
Sl. Jobn.
<"Molfikurs. The wonlttaDslales Ambrosius Viccor's lftOIIitor, as ~ 10 mtJgister. ceacber
or master.-Tnns. >
strepitum voc:isiiOSinle; si

xlii

Preface

be no small crime to liken oneself to God by dominating other minds in this
way.•
The main reason why I wish those who read this book to do so as carefully as
they can is that I wish to be taken to task for the enors that I may have committed
in it, for I do not fancy myself to be infallible. We have such a close tie with our
body and depend on it so much that we do well to be apprehensive about not
always having distinguished the cacophony with which the body fills the imagination from the pure voice of the truth that speaks to the mind.
If only God spoke to us, and if we judged only according to what we heard, we
could perhaps avail ourselves of the words of Christ, b ''I judge according to what
I hear and my judgment is just and true." But we have a body which speaks
louder than God Himself, and this body never tells the truth; we have self-love
that corrupts the words of Him who always tells the truth; and we have pride that
inspires the audacity to judge without waiting for the replies of Truth, according
to which alone we should judge. For the main cause of our enors is that our
judgments cover more things than fall under the clear perception of our mind.
Therefore, I entreat those to whom God will show my enors to correct me in
order that this work that I present as a tentative undertaking, and whose subject
matter is most worthy of men's attention, might gradually be perfected.
At first, I undertook this work only for the purpose of my own instruction, in
order to learn to think well, and to set out clearly what I did think; but as certain
people thought that it would be worthwhile to publish it, I submitted to their
arguments all the more voluntarily as one of their main arguments agreed with
the desire I had to help myself. The real way, they said, of fully instructing
yourself in any matter is to propose your opinions on the matter to competent
people. This arouses the interest of both of you; sometimes they have other views
and discover other truths than yours, and they sometimes put forth certain
discoveries that you have neglected through laziness, or that you have given up
through lack of strength and courage.
With this view toward my own advantage as well as that of others, I chanced
becoming an author; but lest my hopes be entirely in vain, I give this counsel:
that you should not immediately lose heart should you find things that upset the
ordinary views you have held your whole life or that you find generally accepted
by all men down through the ages. These are the most general enors that I
especially try to overthrow. If men were fully enlightened, universal approbation
would be an argument, but just the opposite is the case. Be advised, then, once
and for all, that only Reason should stand in judgment on all human opinions not
related to faith (in which God alone instructs us in an entirely different way from
that in which He reveals natural things to us). Let us enter into ourselves and
draw near the light that constantly shines there in order that our reason might be
•See S1. Aupllille's~ lfllJBistro [14j. "Noli puwe 1e iJIIIIIIl cue luccm." AuJ. Ertal'ratioru (On
Psalm 2S par. II).
"Non a me lumen exilllens, sed lumen non panic:ipans nisi IN TE." Dr •'l'rbis Domini. ser. 8.
bSic:UI IUdio sic judico, &: judicium meum jusiUm esl, quia non quaero volunllllem meam." John
5:30.

Preface

xliii

more illumined. Let us carefully avoid all sensations that are too lively, as well as
the emotions of the soul that exhaust the capacity of our wealt intelligence. For
the slightest sound or the least flash of light sometimes dissipates the mind's
perception so that, although it is not absolutely necessary to do so, it is good to
avoid all these things. And if in striving to do these things we are unable to resist
the prejudices of our youth or the continuous impressions made on our imagination by the body, recoune to prayer is necessary in order to receive what we
ounelves cannot provide;• and in any case we must constantly resist our senses,
for this must be the continuous occupation of those who, following Saint Augustine, love the truth a great deal. "Nullomodo resistitur corporis sensibus;
QUAE NOBIS SACRATISSIMA DISCIPLINA EST, si per eos infficitis plagis VUIDCri·
busque blandimur." Ad Nebridium. Ep. 7. How this work is divilled up will be
explained in the fOMnh chapter.

Ul

""Qui hoc videre aon palell, orel A lpiUI polK maeiiUr,IIIIC Ill hollliaum clispln.lcnm pul•l,
quod nonle1i1lep1, sed Ill Dcum lllva~m. u1 quod non valel, valel." Ep. liZ. h. IZ.
"SupleKque illiqui lumea mntiuc:cendiunelllbl, 111 inlellipl." Co•flrrup.f•ntlmn. c:h. 33(33).

Foreword to This Last Edition

I feel that I should advise the reader that of all the editions of The Search after
Truth produced in Paris and elsewhere, this is the most precise and the most
complete. For beside the fact that I had use of the preceding edition, which itself
was beuer than its predecessors, I have also added several elucidations on
passages I thought had need of them. Since in the Sixteenth Elucidation I have
advanced a view contrary to Descartes's on subtle matter, I felt I had to explaiD
this view at greater length because it seemed clear to me that it unraveled a great
many difficulties encountered in explaining the most general effects of nature. I
illustrate this with several examples in what I have added to the Sixteenth Elucidation. I have also added to the end of this work a kind of condensation of optics
because it would have been too long as an Elucidation and would have interrupted the continuity. I caution that in order to conceive clearly what I say about
the enors of vision, those who do not know how the eyes are constructed or how
they function in seeing objects should read this last Elucidation either before or at
the same time that they read what I say about the enors of vision in the first book.
Perhaps even those who have studied optics willleam enough from it to compensate for their trouble in reading it.
Since my other works are closely related to The Search after Truth, there
would be no point in making further additions to it, for I hope that those who
carefully read my other writings that I have cited in the margin for this purpose
will find in them all the elucidations they might desire and even many truths of
the utmost importaiK:e. It is impossible both to say everything and elucidate
everything at the same time, for truths have too many connections among them;
as a result, by dint of our desire to clarify, we confuse everything. You will
still find certain obscurities and equivocations in this work, then, either through
my fault or through your own; but your attentiveness, your equity, and the
power you have of suspending your judgment until clarity appears can set all
things straight, for the true is conceived clearly, while the false is absolutely
incomprehensible.
Since several different editions of my books have been published, most of
which are imperfect and in need of correction, and on the basis of which,
xlv

xlvi

Foreword to This Last Edition

nonetheless, translations into foreign languages have been made, I feel I must
give notice that, of all which have come to my attention, the most accurate in
tenns of meaning (for I am not speaking about mistakes that are not troublesome
and that the reader might correct, such as punctuation, spelling, and the like) are:
The Conversations chretiennes, Paris edition of 1702. The Traite de Ia nature et
de Ia grace, the last Rotterdam edition, published this year. The Traite de morale
printed in Lyon in 1707. The Meditations Chretiennes, also printed in Lyon in
1707. The Reponses a M. Arnauld, Paris, 1709. The Entretiens sur Ia
metaphysique &. surla religion, Paris, 1711. The Traiti de /'amour de Dieu, and
the sequel, Lyon, 1707. I have listed these works in the order in which they were
written, so that those who wish to read and to judge them might follow this order
and explain by means of the later works what they may have found obscure in the
earlier ones.
All these works are to be found at: Michael David, Quai des Augustins,
Providence.

a Ia

BOOK ONE: THE SENSES
Chapter One

+
I. The nature and properties ofthe understanding. II. The nature and properties
of the will, and what freedom is.
Error is the cause of men's misery; it is the sinister principle that has produced
the evil in the world; it generates and maintains in our soul all the evils that afflict
us, and we may hope fur sound and genuine happiness only by seriously laboring
to avoid it.
Sacred Scripture teaches us that men are miserable only because they are
sinners and criminals, and they would be neither if they had not enslaved themselves to sin by consenting to enor.
Hit is ttue, then, that enor is the origin of men's misery, it is fining that men
make an effort to deliver themselves from it. Certainly their effort will by no
means be useless and without recompense, even though it might not have the
complete resuh they may desire. If men do DOt become infallible, they wiD err
much less; and if they do not deliver themselves entirely from their ills, they will
at least avoid some of them. Complete felicity must not be hoped for in this life,
because on earth we must not lay claim to infallibility. But we must always labor
to avoid enor, siDce we always desire to be delivered from our miseries. In a
word, as we eagerly desire happiness without hoping for it, we must strive for
infallibility without laying claim to it.
It should not be imagined that there is much to be endured in the search after
truth. All that is required is to become attentive to the clear ideas that each of us
finds in himself and to follow precisely the several rules that we shall give later
on.• Precision of mind has almost nothing irksome about it; it is not at all a
servitude as the imagination represents it, and if at first we fmd it somewhal
difficult, we soon obtain results that amply reward our pains, for ultimately it
alone produces light and discloses the truth to us.
But without pausing further to prepare the mind of the reader, of whom it is
much more appropriate to believe that he is sufficiently inclined by himself to the
search after truth, let us examine the causes and the nature of our enors; and

•at. 6 [pc. 2. cb.

lJ.

2

Nicolas Malebranche

since the method that examines things by considering them in their birth and
origin is more orderly and illuminating, and makes them known more thoroughly
than any other, let us try to put it into practice here.

I. The nature and properties of tile understanding.
Being neither material nor extended, the mind of man is undoubtedly a simple,
indivisible substance without composition of parts; but nonetheless, it is customary to distinguish two faculties in it, to wit, the 11nderstanding and the will, which
first need to be explained so that we can attach a precise notion to these two
words, for it seems that our notions or ideas of these two faculties are neither
clear nor distinct enough.
But because these ideas are quite abstract and do not fall within the scope of
the imagination, it seems appropriate to express them by comparison with the
properties that belong to matter. These properties, being more easily imagined,
will make the notions properly attached to the two words understanding and will
more distinct and even more familiar. It should be noted only that these comparisons between mind and matter are not entirely appropriate, and that I compare
them only in order to make the mind more attentive, and, as it were, to illustrate
my meaning to others.
Maner or extension contains two properties or faculties. The first faculty is
that of receiving different figures, the second, the capacity for being moved. The
mind of man likewise contains two faculties; the first, which is the understanding, is that of receiving various ideas. that is, of perceiving various things; the
second, which is the will, is that of receiving inclinations, or of willing different
things. We shall first of all explain the analogies found between the first of the
two faculties belonging to matter, and the first of those that belong to the mind.
Extension can receive two kinds of figure. Some are external only, like the
roundness of a piece of wax; others are internal, and characterize all the panicles
of which the wax is composed, for all the particles that make up a piece of wax
undoubtedly have figures quite different from those that make up a piece of iron.
Figure that is external, then, I call simply figure, and I call configuration that
figure which is internal and which is necessary to all the parts of the wax in order
for it to be what it is.
We can likewise say that the soul's perceptions of ideas are of two kinds. The
fust, which are called pure perceptions, are, as it were, superficial to the soul:
they do not make an impression on it and do not sensibly modify it. The second.
which are called sensible, make a more or less vivid impression on it. Such are
pleasure and pain, light and colors, tastes, odors, and so on. For it will be seen
later on that sensations are nothing but modes of the mind [manieres d' itre de
/'esprit], and it is for this reason that I call them modifications of the mind.
Inclinations of the soul might also be called modifications of the soul. For
since it is certain that the inclination of the will is a mode of the soul [maniere
d'etre de l'ame], it can be called a modification of the soul, just as motion in
bodies being a mode of those bodies, we might say that motion is a modification
of matter. Nevertheless, I do not call inclinations of the will or motion in matter

The Search after Truth

3

modifications, because these inclinations and instances of motion are ordinarily
related to something external, for inclinations are related to the good, and motion
is related to some foreign body. But the figures and configurations of bodies and
the sensations of the soul have no necessary relation to anything external. For just
as a figure is round when all the exterior parts of a body are equally distant from
one of its parts called its center, independently of any external body, so all the
sensations of which we are capable could subsist without there being any object
outside us. Their being contains no necessary relation to the bodies that seem to
cause them (as will be proved elsewhere), and they are nothing but the soul
modified in this or that fashion; consequently, they are indeed modifications of
the soul. Let me therefore so name them in order to clarify matters.
The first and principal agreement found between the faculty that matter has of
receiving different figures and configurations and that which the soul has of
receiving different ideas and modifications is that just as the faculty of receiving
different figures and configurations in bodies is entirely passive and contains no
action, so the faculty of receiving different ideas and modifications in the mind is
entirely passive and contains no action; and I call that faculty, or that capacity
which the soul has of receiving all these things, UNDERSTANDING.
From this it must be concluded that it is the understanding that perceives or
that knows, since only it receives ideas of objects; for it is the same thing for the
soul to perceive an object as to receive the idea that represents the object. Also, it
is the understanding that perceives modifications of the soul, or that senses them,
since I understand by this word understanding that passive faculty of the soul by
means of which it receives all the modifications of which it is capable. For it is
the same thing for the soul to receive the mode called pain as to perceive or sense
pain, since it cannot receive pain in any other way than by perceiving it. From
this it can be concluded that it is the understanding that imagines absent objects
and senses those that are present, and that the senses and the imagination are
nothing but the understanding perceiving objects through the organs of the body,
as we shall explain later on.
But because when we sense pain, or anything else, we ordinarily perceive it
through the mediation of the sense organs, men ordinarily say that the senses do
the perceiving, without knowing distinctly what they mean by the word sense.
They think there is some faculty distinct from the soul that enables it or the body
to sense, for they believe that the sense organs really take part in our perceptions.
They imagine that the body so aids the mind in sensing that if the mind were
separated from the body, it could never sense anything. But they believe all these
things only through prejudice, and because in our present state we never sense
anything without the use of the sense organs, as we shall explain elsewhere at
greater length.
In order to conform to the ordinary way of speaking, we shall say in what
follows that the senses do sense; but by the word sense we mean nothing other
than that passive faculty of the soul we have just spoken about, that is, the
understanding perceiving something upon occasion of the appropriate natural
events taking place in the organs of its body, as will be explained elsewhere.

4

Nicolas Malebranche

The other agreement between the passive faculty of the soul and that of matter
is that as matter is not really altered by any change in its figure-1 mean, for
example, that as wax receives no considerable change for being round or
square-so the mind receives no significant change through the diversity of ideas
that it has, i.e., though in perceiving a square or a circle it receives the idea of a
square or a circle, the mind is not thereby significantly changed.
Furthennore, as matter can be said to receive significant change when a piece
of wax changes into fire and smoke by losing the configuration appropriate to the
parts of wax in order to receive the configuration appropriate to tire and smoke,
so the soul might be said to receive quite significant change when it alters its
modifications and suffers pain after having sensed pleasure. From this it must be
concluded that pure perceptions are to the soul roughly what figures are to
matter, and that configurations are to matter roughly what sensations are to the
soul. But it must not be imagined that the analogy is exact; I propose it only in
order to make the notion of this word understanding perceptible to the senses.
The nature of ideas I shall explain in the third book.

II. The nature and properties of the will, and freedom.
The other faculty of matter is that it is capable of receiving various instances of
motion, whereas the other faculty of the soul is that it is capable of receiving
various inclinations. Let us compare these faculties.
Just as the Author of nature is the universal cause of all motion found in
matter, so is He also the general cause of all natural inclinations found in minds;
and just as all motion proceeds in a straight line [en ligne droite) unless it
encounters particular external causes that influence its course and that by their
opposition alter it so that it proceeds in a curved path, so all the inclinations that
we have from God are right (droites) and could have no other end but the
possession of good and of truth were there not some external cause that directed
the impression of nature toward evil ends. Now it is this external cause that is the
cause of all our evils, and that corrupts all our inclinations.
For a proper understanding of this, it must be realized that there is a very
significant difference between the impression or motion that the Author of nalure
produces in matter, and the impression or impulse [mouvement] toward the good
in general thai the same Author of nature continuously impresses in the mind. For
matter is altogether without action; it has no force to arrest its motion or to direct
it and tum it in one direction rather than another. Its motion, as has just been
said, always proceeds in a straight line; and when it is impeded from continuing
in this way, it describes the greatest possible circular path and consequently most
approximates a straight line, because God impresses its motion on it and controls
its direction. But such is not the case with the will,• which in a sense can be said
to be active, because our soul can direct in various ways the inclination or
impression that God gives it. For although it cannot arrest this impression, it can
in a sense tum it in the direction that pleases it, and thus cause all the disorder
"See lhe EIIICidoliOIU (I).

The Search after Truth

s

found in its inclinations, and all the miseries that are the cenain and necessary
results of sin.
Consequently, I propose to designate by the word WILL, or capacity the soul
has of loving different goods, the impression or natural impulse that carries us
toward general and indeterminate good; and by FREEDOM, I mean nothing else
but the power that the mind has of turning this impression toward objects that
please us so that our natural inclinations are made to settle upon some particular
object, which inclinations were hitheno vaguely and indeterminately directed
toward universal or general good, that is, toward God, who alone is the general
good because He alone contains in Himself all goods.
From this it is easy to see that although natural inclinations are voluntary, they
are still not free with the freedom of indifference of which I speak, which
contains the potential of willing or not willing, or even of willing the contrary of
what our natural inclinations carry us toward. For although it is voluntarily and
freely, or without consttaint, that we love good in general (since we can love
only by the will, and since it is a contradiction that the will should ever be
consttained), we nonetheless do not love it freely in the sense I have just explained, since it is not in the power of our will not to wish to be happy.
But it must be carefully noted that insofar as a mind is thrust toward good in
general, it cannot direct its impulse toward a particular good unless that same
mind, insofar as it is capable of ideas, has knowledge of that particular good. In
plain language, I mean that the will is a blind power, which can proceed only
toward things the understanding represents to it. As a result, the will can direct
both the impression it has for good, and all its natural inclinations in various
ways, only by ordering the understanding to represent to it some panicular
object.• The power our soul has of directing its inclinations therefore necessarily
contains the power of being able to convey the understanding toward the objects
that please it.
I shall clarify by an example what I have just said about the will and freedom.
A person represents some honor to himself as a good that he might hope for; the
will immediately wills this good; that is, the impression toward indeterminate
and universal good that the mind is continuously receiving conveys it toward this
honor. But as this honor is not the universal good, and is not considered as the
universal good by a clear and distinct perception of the mind, for the mind never
sees clearly what is not universal, the impression that we have toward the
universal good is not entirely brought to rest by this particular good. The mind
tends to proceed still further; it does not necessarily and indomitably love this
honor, and it is free with regard to it. Now its freedom consists in the fact thai not
being fully convinced tbal this honor contains all the good it is capable of loving,
it can suspend its judgment and love, and then, as we shall explain in the third
book, by its union with the universal being, or the being that contains all good, it
can think about other things and consequently love other goods. Finally, it can
compare all goods, love them according to order to the extent to which they

6

Nicolas

Mal~branch~

ought to be loved, and relate them all to that which contains all goods and which,
being alone capable of fulfilling our total capacity of loving, is alone worthy of
limiting our love.
It is roughly the same thing with the knowledge of truth as with love of good.
We love knowledge of truth, like enjoyment of good, by a natural impression;
and this impression, like the one that conveys us toward the good, is not
indomitable -only through clarity or through complete and perfect know ledge of
the object is it indomitable; and we are as free in our false judgments as in our
inordinate loves, as will be shown in the next chapter.

BOOK ONE: THE SENSES
Chapter Two

I. Judgments and inferences. II. That they depend on the will. Ill. The use that
should be made of freedom with regard to them. IV. Two general rules for
avoiding e"or and sin. V. Requisite comments on these rules.
I. Judgments and inferences.
It might fairly be concluded from what we have said in the preceding chapter that
the understanding never judges since it does nothing but perceive (or that judgments and inferences on the part of the understanding are but pure perceptions),
that it is the wiD alone that really judges by assenting to, and voluntarily remaining with, what the understanding represents to it, and that thus it alone plunges us
into enor. But these matters must be explained at greater length.
I say, then, that there is no difference on the part of the understanding between
a simple perception, a judgment, and an inference, other than that the understanding by a simple perception perceives a simple thing without any relation
to anything else whatsoever, that in judgments it perceives the relations between
two or more things, and that in inferences it perceives the relations among the
relations of things. Consequently, all the operations• of lhe understanding are
nothing but pure perceptions.
It is only a simple perception when, for example, one perceives twice two or
four. When one judges that twice two is four, or that twice two is not five, the
understanding still does nothing but perceive the relation of equality found between twice two aDd four, or the relation of inequality found between twice two
and five. Thus judgment on the part ofthe understanding is only the perception of
the relation found between two or more things. But inference is the perception of
the relation found, not between two or more things, for this would be a judgment,
but the perception of the relation found between two or more relations of two or
more things. Thus, when I conclude that, four being less than six, twice two,
•HeR lam obliaed ro speak in onlinuy Juguaae. 11 will be &een lillie lppi'OPriale lime lhallhcse
opemlions of lhc undenlandina an: -hina but modif~e•ions produced in lhc soul lhroup the
effic.:y of lhe divine ideas a a resuh of the laws conceminJ lhc union of lhc soul with Sovereign
Reason 111111 wilh its own body.

7

8

Nicolas Malebranche

being equal to four, is consequently less than six, I perceive not only the relation
of inequality between twice two and six, for this would be only a judgment, but
also the relation of inequality between the relation of twice two and four, and the
relation between four and six, which is an inference.
The undentanding, therefore, does nothing but perceive the relations between
ideas, which relations, when they are clear, are expressed by clear ideas; for the
relation of six to three, for example, is equal to two, and is expressed by two.
And only the will judges and reasons, by voluntarily remaining with what the
undentanding represents to it, as has just been said.

II. That judgments and inferences depend on the will.
But nevertheless, when the things we consider are altogether evident, it seems
to us that we no longer consent to them voluntarily. As a result, we are led to
believe that it is not our will but our undentanding that judges them.
In order to recognize our enor, it must be realized that the things we consider
appear entirely evident to us only when the understanding has examined them
from all sides and has examined all the relations necessary to judge them.
Whence it happens that the will, being unable to function without knowledge,
can no longer act on the undentanding, that is, the will cannot further desire that
the understanding represent something new in its object because it has already
considered all aspects related to the question to be decided. It is therefore obliged
to rest with what the understanding has already represented, and to cease activat·
ing it and applying it to useless considerations. This repose is what is properly
called judgment and inference. Thus, this repose or judgment, not being free
when things are completely evident, also seems to us not to be voluntary.
But to the extent that there is something obscure in the subject we are considering, or that we are not entirely certain that we have discovered everything needed
to resolve the question, as almost always happens with those that are difficult and
contain many relations, we are free not to consent, and the will can still order the
undentanding to apply itself to something new. This inclines us to believe that
the judgments we form on these subjects are voluntary.
Nonetheless, most philosophen maintain that these very judgments we form
on obscure things are not voluntary, and they would generally have it that
consent to truth is an action of the understanding, which they call assent, assensus, as opposed to consent to good, which they attribute to the wiU and call
consent, consensus. But here is the source of their distinction and their mistake.
In our present state, we often clearly perceive truths with no reason to doubt
them, and hence the will is not at all indifferent in the consent it gives to these
evident truths, as we have just explained. But it is not the same with goods, of
which we know none without some reason to doubt that we ought to love it. Our
passions and the inclinations we naturally have for sensible pleasures are confused but very strong reasons due to the corruption of our nature. These passions
and inclinations make us cold and indifferent in our love even of God; and thus
we clearly sense our indifference, and are inwardly convinced that we make use
of our freedom when we love God.

The Search after Truth

9

But we do not likewise perceive that we make use of our freedom in consenting to truth, especially when it appears altogether evident to us; and this makes us
believe that consent to truth is not voluntaty. As if it were necessaty that our
actions be indifferent to be voluntary, and as if the blessed did not love God quite
voluntarily, without being diverted by anything whatever, just as we consent to
this evident proposition, that twice two is four, without being diverted from
believing it by anything indicating otherwise.
But in order to clearly distinguish the will's consent to truth from its consent to
goodness, it is necessaty to know the difference between truth and goodness
taken in the ordinaty sense and with reference to us. Thai difference consists in
the fact that goodness concerns and affects us, whereas truth does not; for truth
consists only in the relation between two or more things, whereas goodness
consists in the relation of agreement things have with us. • As a resuk, there is but
one action of the will with regard to truth, which is its assent [acquie.scement] or
consent to the representation of the relation between things; but there are two
with regard to goodness, its assent or consent to the relation of agreement
between the thing and us, and its love or impulse toward that thing, which actions
are quite different, however they might ordinarily be confused. For there is quite
a difference between simply assenting and being conveyed by love to what the
mind represents, since one often assents to things that one avoids and wishes
were nonexistent.
Now if we consider these things closely, we will clearly recognize that it is
always the wiD that assents, not only to things agreeable to it, but to the representation of things; and the reason why the will always assents to the representations
of things thai are completely evident is, as we have already said, that there is in
these things no further relation to be considered that the understanding has not
already perceived. Consequently, it is necessary, as it were, for the will to cease
its agitation and useless self-exhaustion, and for it to assent with full assurance
thai, since there is nothing further toward which it can direct its understanding, it
is not mistaken.
As it is agreed on all hands that rash judgments are sinful, and that all sin is
voluntaty, it must also be agreed that it is therefore the will thai judges by
assenting to the confused, compound perceptions of the understanding. But the
question as to whether the understanding alone judges and reasons at bottom
seems rather useless and merely a verbal question. I say the understanding alone,
for it does have the role in our judgments that I have assigned it, since it is
necessaty to know or to sense before judging and consenting. Furthermore, as the
understanding and the will are but the soul itself, it actually perceives, judges.
reasons, wills, and soon. For reasons that will be seen in what follows, I have
auiped to the word understanding the notion of a passive faculty or a capacity
for receiving ideas.
It must especially be noted thai in our present state we know things only
imperfectly, and that consequently it is absolutely necessaty that we have this
freedom of indifference by which we can refrain from consenting.
AGeome~n do DOl low lhe lnllh. but blowledae

of tbe truth, whall:ver mipt otherwise be said.

10

Nicolas Malebranche

To see the necessity for this, it must be considered that we are led by our
natural inclinations toward truth and goodness, as a result of which, the will,
being led only to things that the mind has some knowledge of, must be led to
what has the appearance of truth and goodness. But because what has the appearance of truth and goodness is not always what it seems, it is obvious that if the
will were not free and if it were infallibly and necessarily led to everything
having the appearance of truth and goodness, it would almost always be deceived. From this we could conclude that the Author of its being was the Author
of its disorders and errors as well.

Ill. The use we ought to make of our freedom in order ne1•er to err.
Freedom is therefore given by God in order that we may refrain from falling
into error, and into all the evils that follow from our errors, by never fully resting
with probabilities, but only with truth, i.e., by constantly applying the mind and
ordering it to continue investigating until everything to be investigated is unraveled and brought to light. For truth is almost never found except with evidence, and evidence consists only in the clear and distinct perception of all the
constituents and relations of the object necessary to support a well-founded
judgment.
The use, therefore, that we should make of our freedom is TO MAKE AS MUCH
usE OF IT AS WE CAN, that is, never to consent to anything until we are forced to
do so, as it were, by the inward reproaches of our reason.
To submit to the false appearances of truth is to enslave oneself against the will
of God; but to submit in good faith to these secret reproaches of our reason that
accompany the refusal to yield to evidence is to obey the voice of eternal truth
that speaks to us inwardly. Here, then, are two rules based on what I have just
said, which of all rules are the most necessary for the speculative sciences and for
morals, and which can be regarded as the foundation of all the sciences of man.

IV. General rules for

a~·oiding

error.

Here is the first, which concerns the sciences. We should never give complete
consent except to propositions which seem so evidently true that we cannot refuse
it of them without feeling an inward pain and the secret reproocMs of reason;
that is, unless we clearly knew that ill use would be made of our freedom if
consent were not willed, or if we willed to extend its power over things no longer
in its power.
The second, which concerns morals, is this. We should ne,·er absolutely love
some good if we can without remorse refuse to love it. From this it follows that
God alone ought to be loved absolutely and intrinsically, for Him alone can we
not abstain from loving without remorse; i.e., provided that He is known through
reason or faith, we cannot abstain from loving Him without clearly knowing that
we are doing wrong.

V. Requisite comments on these two rules.
But it must be noted here that when the things we perceive appear to us quite
probable, we are strongly led to believe them; we even feel pain when we do not

The Search after Truth

II

let ourselves be persuaded by them. Consequently, if we are not wary, we run the
risk of consenting to them and consequently of being mistaken; for it is unlikely
that truth should conform completely to probable opinion. For this reason I have
expressly made it a point in these two rules that nothing should be consented to
until it is clearly seen that we would make ill use of our freedom if we were not to
consent.
Now, while we might feel strongly inclined to consent to probability, yet if we
are careful to note whether we clearly see that we are obliged to consent to it, we
shall undoubtedly find that the answer is no. For if probability is based on our
sense-impressions-probability or verisimilitude ['•rai-semblance) is really a
misnomer-we shall then be very much inclined to yield to it; but no other cause
of this inclination will be discovered than some passion or general affection we
have for what affects the senses, as will be seen in what follows.
If on the other hand probability is due to some conformity with truth, as our
probabilistic bow ledge, in a certain sense, is ordinarily true, then if one reflects
inwardly, one will feel led to do two things: to believe, and to go on investigating. But one will never find himself so persuaded that he clearly believes he is
doing something wrong when he does not give complete consent.
Now, these two iocliDations we have with regard to probabilities are very
sound. For consent can and ought to be given to probabilities insofar as they
indicate truth; but complete consent should not yet be given, as we have set out in
our rule. The unknown aspects must be examined in order to enter fully into the
nature of the thing, to distinguish the true from the false, and then to consent
fully if the evidence obliges us to do so.
It is therefore necessary to become well accustomed to distinguishing truth
from probability by inward self-examination, as I have just explained, because it
is for lack of having attended to self-examination of this sort that we feel affected
in almost the same way by two things so different. In short, it is of the greatest
importance to make good use of our freedom by always refraining from consenting to things and loving them until forced to do so by the powerful voice of the
Author of Nature, which till now I have called the reproaches of our reason and
the remorse of our conscience.
All the duties of spiritual beings, as much for angels as for men, consist chiefly
in this proper usage; and it can be said without fear that if they use their freedom
with care, without becoming slaves of lies and vanity, they are on the road to the
greatest perfection of which they are naturally capable, provided, however, that
their understanding does not remain idle, that they continually take care to urge it
toward new knowledge, and that they make it capable of greater truths by
continual meditations on subjects worthy of its attention.
To perfect the mind, it is not enough to make use of freedom by never
consenting to anything, like those people who glorify knowing nothing and
doubting everything. Nor is it necessary to consent to everything, like certain
others, who fear nothing so much as not knowing something, and pretend to
know everything. Rather, we must make such good use of our understanding by
continual meditations that we can often consent to what it represents to us with no
fear of being mistaken.

BOOK ONE: THE SENSES
Chapter Three

t

I. Replies to some objections. II. Remarks on what was said concerning the
necessity for el·idena.
It is not very difficult to foresee that the practice of the first rule, of which I have
just spoken in the preceding chapter, will not please everyone; and especially
those of false learning, who pretend to know everything, who never know anything, and who like to speak boldly about the most difficult things while clearly
not understanding the easiest.
They will always echo Aristotle, that only in mathematics must complete
certitude be sought, but that morals and physics are sciences in which probability
alone suffices; that Descartes made a great mistake in wishing to treat physics as
geometry, and that for this reason he did not have success with it; that it is
impossible for men to comprehend nature, that its mechanisms and secrets are
impenetrable to the human mind; plus an infinity of other vague and ambiguous
propositions, which they reel off with pomp and magnificence, and which they
support with the authority of a crowd of authors, whose mere names or a couple
of whose passages these people boast of knowing.
I would beseech these gentlemen not to speak further about that of which they
themselves acknowledge they know nothing, and to check the ridiculous impulses of their vanity by ceasing to compose such thick volumes on matters that,
according to their own admission, are unknown to them.
Let these people seriously examine whether it is absolutely necessary either to
fall into error or never to give complete consent except to entirely evident things,
whether truth attends geometry because geometers observe this rule, and whether
the errors into which some have fallen concerning the squaring of the circle, the
duplication of the cube, and certain other very difficult problems do not come
from some rashness or stubbornness that makes them take probability for truth.
Let them also consider from another point of view whether falsity and confusion do not reign in ordinary philosophy because philosophers are satisfied with
probability, which is very easy to find and is so accommodating to their vanity
and interests. Is not an infinite diversity of opinion on the same subjects, and
hence an infinity of errors, to be found almost everywhere? Nonetheless, a very
12

The SelU'ch after Truth

13

great number of disciples let themselves be seduced, and blindly submit to the
authority of these philosophers without even understanding their views.
It is true that some of them after twenty or thirty years of lost time realize they
have learned nothing in their readings, though to say so with sincerity does not
please them. They must first have proved in their own way that nothing can be
known, and only then do they admit their failure, for they then believe they can
do so without being ridiculed for their ignorance.
If we wanted to laugh and amuse ourselves, all we would have to do is ask
them about the progress of their fine learning, especially if they were inclined to
relate in detail all the hardships they have endured to acquire it.
But although this learned and profound ignorance deserves to be scoffed at, it
seems more appropriate to pardon it and to have compassion on those who have
spent so many years in learning nothing but that false proposition so hostile to all
science and truth, that nothing can be known.
Therefore, since the rule I have established is so necessary in the search after
truth, as we have just seen, let no one carp at its promulgation. And let not those
who do not wish to take the trouble to observe it condemn so illustrious an author
as Descartes because he followed it or made every effon to follow it. They would
not condemn him so boldly if they knew him on whom they pass so rash a
judgment, and if they had not read his works as fictions and romances, which are
read for diversion and not meditated upon for instruction. Had they meditated
with this author, they would have found within themselves some notion and
seeds of the truth he teaches, which might develop despite the cumbersome
weight of their false learning.
The Master who teaches us inwardly wills that we listen to Him rather than to
the authority of the greatest philosophers. It pleases Him to instruct us, provided
that we apply ourselves to what He tells us. By meditation and very close
attention we consult Him; and by a cenain inward conviction and those inward
reproaches He makes to those who do not submit, He answers us.
The works of men must be read in such a way that one does not expect to be
instructed by men. He who enlightens the world must be consulted in order that
He may enlighten us along with the rest of the world, and if after we have
consulted Him He does not enlighten us, it will be because we have improperly
consulted Him.
Therefore, whether we read Aristotle, or whether we read Descartes, we
should believe neither one of them immediately. We need only meditate as they
have done, or ought to have done, as attentively as we can, and then we must
obey the voice of our common Master and submit ourselves in good faith to
inward conviction and the impulses felt while meditating.
After this, a judgment for or against the authors may be formed. But after the
principles ofthe philosophies of Descartes and Aristotle have been thus digested,
the one is then rejected, and the other approved, i.e., his method and his most
general principles. Then it can even be guaranteed concerning Aristotle that as
his principles have been of no use for two thousand years, no phenomenon of
nature will ever be explained by them, although his philosophy has been studied

Nicolas Malebranche

14

by the ablest people in almost all parts of the world. It can boldly be said of
Descartes, on the other hand, that he has penetrated into what appears most
hidden to the eyes of men, and that he has shown them a most safe road to the
discovery of all the truths a limited understanding can comprehend.
But without dwelling on the opinion we might have of these and all other
philosophers, let us always consider them as men; and let not the votaries of
Aristotle carp if, after having trod through so many centuries in darltness without
finding ourselves any further ahead than we were before, we should finally wish
to see clearly whar we are doing; or if after having been left to wander like blind
men, we should remember that we have eyes with which to try to guide ourselves.
Let us therefore be fully convinced that this rule, tlrat one must ne1•er gi1•e
complete consent, except to things seen with evidence, is the most necessary of
all the rules in the search after truth; let our mind embrace as true only what
appears to us with the evidence it requires. We must be persuaded of this in order
to undo our prejudices; and it is absolutely necessary, in order to enter into
knowledge of the truth, thai we be entirely delivered of our prejudices, for the
mind absolutely must be purified before it can be enlightened: Sapientia prima
stultitia caruisse.
II. Remarks on wlrat was said concerning tire necessity ofevidence.
Before finishing this chapter, three things must be noted. The first is that I am
not presently discussing matters of faith, which evidence does not accompany as
it does the natural sciences, the reason for which seems to be that we can perceive
things only through the ideas we have of them. But God has given us ideas only
insofar as we need them to find our way in the natural order of things according
to which He has created us. Thus, given that the mysteries of the faith are of a
supernatural order, it should not be astonishing if we have no evidence for them,
since we do not even have any ideas of them. • This is because our souls were
created in virtue of the general decree, by which we have all the notions necessary to us; but the mysteries of faith were established only through the order of
grace, which, according to the common view, is a decree subsequent to the order
of nature.
The mysteries of faith must therefore be distinguished from the things of
nature. We must be equally submissive to faith and evidence; but in matters of
faith, evidence must not be sought before belief, just as in matters of nature, one
must not stop at faith, that is, at the authority of philosophers. In a word, to be
among the Faithful, it is necessary to believe blindly; but to be a philosopher, it is
necessary to see with evidence, for divine authority is infallible, whereas all men
are subject to error.
Undeniably, there are other truths, besides those of faith, concerning which it
would be wrong to ask for incontrovertible demonstrations, such as those regarding the facts of history, and other matters that depend on the will of men. For
"See the Elu<'idations (3).

Th~ S~arch aft~r

Truth

IS

there are two kinds of troths, those that are necessary and those that are contingent. I call those troths necessary that by their nature are immutable, or that have
been fixed by the will of God, which is in no way subject to change. All others
are contingent troths. Mathematics, metaphysics, and even a large part of physics
and morals contain necessary troths. History, grammar, local custom, and several other things that depend on the changing will of men, contain only contingent troths.
I ask, then, for a strict observance of the role just established in our search for
necessary lnlths, the knowledge of which may be called science, but in history,
which covers contingent matters, we must be satisfied with the greatest probability. For the term history can be applied generally to knowledge of languages,
customs, and even the different opinions of philosophers, when they have been
learned only by memory, and without any evidence or cenitude for them.
The second thing that must be noted is that in morals, politics, medicine, and
all the practical sciences, we must be satisfied with probability, not permanently
but temporarily-not because probability satisfies the mind but because the need
to act is urgent, and if one waits to act until entirely assured of success, the
opponunity is often lost. But although we are sometimes forced to act, while
acting we must doubt the success of what we do; and we should try to make such
progress in these sciences that we can act at the appropriate time with greater
cenitude, for this should be the general goal of the study and occupation of all
men who make use of their mind.
The third thing, fmally, is that probabilities need not be utterly despised,
because several probabilities joined together generally can produce as much
conviction as can very clear demonstrations. An infinity of examples of this are
found in physics and morals; accordingly, it is often appropriate to combine a
sufficient number of them for matters that cannot otherwise be demonstrated in
order to find the troth, which it would be impossible to discover in any other
way.
I must here again declare that the law I impose is quite strict; that an infinity of
people will prefer never to reason than to reason under these conditions; that not a
great deal of ground will be covered with such inconvenient circumspection. But
it must also be granted that, while following it, we shall tread securely, and that
until now we have been obliged to retrace our steps for having progressed too
quickly. A p-eat number of people will even agree witb me that in thirty yean
Descartes discovered more tnJths than all other philosophers because he recognized this law; if more people had philosophized as he did, we could eventually
know the greater part of what is necessary for living happily, insofar as we are
able on an earth that God has cursed.

BOOK ONE: THE SENSES
Chapter Four

t

I. The occasional causes of e"or; that there are five principal ones. II. A
general plan of the whole work. and a specific plan of the first book.
We have just seen that we fall into enor only because we do not use our freedom
as we should, that we err for failure to regulate the eagerness and ardor of the will
for the mere appearances of truth, and that enor consists only in consent of the
will when extended beyond the perception of the understanding, because we
would not err at all were we to judge only about what we perceive.
I. The occasional causes of error: that there are ji\·e principal ones.

Although, properly speaking, only the misuse of freedom is the cause of enor,
it can nevertheless be said that we have many faculties that are causes of our
enors -not real causes, but causes that might be called occasional. All our ways
of perceiving are to us so many occasions of enor, for since our false judgments
include two things, the consent of the will and the perception of the understanding, it is quite clear that each of the ways in which we perceive can provide us
with an occasion for enor, since they can lead us to precipitous consent.
But because the mind must first be made aware of its weaknesses and aberrations in order to acquire the proper desire to deliver itself from them and more
easily discard its prejudices, we shall try to give a precise division of the ways it
perceives, which will be the headings under which the different enors to which
we are subject will be grouped in what follows.
The soul can perceive things in three ways, by the pure understanding, by the
imagination, and by the senses.
By the pure understanding it perceives spiritual things, universals, common
notions, the ideas of perfection and of an infinitely perfect being, and generally
all its thoughts when it knows them through self-reflection. By the pure understanding it even perceives material things, extension with its properties; for
only pure understanding can perceive a perfect circle, a perfect square, a figure
of a thousand sides, and similar things. These sorts of perceptions are called pure

16

The Search after Truth

17

intellections, or pure perr:eptions, because the mind need not form corporeal
images in the brain to represent all these things.
Through the imagination the soul perceives only material beings, making them
present when in fact they are absent, by forming images of them, as it were, in
the brain. It is in this way that we imagine all sorts of figures: a cin:le, a triangle,
a face, a horse, cities, and the countJyside, whether we have already seen them or
not. These sorts of perceptions might be called imaginations, because the soul
represents these objects to itself by forming images of them in the brain; and,
since images of spiritual things cannot be formed, it follows that the soul cannot
imagine them (and this should be noted well).
Finally the soul perceives by the senses only sensible and gross objects, either
when, being present, they make an impression on the external organs of its body
and this impression is communicated to the brain or, when in their absence, the
flow of animal spirits makes a similar impression in the brain. In this way the
soul sees plains and rocks before its eyes, knows the hardness of iron, the point
of a sword, and similar things; and these sorts of perceptions are called feelings
[sentimens] or sensations [sensations].
The soul, then, perceives only in these three ways, which can easily be seen if
it be considered that the things we perceive are either spiritual or material. If they
are spiritual, only the pure understanding can know them. But if they are material, they will be either present or absent. If they are absent, the soul ordinarily
represents them to itself only through the imagination; but if they are present, the
soul can perceive them through the impressions they make on its senses. Thus
our souls perceive things in only three ways, by the pure understanding, by the
imagination, and by the senses.
These three faculties, then, can be considered as reliable headings under which
men's enors and the causes of these enors might be grouped, and thus we can
avoid the confusion into which their great number would inevitably plunge us
were we to speak of them without ordering them.
But our inclinations and passions also act very strongly on us; they dazzle our
mind with false lights, cover it, and fill it with shadows. Our inclinations and
passions involve us in an infinite number of enors when we follow this false and
deceptive light they produce in us. They must be considered, then, along with the
three faculties of the mind, as sources of our aberrations and enors; and the enors
attributable to the passions and inclinations must be added to those ofthe senses,
the imagination, and the pure understanding. Thus, all the enors of men and their
causes can be grouped under five headings, and they will be treated according to
this classification.
II. General plan of the whole work.
First, the errors of the senses will be discussed; Second, the errors of the
imagination; third, the errors of the pure understanding; fourth, the errors ofthe
inclinations; fifth, the errors of the passions. Finally, after having tried to relieve

18

Nicolas Malebranche

the mind of the enors to which it is subject, we shall give a g~neral method for
conducting the search after truth.

Ill. The specific plan of the first book.
We are going to begin by explaining the enors of our senses, or rather the
enors into which we fall by not using our senses in the way we should; and we
shall deal not so much with particular enors, which are almost infmite, as with
the general cause of these enors and the things we take to be necessary for
knowing the nature of the human mind.

BOOK ONE: THE SENSES
Chapter Five

The senses. I. Two ways of explaining how our senses are corrupted by sin.
II. That it is not our senses, but our freedom tlrat is the real cause of our errors.
Ill. A rule for avoiding error in tire use of our senses.
When we carefully consider man's senses and passions, we find them to be so
well suited to the end for which they are given us that we cannot agree with those
who say that they are entirely corrupted by Original Sin. But in order to ascertain
whether our disagreement with them is correct, we need to explain how we might
conceive of the order found in the faculties and passions of our first father in his
original state, as well as the changes and disorders that befell him after his sin.
TIIese matters can be conceived in two ways; here is the first.

I. Two ways of explaining the corruption of the senses by sin.
It seems to be a common notion that for things to be well ordered, the soul
should feel pleasure in proportion to the amount of good it enjoys. Pleasure is a
natural instinct, or, to speak more clearly, an impression from God Himself
directing us toward some good, which impression must be proportionately
stronger as the good is greater. According to this principle, it seems that as he
was created before his sin, our first father undoubtedly found no more pleasure in
the most concrete goods than in others. Since God had created him that he might
love Him, and since God was his true good, we can therefore say that God made
Himself pleasing to him, that He brought him to His love by a sensation of
pleasure, and that, counterbalancing the greatest sensuous pleasures, He gave
him interior satisfaction in his duty, which men no longer experience after
Original Sin without some special grace.
Nevertheless, as he had a body that God willed he should preserve, and which
he regarded as part of himself, God must also have made him experience pleasures through the senses like those we enjoy in the use of things conducive to the
preservation of life.
We do not presume to decide whether before his fall the first man was able to
avoid having agreeable or disagreeable sensations when the principal part of his
brain was set in motion by the use of sensible things. Perhaps he had this power
19

20

Nicolas Malebranche

over himself due to his submission to God, though the contrary seems more
probable. For although Adam might have been able to arrest the agitation in the
spirits and blood, as well as disturbances in the brain that objects aroused in him
(because his body, being in order, was necessarily dominated by his mind),
nonetheless it is unlikely that he could have avoided having sensations of objects
as long as he had not arrested the motion they produced in the part of his body to
which the soul is immediately joined. For the union of soul and body, which
consists primarily of a mutual relation between sensations and motion in the
organs, would seem to be more arbitrary than natural had Adam been able to
sense nothing when the main part of his body received some impression from the
bodies surrounding him. Nevertheless, I shall opt for neither of these views.
The first man, then, experienced pleasure in what improved his body, just as
he sensed pleasure in what improved his soul; and because he was in a perfect
state, he found that of the soul much greater than that of the body. Thus it was
infinitely easier for him to preserve his righteousness than it is for us to do so
without the grace of Jesus Christ, since without it, we no longer find pleasure in
our duty. Yet he unfortunately let himself be seduced, and he lost this righteousness through his disobedience.• Thus, the main change he underwent, which
produced all the disorder of the senses and passions, was that, as a just punishment, God withdrew from him and no longer willed to be his good, or rather no
longer made him feel the pleasure that indicated that He was his good. As a
result, the sensible pleasures, which lead only to the goods of the body, were left
isolated, no longer counterbalanced by those that heretofore had led him to his
true good. The close union he had with God was extremely weakened, and that
with his body was greatly increased. Being dominant, sensible pleasure corrupted his heart by attaching it to all sensible objects; and the corruption of his
heart darkened his mind by leading it away from the light that had illumined it,
and by leading him to judge things only according to the relations they might
have to his body.
But at bottom, the change cannot be said to have been very great on the side of
the senses. For just as when I have removed one of two balanced weights the
other immediately tips the scale to its side without being changed or increased, so
after the Fall sensible pleasures lowered the soul toward sensible things because
there were lacking those inner delights that before the Fall counterbalanced our
inclination for the good of the body-but, again, without so great a change on
the part of the senses as is commonly supposed.
The second explanation, which seems to me the true one. Here is the second
way of explaining the disorders due to sin, which is certainly more reasonable
than the one we have just discussed. It is quite different because its principle is
different; but yet these two ways are in perfect agreement as far as the senses are
concerned.
Being composed of a mind and a body, we have two kinds of goods to look
for. those ofthe mind and those of the body. We also have two ways of recognizing a thing to be good or bad: by employing the mind alone, or by employing the
"SI. Gn:gory Hom. on IM Go.rpe/.r 39.

Th~ S~tuclt aft~r

Truth

21

mind in conjunction with the body. We can recognize our good through clear and
evident knowledge; we can also recognize it through cohfused sensation. I realize
through reason that justice ought to be esteemed; I also know through the sense of
taste that a given tiuit is good. The beauty of justice is not sensed; the goodness
of tiuit is not known. The goods of the body do not deserve the attention of a
mind, which God made only for Him. The mind, then, must recognize this son
of good without examination, and by the quick and indubitable proof of sensation. Stones do not provide nourishment; the proof of this is convincing, and taste
alone produces universal agreement.
I grant, then, that pleasure and pain are the natural and indubitable characteristics of good and evil: but (I) this holds only for those things that, being neither
good nor bad by themselves, cannot also be recognized as such through clear and
evident knowledge; and (2) this holds only for those things that, being below the
mind, can neither reward nor punish it; fmally, (3) this holds only for those
things that do not merit the mind's attention, and since God does not will that we
auend to them, He leads us to these things only by instinct, i.e., by pleasant or
unpleasant sensations.
But God-who alone is the true good of the mind, who alone is above it, who
alone can reward it in a thousand different ways. who alone is worthy of its
auention, and who has no fear that those who know Him will not find Him
worthy of esteem-He is not content to be loved with a blind and instinctive
love; He wishes to be loved with an enlightened Jove, with a Jove through choice.
If the mind saw in bodies only what is really in them, without being aware of
what is not in them, it would neither love objects nor make use of them without
great pain; thus it is necessary, as it were, that objects should appear to be
pleasant by producing sensations they themselves lack. The same is not true of
God. One has only to see Him as He is to be brought to love Him, and He need
not avail Himself of the instinct of pleasure as a kind of strategem to attract our
love without deserving it.
This being so, Adam cannot be said to have been brought to love of God and to
his duty by a prevenient pleasure,• because his knowledge of God, like that of
his good, and the joy he unceasingly felt as a necessary result of the perception of
his happiness in being united to God could have sufficed to attract him to his duty
and to make him act more meritoriously than if he had been determined, as it
were, by some prevenient pleasure. Thus he was fully free. And it is in this state
perhaps that Sacred Scripture would have represented him to us with the words:
"God made man from the beginning, and having given him His commandments,
left him to himself, ••b that is, without determining him by the enjoyment of some
prevenient pleasure, but by keeping him drawn to Him through the clear perception of his good and duty. But to the shame of free will and to the glory of God
alone, experience has revealed the weakness that Adam was capable of even in so
ordered and happy a state as was his before his sin.
"See the E/Ut:idalior&S [4).

""Deus ab initio conllituit hominem &r: reliquit ilium in manu consilii sui, adjccit mandata It
pncc:cpta sua. &c." Ecc:l. 15:14.

22

Nicolas

Malebranc~

But Adam cannot be said to have been led to seeking out and using sensible
things through exact knowledge of the relation they might have had to his body.
For in the final analysis, had it been necessary for him to examine the configurations of the parts of some fruit, then those of the parts of his body, and then the
resultant relation between them, in order to judge whether, with the present
temperature of his blood and the thousand other dispositions of his body, the fruit
was nourishing, then clearly things unworthy of its attention would have
exhausted his mind's capacity; to do so would have even been useless enough,
because he would not have preserved himself for long by this means alone.
Given, then, that Adam's mind was not infinite, no fault will be found in our
saying that he did not know all the properties of the bodies surrounding him,
since it is certain that these properties are infinite. And if what is undeniable be
agreed, that his mind was not made for examining the motion and configurations
of matter but to be continually applied to God, we shall not be found amiss in
claiming that it would have been a disorder or an irregularity in a time when
everything was necessarily perfectly ordered if he had been obliged to tum his
mind from the contemplation of the perfections of his true good in order to
examine the nature of some fruit with regard to its nutritive value.
Adam, then, had the same senses as we do, by which he was advised of what
was necessary for his body, but without being distracted from God. Like us, he
sensed pleasures and even pains, or involuntary and prevenient displeasure. But
these pleasures and pains could neither enslave him nor make him unhappy, as
they do us, because as absolute master of the motions generated in his body, he
stopped them, if he so wished, as soon as they had performed their advisory
function (and no doubt he always wished to do so with regard to pain). Happy
would he, and we, have been had he done the same thing with regard to pleasure,
and had he not voluntarily turned himself away from the presence of his God by
allowing his mind's capacity to be exhausted by the beauty and anticipated
sweetness of the forbidden fruit, or perhaps by the rash joy excited in his soul by
the contemplation of his natural perfections, or finally by his natural fondness for
his wife and the inordinate fear of displeasing her, all of which apparently
contributed to his disobedience.
But after he had sinned, the pleasures that had served only to advise him
respectfully, and the pains that, without disturbing his felicity served only to
inform him that he might lose it and become unhappy. no longer had the same
significance for him. His senses and passions revolted against him; they no
longer obeyed his orders, and they enslaved him, as they do us, to sensible
things.
Thus, not the senses and passions themselves were generated by sin, but rather
only their power of victimizing sinners; and this power is not so much a disorder
on the part of the senses as on the part of the mind and will of men, who, having
lost the power they had over their bodies, and no longer being so closely united to
God, no longer receive from Him that enlightenment and strength by means of
which they had preserved their freedom and happiness.

The Search after Truth

23

Incidentally, we must conclude from these two ways of explaining the disorders of sin that two things are needed to restore us to order. •
First, the weight that burdens us and inclines us toward sensible goods must be
cast off by continually avoiding pleasures, by mortifying the sensitivity of our
senses through penances, and by circumcision of the heart.
Second, we must aslt God for the weight of his grace and for that pre,•enient
delightb which Jesus Christ has individually merited for us and without which the
weight that inclines us toward sensible goods will always, however we might
struggle, be a burden and, however light it might be, will inevitably lead us into
sin and disorder.
These two things are absolutely necessary to restore us to, and preserve us in,
our duty. As can be seen, reason is in perfect agreement with the gospel-both
teach us that privation, self-denial, and the diminution of the influence of sin are
necessary preparations in order that the influence of God's grace should rectify
our situation and unite us with Him.
But though we have in our present state an obligation to struggle continually
against our senses, it should not be concluded from this that the senses are
altogether corrupted and disordered. For if it be considered that they are given us
for the preservation of our body, it will be seen that they fulfill their purpose
perfectly well, and that they conduct us in so faithful and appropriate a fashion to
their end that it seems wrong to accuse them of being corrupt and disordered.
Through pleasure and pain, through agreeable and disagreeable tastes, and by
other sensations, they so quickly advise the soul of what ought and ought not to
be done for the preservation of life that it cannot correctly be maintained that this
order and precision are a consequence of sin.

II. It is not our senses, but the improper use of our freedom that
plunges us into e"or.
Our senses, then, are not as corrupt as might be imagined; rather, it is the most
inward pan of our soul, our freedom, that has been corrupted. We are deceived
not by our senses but by our will, through its precipitous judgments. When, for
example, we see light, it is quite certain that we see light; when we feel heat, we
are not mistaken in believing that we feel heat, whether before or after the fall.
But we are mistaken in judging that the heat we feel is outside the soul that feels
it, as we shall explain in the following.
The senses, then, would not plunge us into error if we used our freedom
properly and if we did not rely on their reports in order to judge matten too
precipitously. But because it is very difficult to avoid this, and because we are
almost forced into it due to the close union between our body and soul, I shall
indicate the way we ought to use them in order to avoid falling into error.
•Remedy for the disorder in the world caused by Ori1iDal Sin, and lhe foundalion of Christian
morality.
"See !he ElucidatiOIU (5).

24

Nicolas Malebranche
Ill. A rule for avoiding error in the employment of the senses.

We must follow this rule exactly. Ne1·er judge by means of the senses as to
what things are in themse/l•es, but only as to the relation they ha1·e to the body
because, in fact, the senses were given to us, not to know the truth of things in
themselves, but only for the preservation of our body.
But in order to make a clean breast ofthe natural inclination toward following
the senses in the search after truth, we shall in the following chapters deduce the
chief and most general errors into which they plunge us, and then the truth of
what has just been claimed will be clearly recognized.

BOOK ONE: THE SENSES
Chapter Six

I. The errors of vision with regard to absolute extension [itendue en soi).
II. The consequence of these errors with regard to invisible objects. Ill. The
errors of vision with regard to relative extension [itendue considirie par rapport).
Of all the senses, vision is the first, the most noble, the most extensive; accordingly, if they wen: given to us for discovering truth, it would have a gn:ater role
by itself than all the othen combined. Thus, in order to set ounelves aright and to
bring ounelves to a general distrust of all the senses, it will suffice to overthrow
the authority our eyes have over our reason.
We shall make it clear, then, (I) that we should n:ly on the testimony of sighl
not in order to judge concemiDg the truth of things iD themselves but only to
discover the relation they have to the pn:servation of the body; (2) that our eyes
generally deceive us in everythiDg they n:pn:sent to us: in the size of bodies, iD
their figure and motion, and iD light and colors, which an: the only things we see;
(3) that all these things an: not as they appear to us, that everyone em regarding
them, and that as a n:sult we an: plunged into an iDfmite number of other erron.
We begin with extension; the following an: the arguments that lead us to believe
that our eyes never make us see it just as it is.

I. The errors of vision with regard to absolute extension.
With magnifying glasses, we can easily see animals much smaller than an
almost invisible grain of sand;• we have seen some even a thousand times
smaller. These living atoms walk as well as other animals. Thus, they have legs
and feet, and bones in their legs to support them (or rather on their legs, for the
skin of an insect is its skeleton). They have muscles to move them, as well as
tendons and an infinity of fibers in each muscle; fmally, they have blood or very
subtle and delicate animal spirits to fill or move these muscles in succession.
Without this, it is impossible to conceive how they should live, nourish themselves, and move their tiny bodies from place to place according to the various
0J011nttll des Sfa'IIQIIs, 12 Nov. 1668.

26

Nicolas Malebranche

impressions of objects-or rather, it is impossible for those who have spent their
whole lives in anatomy and the study of nature to imagine the number, diversity,
and delicacy of all the parts of which these little bodies are necessarily composed
in order to live and carry out the things we see them do.
The imagination boggles at the sight of such an extreme smallness. It can
neither arrive at nor grasp these parts that have no handle for it, and although
reason convinces us of what has just been said, the senses and the imagination
oppose it and often make us doubt it.
Our vision is very limited; but it must not limit its object. The idea it gives us
of extension has very nanuw limits; but it does not follow from this that extension is so limited. Undoubtedly, it is in a sense unlimited; and this small section
of matter, which is hidden from our eyes, can contain an entire world in which
would be found as many things, though proportionately smaller, as are found in
this larger world we live in.
For the tiny animals of which we have just spoken, there are perhaps other
animals that prey upon them and that, on account of their awesome smallness.
are to them as imperceptible as they themselves are to us. What a mite is
compared with us, these animals are to a mite; and perhaps there are in nature
things smaller and smaller to infinity, standing in that extreme proportion of man
to mite.
We have clear mathematical demonstrations of the infinite divisibility of matter, and although our imagination is shocked at the thought, this leads us to
believe that there might be smaller and smaller animals to infinity. God made
matter only to fashion His wonderful creation from it, and since we are certain
that there is nothing whose smallness could limit His power of forming these tiny
animals, why limit it and thus diminish without reason the idea we have of an
infinite craftsman by measuring his power and skill with our finite imagination?
Experimentation has already partially rectified our errors by enabling us to see
animals a thousand times smaller than a mite-why would we have them be the
last and smallest of all? For my part, l see no reason to imagine it so. On the
contrary, it is much more plausible to believe that there are many things yet
smaller than those already discovered, for in the final analysis, there are always
tiny animals to be found with microscopes, but not always microscopes to find
them.
When one examines the seed of a tulip bulb in the dead of winter with a simple
magnifying lens or convex glass, or even merely with the naked eye, one easily
discovers in this seed the leaves that are to become green, those that are to make
up the flower or tulip, that tiny triangular part which contains the seed. and the
six little columns that surround it at the base of the flower. Thus it cannot be
doubted that the seed of a tulip bulb contains an entire tulip.
It is reasonable to believe the same thing of a mustard seed, an apple seed, and
generally of the seeds of every sort of tree and plant, though all this might not be
seen with the naked eye or even with a microscope; and it can be said with some
assurance that all trees are in the seeds of their seeds in miniature.

The Search after Truth

27

Nor does it seem unreasonable to believe even that there is an infinite number
of trees in a single seed, since it contains not only the tree of which it is the seed
but also a great number of other seeds that might contain other trees and other
seeds, which will perhaps have on an incomprehensibly small scale other trees
and other seeds and so to infinity. So that according to this view, which will
appear strange and incongruous only to those who measure the marvels of God's
infinite power by the ideas of sense and imagination, it might be said (I) that in a
single apple seed there are apple trees, apples, and apple seeds, standing in the
proponion of a fully grown tree to the tree in its seed, for an infinite, or nearly
infinite number of centuries; (2) that nature's role is only to unfold these tiny
trees by providing perceptible growth for that outside its seed, and imperceptible
yet very real growth in proponion to their size, for those thought to be in their
seed-for it cannot be doubted that there are bodies sufficiently small to get in
between the fibers of these trees thought to be in their seed and thus to serve as
food for them.
What we have just said about plants and their seeds can be said also of animals
and the seeds from which they are produced. An entire tulip is seen in the seed of
a tulip bulb. Likewise, a chicken that is perhaps entirely formed is seen in the
seed of a fresh egg that has not been hatched. • Frogs are to be seen in frogs •
eggs, and stiU other animals will be seen in their seed when we have sufficient
skill and experience to discover them.b But the mind need not stop with the eyes,
for the mind's vision is much more extensive that tbe body's. We ought to
accept, in addition, that the body of every man and beast born till the end of time
was perhaps produced at the creation ofthe world. My thought is that the females
of the original animals may have been created along with all those of the same
species that they have begotten and that are to be begotten in the future.
This thought might be developed and might get at the truth, but we are justly
apprehensive about wanting !., enter too deeply into the works of God. In these
works, nothing but infinities are found everywhere; and not only are our senses
and imagination too limited to comprehend them, but even the mind, as pure and
detached from matter as it is, is too coarse and feeble to penetrate the smallest of
God's works. It loses itself, is distracted and dazzled, and is afraid at the sight of
what according to the language of the senses is called an atom. But the pure mind
always has this advantage over the senses and the imagination, that it recognizes
its weakness and the grealness of God, and is conscious of the infinity in which it
is lost; our senses and imagination, meanwhile, would depreciate God's works
and inspire us with a foolish confidence that casts us blindly into error. Our eyes
furnish us with none of the ideas of these things that we discover with microscopes or by reason. Through sight we perceive nothing smaller than a mite. Half
a mite is nothing if we accept the testimony of vision. As far as vision is
0

The aenu of the eu is under •liny white spot lhl.t is on the yolk. See theUv. de/omiDiiOM pulli

in o••o, by Mlllpighi.
bSce the Miraculum lltllllrae, by Sw•mmerdam.

28

Nicolas Malebranche

concerned, a mite is only a mathematical point. It cannot be divided without
being annihilated. Our sight, then, does not represent extension to us as it is in
itself, but only as it is in relation to our body; and because half a mite has no
significant relation to our body, and can neither preserve nor destroy it, our sight
hides it from us entirely.
But if we had eyes constructed like microscopes, or rather, if we were as small
as mites, our judgments about the size of bodies would be quite different. For
these tiny animals undoubtedly have eyes that can see both what surrounds them
and their own body as though much larger, or as composed of a greater number
of parts, than we see it, since otherwise they would not receive the impressions
necessary for the preservation oftheir life, and thus the eyes they do have would
be entirely useless to them.
But to reassure ourselves about all this, we must realize (I) that our own eyes
are in effect only natural spectacles; (2) that their humors have the same effect as
the lenses in spectacles; (3) that depending on the distance between them, the
shape of the crystalline lens, and its distance from the retina, • we see objects
differently. As a result of this, we cannot be certain that there are two men in the
world who see objects as having precisely the same size, or as being composed of
the same number of parts, since we cannot be certain that their eyes are altogether
alike.
All men see objects as having the same size in the sense that they see them as
described by the same limits or by equal angles. For they see their edges as
straight lines making up a visual angle that is perceptually equal when the objects
are seen from an equal distance. But it is not certain that the ideas they have of
the size of a given object are equal, because the means they have for judging
distance, upon which the size of the idea depends, are not equal. Furthermore,
those whose optical nerve fibers are smaller and more delicate are able to notice
many more parts in an object than those whose nerve is of a coarser tissue.
Nothing would be easier than a geometrical demonstration of these matters;b
and if they were not already so well known, we would first stop to prove them.
But because several people have already treated of these matters, those who wish
to be instructed in them are asked to consult their works.
Since it is not certain that there are two men who view the same object as
having the same size, and since sometimes even the same man sees things larger
with the left eye than with the right, c according to observations reported in the
Giornale de' letterati, January 1669, it is clear that we must not rely on the
testimony of our eyes to make judgments about size. It would be better to listen
to reason, which proves to us that we do not know how to determine the absolute
size of the bodies surrounding us, or what idea we ought to have of a square foot,
or of our own body such that the idea would represent it to us as it is. For reason
teaches us that the smallest of all objects would not be small by itself, since it is
composed of an infinite number of parts from each one of which God could
"This is the optic nerve.
'See DeacllltJes 's Dioptrics.
•one of my &iends always sees the letters of a boot laraer wilb the right e~ than with the left.

The Search after Truth

29

fashion an earth that would be but a point in comparison to the others taken
together. Thus the mind of man is incapable of framing an idea sufficiently great
to encompass and comprehend the least extension in the world, since the mind is
limited whereas the idea must be infinite.
It is true that the mind can more or less know the relations found among these
infmities of which the world is composed, that, for example, one is twice the
other, and that a fathom consists of six feet; but nonetheless, it cannot frame for
itself an idea representing what these things are in themselves.
Yet I am willing to suppose that the mind is capable of ideas that match or
approximate the extension of the bodies we see, for it is difficult enough to
persuade men of the contnry. Let us examine, then, what can be concluded from
this supposition. It will undoubtedly be concluded that God does not deceive us,
that He has not given us eyes like glasses that magnify and diminish objects, and
that we must therefore agree that our eyes represent things to us as they are.
It is true that God never deceives us, but we often deceive ourselves by judging
things too hastily. For we often judge that the objects of which we have ideas
exist, and even that they are altogether like these ideas. But it often turns out that
these objects are not at all like our ideas, and even that they do not exist.
From the fact that we have an idea of a thing, it does not follow that the thing
exists and still less that it is entirely like our idea of it. From the fact that God
provides us with a given sensible idea of size, as when a fathom ruler is before
our eyes, it does not follow that the ruler has only that extension represented to us
by the idea. For in the first place, not all men have precisely the same sensible
idea of the ruler, since not all men's eyes are disposed in the same way. Second,
a given person sometimes does not have the same sensible idea of a fathom ruler
when he views it with the right eye and then the left, as has already been said.
Finally, it often happens that the same person has different ideas of the same
objects at different times, according to whether he believes them to be more or
less at a distance, as we shall explain elsewhere.
Thus it is a groundless prejudice to believe that we see objects as they are in
themselves. For our eyes, which were given us only for the preservation of our
body, perform their duty quite well by providing us with ideas of objects proportioned to the idea we have of the size of our body, although there are in these
objects an infinite number of parts that they do not disclose to us.
But to understand better what we should judge concerning the extension of
bodies on the basis of the testimony of our eyes, let us imagine that from a
quantity of matter the volume of a ball God has made a miniature earth and sky,
and men upon this earth having the same proportions observed in the larger
world. 'J:hese tiny men would see one another, the parts of their bodies, and even
the little animals that might bother them, for otherwise their eyes would be
useless for their preservation. It is obvious on this supposition, then, that these
tiny men would have ideas of the size of objects quite different from ours, since
they would regard their world, which is but a ball to us, as having infinite space,
more or less as we judge the world we are in.
Or, if it is easier to conceive, suppose that God created an earth infmitely more
vast than the one we inhabit, such that this other earth would stand to ours as ours

30

Nicolas Malebranche

stood to the one we were just speaking about in the preceding supposition. In
addition to this, let us suppose that God preserved among all the pans composing
this other world the same proportion as among the pans composing ours. It is
clear that the men of this other world would be larger than the space between our
earth and the most distant star we see; this being so, it can be seen that if they had
the same ideas of the extension of bodies as we have, they would be unable to
discern certain parts of their own body. while they would see certain others as
having an enonnous bulk. As a result, it is ridiculous to suppose that they see
things as having the same size as we see them.
It is obvious from these two suppositions we have just made that the men of the
larger or smaller world would have ideas of the size of bodies quite different from
our own, given that their eyes provide them with ideas of the objects surrounding
them proportionate to the size of their own bodies. But if these men relied heavily
on the testimony of their eyes that objects are such as they see them, it is clear
that they would be mistaken; oobody can doubt this. Nonetheless, these men
would certainly have as much reason as we to defend their opinion. Let us learn,
then, by their example that we are quite uncertain as to the true size ofthe bodies
we see, and that all we can know of size through sight is the relation between
thein and ours, a relation by oo means exact-in a word, that our eyes were not
given us to judge the truth of things. but only to let us know which things might
inconvenience us or be of some use to us.

[//. Continuation of the errors of sight witlr regard to things not
under its jurisdiction <This title found in first edition only>.]
Men, however, trust their eyes in judging oot only about visible objects but
also about objects that are invisible. As soon as they do not see certain things,
they conclude that they do oot exist, thus attributing to sight powers of penetration to some extent infinite. This is what prevents them from recognizing the true
causes of an infinity of natural effects; for if they relate these effects to imaginary
qualities and faculties, it is often because they do not see the real ones, which are
a matter of the different configurations of these bodies.
For example, they do not see the panicles of air and of flame, still less those of
light or of other matter yet more subtle, and this leads them to believe that they
do not exist or to judge that they are inert. They fall back on occult qualities or
imaginary faculties to explain all the effects of which these imperceptible particles are the natural cause.
To explain the elevation of water in pumps, they prefer to resort to the horror
of the void, rather than to the weight of air. They resort to qualities of the moon,
rather than to the pressure of the air surrounding the earth in order to explain the
tides, and to forces of attraction in the sun, rather than to the impulses caused by
the particles of subtle matter it continuously diffuses, in order to explain the
rising of vapors.
They consider it incongruous that the movement of animals as well as the
habits and corporeal memory of men can be explained through appeal to blood
and flesh alone. This derives in part from their conception of the brain as very

The Search after Truth

31

small and consequently as incapable of preserving the traces of the almost infmite
number of things found there. They prefer to recognize, without understanding
it, a soul in beasts that would be neither mind nor body, as well as qualities and
intentional species for the memory and habits of men, or other such things of
which they have no specific notion at all in mind.
It would take too long to enumerate the enors into which this prejudice leads
us; there are very few errors in physics that it has not occasioned, and the results
of some serious thought on this matter would perhaps be astonishing.
Although we do not wish to delay too long over these matters, we can hardly
ignore the disdain men ordinarily have for insects and other tiny animals produced from matter they call corrupt. The disdain is inappropriate and is founded
only on ignorance of the thing they disdain as well as on the prejudice just
mentioned. Nothing in nature is despicable, and all the works of God deserve to
be respected and admired, especially if one notices the simplicity of the ways in
which God makes and preserves them. The tiniest gnats are as perfect as the
largest of animals. The proponion of their members is as correct as that of other
animals, and it even seems as though God has willed to bejewel them in compensation for their lack of size. They have crowns, plumes, and other attire upon
their heads against which anything invented by the riches of men must pale; and I
can assen with confidence that those who have used only their eyes have never
seen anything so beautiful, so fining, or even so magnificent in the houses of the
greatest princes as what can be seen with magnifying glasses on the head of a
simple fly. Man, for example, has only one crystalline lens in each eye, the fly
has more than a thousand-but arranged with a marvelous order and precision.
It is true that these things are quite small, but this makes it even more surprising that so much beauty is found concentrated in so small a space; although they
arc quite common, these animals are nonetheless remarkable, and they are no
less perfect in themselves-rather, on their account God appears more admirable, God who in producing them in such numbers and with so much magnificence performed an almost infinite number of miracles.
Yet vision hides all these beautiful things from us; it makes us scorn these
works of God so wonhy of our admiration; and because these animals are small
in relation to our bodies, we are led to view them as absolutely small, and
consequently as despicable because of their smallness, as if bodies could be small
in themselves.
Let us try, then, not to follow sense impressions in judgments we make about
the size of bodies; and when we say, for example, that a bird is small, let us not
understand this absolutely. for nothing is either large or small in itself. Even a
bird is large in relation to a fly, and if it is small in relation to our bodies, it does
not follow that it is so absolutely, since the body is not an absolute standard
against which one should measure other things. The body is itself quite small in
relation to the earth, and the eanh quite small in relation to the circle that the sun
or the earth describes about the other, and this circle in relation to the space
between us and the fixed stars, and so on, for we can always imagine greater and
greater spaces to infinity.

32

Nicolas Malebranche
Ill. The error of our eyes concerning the extension of bodies in
reiDtion to each other.

It must not be imagined, however, that our senses correctly inform us of the
relation that other bodies have to our own, for exactitude and precision are not
essential to sense knowledge, which need serve only for the preservation of life.
It is true that we know with sufficient precision the relation that bodies close to us
have to our own body, but the further they are from us the less we know them,
because they then have less of a relation to our body. The idea or sensation of
size we have upon viewing some object diminishes as that object is less in a
position to harm us, and the idea or sensation increases as the object approaches
us, or rather as its relation to our body increases. Finally, if this relation ceases
altogether, that is, if an object is so small or so distant from us that it cannot harm
us, we no longer have any sensation of it at all. As a result, we can sometimes
judge through sight the approximate relation bodies have to our own as well as
among themselves; but we must never believe that they have the size they seem
to us to have.
Our eyes represent the sun and the moon, for example, as having a diameter of
a foot or two, but we must not imagine, as did Epicurus and Lucretius, that they
are really of this size. According to our perception of it, the same moon appears
to us much larger than the largest of stars, yet no one doubts that it is incomparably smaller. We likewise see daily on the earth two or more things whose size or
relation we are unable to determine precisely, because in order to judge their
size, their exact distance must be known, and this is very difficult to determine.
We can hardly even judge with any certainty about the relation between two
bodies quite close to us; they must be picked up and held against each other for a
comparison, and even then we often hesitate, being sure of nothing. This can be
clearly seen in examining the size of coins that are almost equal; here we must
place them on top of each other to see with assurance whether they correspond in
size. If a line is drawn on paper and another is drawn at its end perpendicular and
equal to it, they will appear roughly equal. But if the perpendicular is drawn at its
middle, the perpendicular will appear perceptibly longer, and the closer to the
middle it is drawn the longer it will appear. The same experiment can be performed with two straws, so that to know if they are equal, or which is longer,
they must be laid one upon the other, as is ordinarily done. Our eyes, therefore,
deceive us not only with regard to the size of bodies in themselves but also with
regard to the relation bodies have among themselves.

Note
Those who are ignorant of the eye's structure and the principles of its construction would do well to read the appendix found at the end of this work before
reading this chapter.

BOOK ONE: THE SENSES
Chapter Seven

t

I. The errors of our eyes concerning figures. II. We have no knowledge of the
smallest ones. Ill. That the lcnowledge we have of larger figures is inexact.
IV. Explanation of certain natura/judgments by which we avoid error. V. That
even these judgments mislead us in certain instances.
I. The errors of sight concerning figures.
Our sight is less liable to mislead us when representing figures 10 us than when
representing anything else, because figure in itself is nothing absolute, and
because its nature consists in the relation between the limits of some space and a
given straight line, or a point conceived of as in that space, which might be
termed, as in the case of a circle, the center ofthat figure. Nevertheless, we are
mistaken in a thousand ways about figures, and we never know any of them with
complete precision through the senses.

II. That we have no lcnowledge of the smallest figures.
We have just proved that our sight does not reveal 10 us evecy sort of extension
but only that which has some significant relation 10 our body, and that for this
reason, we do not see each part of the smallest animals nor those parts that make
up both solid and liquid bodies. Thus, unable 10 perceive these parts on account
of their size, we consequently cannot perceive their figures, since the figure of a
body is but its limiting boundacy. Here we already have an almost infinite
number of figures, the greatest part of which remain unnoticed by our eyes,
which even lead the mind, relying too much on their capacity and not investigating things carefully enough, 10 believe that these figures do not exist.

Ill. That the lcnowledge we have of larger figures is inexact.
We can approximate the figures of bodies proportioned 10 our vision, which
are quite few in comparison with all the rest, but their figures cannot be known
exactly through the senses. Through sight we cannot even ascertain whether a
circle and a square, the simplest of figures, are not in fact an ellipse and a
parallelogram, although these figures might be in our hands and vecy close 10 our
eyes.
33

34

Nicolas Malebranche

Funhennore, we cannot determine exactly whether a line is straight or not,
especially if it is of some length-for that a ruler is required. But what am I
saying? We do not know whether the ruler itself is as we suppose it ought to be,
and we have no way of being entirely certain on the matter. Nevertheless,
without knowledge of the line, we can never, as we all realize, have knowledge
of any figure.
This is all that can be said in general about figures at hand and close to our
eyes; but if they are at a distance from us, how much change shall we find in the
projection they make on the fundus of our eyes? I do not wish to stop here to
describe them; they can easily be learned from some book of optics, or by
examining figures found in paintings. Since painters, in order to make them
appear natural, are almost always forced to change them and to paint circles, for
example, as ovals, we have a sure sign that the way we see non-painted objects is
erroneous. But these errors are corrected by new sensations that ought to be
regarded as a kind of natural judgment, and that can be called judgments of
sense.

IV. Explanation of certain natural judgments by which we amid
error. I cal/tlrem ·'natural'' because they are gi,·en to us by tire
Author of Nature.
When we look at a cube, for example, it is certain that the sides of it that we
see almost never project an image of equal size in the fundus of our eyes. This is
so because the image of each of its sides that appears on the retina. or optic
nerve, is very like a cube painted in perspective; and consequently the sensation
we have of it ought to represent the faces of the cube to us as being unequal, since
they are unequal in a cube in prespective. Nonetheless, we see them as equal, and
we are not deceived.
Now it might be said that this happens by a kind of judgment we naturally
make, to wit, that the faces of the cube, that are farthest away and that are viewed
obliquely should not fonn images on the fundus ofthe eye as big as those formed
by the faces that are closer. But as it is given to the senses only to sense and
never, properly speaking, to judge, it is clear that this natural judgment is but a
compound sensation that consequently can sometimes be mistaken. I call it
compound because it depends on two or more impressions occurring in the eye at
the same time. When I look at a man walking toward me, for example, it is
certain that, as he approaches, the image or impression of his height traced in the
fundus of my eyes continuously increases and is finally doubled as he moves
from ten to five feet away. But because the impression of distance decreases in
the same proportion as the other increases, I see him as always having the same
size. Thus the sensation I have of the man always depends on two different
impressions, not counting the change in the eyes' position and other matters of
which I shall speak in the following.
Nevertheless, since what in us is but a sensation can be considered in relation
to the Author of Nature who excites it in us as a kind of judgment, I speak of
sensations as natural judgments, because this way of speaking makes sense of

The Search after Truth

35

certain things, as can be seen here, toward the end of chapter nine, and in several
other places.
V. That en•n these j11dgments mislead 11s in certain instances.
Although these judgments I speak of serve to correct our senses in a thousand
different ways, and although without them we would almost always be deceived,
they can still be occasions of error for us. If it happens, for example, that we see
the top of a bell tower behind a high wall, or behind a mountain, it will appear to
us rather near and small. If afterward we see it at the same distance, but with
several fields and houses between us and it, it will undoubtedly appear larger and
farther away, even though the projection of rays from the bell tower or the image
of the bell tower fonned at the fundus of the eye is exactly the same in both cases.
Now it might be said that we see it larger due to a judgment we naturally make,to
wit, that since there are so many fields between us and the bell tower, it must be
farther away and hence larger.
But if, on the other hand, we see no fields between us and the tower, although
we know by other means that there are many, and that the tower is quite distant
(which is important), the tower appears very near and small, as I have just said.
And it can be further stated that this occurs as a result of a kind of judgment
natural to our soul, which sees the tower in this way because it judges the tower
to be five or six hundred feet away. For our imagination ordinarily does not
represent great distance between objects unless it is aided by the sight of other
objects between them, beyond which it can imagine more objects.
This is why we see the moon much larger when it is rising or sening than when
it is well above the horizon;• for when the moon is high, we see no objects
between us and it whose size we might know in order to judge the size of the
moon by comparison. But when it has just risen or is about to set, we see between
us and it the countryside, whose approximate size we know, and thus we judge it
to be farther away and as a result we see it larger.
It should be noted that when the moon has risen above our heads, although we
might know for certain through reason that it is at a great distance, we cannot
help but see it as quite near and small, because these natural judgments of vision
occur in us, independently of us, and even in spite of us. Likewise, although we
might know that the moon does not travel in a path of our choosing, nevertheless,
if we look at it while running, we shall see it running along with us and in the
same direction. The reason for this is that the moon's image (by image I always
mean the impression the object makes at the fundus of the eye) does not percepti·
bly change place in the fundus of the eye, even though we are running; and this is
so because of its great distance, as can easily be shown. Thus, aware that we are
running, we must naturally judge that it runs along with us. But when we run
while looking at objects near us, we naturally judge that they are stationary, i.e.,
we see them stationary, since their images do not change place at the fundus of
our eyes, or increase proportionately to the motion we feel in ourselves. Now
•See chapter 9 near lhe end and my Riponse

a M.

Rrgis below (vol. 17(1):263-78).

36

Nico/JJs Malebranche

these natural judgments, although quite useful, often involve us in error of some
sort, by making us form free judgments in perfect agreement with them. For
when we judge as we sense, we are always to some degree mistaken, though we
are never mistaken in anything if we judge as we conceive, because the body
informs only for the sake of the body, while God alone always teaches the truth,
as I shall show elsewhere.
These natural judgments deceive us not only with regard to the size and
distance of objects but also by making us see their figures other than as they are.
We see the moon and the sun, for example, and other very distant spherical
bodies as if they were flat and circular. This is because at that great distance we
cannot distinguish whether the part near the center of [the visual face of] these
bodies is closer to us than the others, and because of this we judge it to be at an
equal distance. For the same reason we judge all the stars and the blue sky to be at
roughly the same distance as their neighbors and in, as it were, a perfectly
elliptical, convex vault, because our mind always supposes equality where it sees
no inequality. But unless it is seen clearly, this equality should not be positively
admitted.
Since instruction in these matters can be had from any book on optics, we shall
not delay further with the errors of sight. The science of optics in fact teaches
only how to deceive the eyes, and its technique consists only of finding ways of
imposing on us at inappropriate moments those compound sensations or natural
judgments of which I have just spoken. This can occur in so many different ways
that of all the figures in the world, there is not a single one that cannot be
represented in a thousand different ways. As a result, vision is invariably in error
with regard to them. But this is not the place for a complete explanation of these
matters. What has been said suffices to show that the eyes are not to be trusted
when they represent to us the figure of bodies, though they are more faithful with
regard to figures than with anything else.

BOOK ONE: THE SENSES
Chapter Eight

t

I. That our eyes do not inform us of the magnitude or speed of motion in itself.
II. That duration, which is necessary for lcnowledge of motion, is unknown to
us. Ill. An example of visual error concerning motion and rest.
We have already discovered the principal and most general errors of sight with
regard to extension and figure; we must now correct those errors in which this
same sense involves us concerning the motion of matter. After what has been
said about extension, this will hardly be difficult, for there are so many coMections between these two things that if we err with regard to the size of bodies, it is
absolutely necessary that we also err with regard to their motion.
But in order to avoid anything that is not clear and distinct, an equivocation on
the word motion must first be eliminated. Ordinarily, this term signifies two
things: the first is a certain force imagined to be in the body moved and that is the
cause of its motion; the second is the continual transport of a body approaching or
receding from another object taken to be at rest.
When, for example, one ball is said to have communicated some of its motion
to another, the word is taken in its first sense; but if we simply say that a ball is
seen to have great motion, it is taken in the second. In short, this term motion
signifies both the cause and the effect, which are nevertheless two quite different
things.
There seem to abound very great and even dangerous errors concerning the
force that produces motion and transports bodies. Those lovely terms nature, and
impressed qualities, seem to be appropriate only for hiding the ignorance of
counterfeit scholars and the impiety of freethinkers, as is easy to show. But this is
not the place to disctoss the force that moves bodies-it is not visible and I am
speaking here only of the errors of the eyes. I postpone the issue till the proper
occasion.•
Motion taken in the second sense, as the movement of one body away from
another, is something visible and is the subject of this chapter.

•See bk. 6, pl. 2. ch 3.

37

38

Nicolas Malebranche
I. That our eyes do nor illform us of the mag11it11de or speed of
motion in itse{f.

It seems to me that I have demonstrated in the sixth chapter that sight never
informs us of the size of bodies in themselves. but only of the relations they have
with one another. From this I conclude that we are also unable to know the true or
absolute magnitude of their motion, that is. of their swiftness or slowness, but
only the relation these motions have to one another and especially to the motion
that ordinarily occurs in our body. I shall prove this as follows.
It is certain that we would be unable to judge the magnitude of the motion of a
body except by the distance it has passed through. Thus, since our eyes do not
permit us to view the true distance passed through, it follows that they do not
enable us to know the true magnitude of motion.
This proof is only a consequence of what I have already said concerning
extension, and it is compelling only because it necessarily follows from what has
already been demonstrated. But here is a proof that assumes nothing. Even if we
could know clearly the true measure of the distance passed through, it would not
follow that we could likewise know the true magnitude of the motion.
The magnitude or speed of motion includes two things. The first is the transport of a body from one place to another, as from Paris to St. Germain; the
second is the time necessary for this transport. Now to know whether a man has
traveled quickly or slowly it does not suffice to know the distance between Paris
and St. Germain; besides this, the time spent in traveling must be known.

II. That duration. which is necessary for knowledge of the magnitude of motion, is unknown to 11s.
I agree, then, that the length of the road might be known truly, but 1 absolutely
deny that through sight, or by any other means, one can know the exact time
taken to travel the road, and the true magnitude of the duration.
This is sufficiently evident from the fact that at certain times one hour seems to
us as long as four, and that at other times four hours fly by imperceptibly. When
one is happy, for example, hours last but a moment, because then time passes
without us thinking about it. But when one is overwhelmed with sadness or is
suffering some pain, days last much longer. The reason for this is that at such a
time the mind wearies of its duration as something irksome. The more the mind
attends to it, the better it is noticed, and thus the mind finds it greater than periods
of joy or agreeable occupation, which direct the mind outwardly, as it were. in
order to grasp the object of its joy. So likewise does a person find some painting
proportionately larger as he stops to consider more attentively all the things that it
represents; or as we find the head of a fly to be quite large when all its parts are
distinguished with a microscope. Thus the mind finds duration proportionately
greater as it is carefully considered and all its parts perceived.
As a result, 1 have no doubt but that God could so direct our mind to the parts
of duration by making us have a great number of sensations in a short time that a
single hour would seem to us like several centuries. For ultimately duration has

Th~ S~arch aft~r

Truth

39

no instants as bodies have no atoms; and just as the smallest part of matter can be
infinitely divided, infinitely smaller and smaller parts of duration can be given,
as is easy to demonstrate. If the mind were made attentive to these small parts of
duration through sensations that would leave traces in the brain it could remember, the mind would undoubtedly find it much longer than it appears.
But in any case, the use of watches is enough to show that we do not know
duration exactly; and that is enough for me. For since the magnitude of motion in
itself cannot be known unless, as we have shown, that of duration is known
beforehand, it follows that if we cannot know the absolute magnitude of duration
exactly, we likewise cannot know the absolute magnitude of motion exactly.
But because we can know some relations of duration, or relations of one time
to another, we can also know some relations had by motions to one another. For
as we can know that the solar year is longer than the lunar year, we can also know
thai a cannonball has more motion than a tortoise. Consequently, if our eyes do
not enable us to see the absolute magnitude of motion, still they help us to know
approximately its relative magnitude, i.e., the relation of one motion to another,
and this alone is required to be known for the preservation of our body.

Ill. An ~xample of visual error concerning the motion and rest of
bodies.
In many instances it is clearly recognized that our sight deceives us concerning
the motion of bodies. It happens often enough that things which appear to us to
be moving have not in fact moved. and that things which appear to be at rest, on
the other hand, are in motion. When, for example, one is seated aboard a quickly
and steadily moving vessel, the land and towns are seen to recede. They appear
to be in motion and the vessel seems to be at rest.
Similarly, if a man were placed on the planet Mars, he would judge through
sight that the sun, the earth, and the other planets along with the fixed stars make
their circumvolution in about 24 or 25 hours, which is the time taken by Mars in
its axial rotation. Nonetheless, the earth, the sun, and the stars do not rotate about
that planet, so that the man would see in motion things that are at rest, and he
would think himself to be at rest, although he was in motion.
I shall not pause to explain how it is that the man aboard the vessel would
easily correct the error of his eyes whereas the man on Mars would obstinately
cling to his error. The reason for this is too easily known. and can be even more
easily found if one reflects on what would happen to a man sleeping on a ship
who awakes with a start and upon awakening sees only the top of the mast of an
approaching ship. Given that he did not see the sails filled with wind. nor the
sailors at work, and that he did not feel the agitation or the rocking of the ship, or
some such thing, he would remain completely in doubt as to which of the two
ships was moving, and neither his eyes nor even his own reason could disclose
anything of help to him.

BOOK ONE: THE SENSES
Chapter Nine

t

Continuation of the same subject. I. A general proof of the errors of vision
concerning motion. II. That the distance of objects must be known in order to
judge the magnitude oftheir motion. Ill. An examination of the means of determining distances.
<J. A general proof of the e"ors of vision concerning motion.>

I. Here is a general proof of all errors inro which sight leads us concerning
motion.

Let A be the eye of the viewer, C the object, which I take to be at some
distance from A. I claim: that although the object remains immobile at C, it may
be thought ro recede to D. or to approach B. That although the object recedes
toward D. it may be thought to be at rest at C and even approach B, and that, on
the other hand, akhough it approaches B. it may be thought to be at rest at C and
even recede toward D. That although the object has advanced from C as far as E,
or even H, G, or K, it may be thought ro have moved only from C ro F or I; and
40

The Search after Truth

41

lhat on the other hand, though the object has moved from C to For I, one might
take it to have moved toE or H, or even G or K. That if lhe object moves in a line
equally distant from lhe viewer, i.e., in a circumference whose center is the
viewer, though this object moves from C toP, one may believe lhat it moves only
from 8 to 0, and on the olher hand, though it move only from 8 to 0, one might
believe it to move from C to P.
If beyond lhe object C lhere is another object M, which is believed immobile
but which moves toward N, then although the object C remains immobile, or
moves much more slowly toward F than does M toward N, it wiD appear to move
toward Y; and on lhe other hand, if . . . , and so forth.

II. That it is necessary to know the distance of objects in order to
know the magnitude of their motion.
Clearly, lhe proof of all but lhe last of these propositions, which presents no
difficulty, depends on but one thing, that ordinarily we cannot judge lhe distance
of objects wilh assurance. For, if it is tnJe lhat we cannot judge distance wilh
certitude, it follows lhat we cannot know whelher C has advanced toward 0, or
has come nearer to 8, and likewise for the olher propositions.
Now to see whelher the judgments we form concerning distance are certain,
we have only to examine the means we employ in judging it; and if the means are
not certain, our judgments cannot be infallible. There are several such means and
they must be explained.

Ill. An examination of the means of determining the distance of
objects.
The first, most universal, and sometimes lhe surest means we have of judging
the distance of objects at a short distance is lhe angle made by lhe rays of our eyes
wilh lhe object as its apex, that is, where the object is the point where these rays
meet. When Ibis angle is very great, we see the object as very near. and when, on
the other hand, it is very small, we see it as very remote. And lhe change lhat
occurs in the state of our eyes according to lhe changes in this angle is lhe means
lhe soul employs in order to judge lhe remoteness or proximity of objects. For
just as a blind man could touch a given body wilh the ends of two straight sticks
of unknown length and judge its approximate distance according to a kind of
natural geometry by the position of his hands and the distance between lhem, so
might the soul• be said to judge the distance of an object by the disposition of its
eyes, which varies with the angle by which it sees the object, that is, with lhe
distance of the object.
You will be readily conviDced of what I say if you take the trouble to perform
this very simple experiment. At the end of a string suspend a ring whose opening
is facing away from you, or else drive a stick into the ground and pick up another
stick wilh a curved end. Move three or four steps from lhe ring or stick. Cover
•The soul does DOl puform Ill the judJIIICIItl lhatlallribulc eo it-lbe.e DaiUIII judJIIICnll lll'e only
aelllllliona-and I speak of them a such only for the sake of brevity and common speech. See .nitlc
4 of chapter 7.

42

Nicolas Malebranche

one eye with one hand and try to pass the other hand through the ring, or with a
hand over one eye and holding the stick in your other hand at a level approximately even with your eyes, try to touch the stick in the ground crosswise. You
will be surprised to find yourself incapable of doing, in perhaps a hundred
attempts, what appears quite easy. Even if you put the stick aside and try to pass
one of your fingers through the ring, you will find some difficulty even though
you might be quite close to the ring.
But it must be noted that I said you should try to thread the ring or touch the
stick crosswise and not in a straight line from the eye to the ring-for that would
not be difficult at all, and indeed would be easier to bring off with one eye closed
than with both open, since this would help to guide us.
Now it might be said that the difficulty found in threading a ring crosswise
with only one eye open is a result of the fact that with the other closed, the angle I
just spoke of is not known. For in order to know the size ofthe angle, it does not
suffice to know the size of the base and of an angle formed on the base -as we
know from the preceding experiment. It is still necessary to know the other angle
formed on the base, or the length of one of the sides, which can be known exactly
only by opening the other eye. Thus the soul cannot avail itself of its natural
geometry to judge the distance of the ring.
The disposition of the eyes associated with the angle formed by the visual rays
intersecting and meeting in the object is therefore one of the best and most
universal means employed by the soul in judging the distance of things. If, then,
this angle does not perceptibly change when the object is at some distancewhether it approaches or recedes from us-it will follow that this means is
unreliable and that the soul cannot use it to judge the distance of that object.
Now it is easily seen that this angle changes noticeably when an object a foot
away is moved to four feet away; but if it is moved only from four to eight feet,
the change is much less perceptible, and if from eight to twelve feet, still less,
and if from a thousand to a hundred thousand, hardly at all. Finally the change
will no longer be perceptible, even if the object were carried to the imaginary
spaces. Consequently, ifthere is sufficient space between A and C, the soul will
be unable by this means to know whether the object is near 8 or D.
This is why we see the sun and the moon as though they were wrapped in the
clouds although they are vastly distant from them. This is also why we naturally
believe that the stars are at an equal distance, and that comets are fixed and
almost motionless at the end of their course. We even imagine that comets vanish
at the end of several months because they recede from us in an almost straight
line from our eyes, and are then on their way to oblivion in the vast spaces from
which they return only after several years or even centuries-for it is very likely
that they do not vanish upon ceasing to be seen.
The second way of judging the distance of objects. In order to explain the
second means employed by the soul to judge the distance of objects, it should be
known that it is absolutely necessary for the shape of the eye to change with the
distance of objects we see; for when a man sees an object nearby, his eyes are
necessarily longer, or the crystalline lens is farther from the retina, than if the
object were farther away. This is so because in order for the rays of this object to

The Search after Truth

43

converge on the optic nerve (which is necessary to see it distinctly, especially
when the object is poorly lighted), the distance between this nerve and the
crystalline lens must be greater.
It is true that if the crystalline lens became more convex with the proximity of
the object, this would have the same effect as if the eye were elongated.• But it is
hard to believe that the crystalline lens can easily change its convexity, and we
have, on the other hand, a rather likely proof that the eye does elongate.
Anatomy teaches that there are muscles surrounding the middle of the eye whose
effort is feh as they press and lengthen the eye when we wish to see something
very near.
But the way in which this happens need not be known at this point-it is
enough that change in the eye does occur, whether because the muscles surrounding the eye press it or because the small nerves that correspond to the ciliary
ligaments (which hold the crystalline lens suspended between the other humors
of the eye) relax in order to increase the convexity of the crystalline lens and
tighten to decrease it, or, finally, because the pupil dilates and contracts, for
there are many people whose eyes undergo no other change.
For, in short, the change that occurs, whatever it is, serves only to make the
rays from objects converge properly on the optic nerve. Now, it is certain thal
whether we look at an object at five hundred feet or at ten thousand leagues. our
eyes have the same disposition, with no perceptible change either in the muscles
surrounding the eye, or in the nerves corresponding to the ciliary ligaments of the
crystalline lens, or in the opening of the pupil, and the rays from objects converge exactly on the retina or optic nerve. Thus, the soul would judge that objects
at a distance of ten thousand or a hundred thousand leagues are only five or six
feet away, if it could judge their distance only through the eyes' disposition that I
have just discussed.
Nevertheless, this method can certainly be of use to the soul when the object is
near. If, for example, an object is only half a foot from us, we can perceive its
distance well enough by the disposition of the muscles that press our eyes to
make them longer. This disposition is even painful. If the object is two feet
away, we can still make it out because the disposition of the muscles is still
somewhat perceptible, though no longer painful. But if the object is moved
several feet farther away, the disposition of our muscles becomes so slightly
perceptible as to be completely useless in judging the distance of the object.
These, then, are two of the means the soul can be said to use in judging the
distance of an object; they are quite useless when the object is from five to six
hundred paces away and are not reliable even when the object is closer.
Tl1e third way of judging the distance of objects. The third way is the size of
the image that is depicted on the fundus of the eye and that represents the objects
we see. It is claimed that this image diminishes proportionately as the object
recedes; but this decrease is proportionately less perceptible as the object whose
distance changes is farther away. For when an object is at a reasonable distance,
such as five or six hundred paces, more or less in proportion to its size, there
•See the last Elucidation. number 31. and following.

44

Nicolas Malebranche

occur rather considerable changes in its remoteness without any perceptible
alteration occuniug in the image that represents it, as is easy to demonstrate.
Thus, this third way has the same defect as the other two we have just discussed.
It should be further noted that the soul does not judge those objects as most
remote whose image on the retina is smallest. When, for example, I see a man
and a tree at a hundred paces, or several stars in the sky, I do not judge the man
farther away than the tree, or the smaller stars more distant than the larger,
although the images of the man and of the smaller stars formed on the retina are
smaller than those of the tree and of the larger stars. The size of the object must
be known from sense experience in order to judge its approximate distance; and
because I know, or have several times seen, that a house is bigger than a man,
although the image of a house might be bigger than that of a man, I nevertheless
do not judge it or see it to be nearer. • The same holds true of the stars. Our eyes
represent them all to us as at the same distance, though it is more reasonable to
believe some of them to be much farther from us than others. Thus, there is an
infinity of objects whose distance we cannot know since there is an infinity of
objects whose size we do not know.
Fourth and fifth ways. We further judge the remoteness of an object by the
force with which it acts upon our eyes, because a distant object acts much more
feebly than do others, and also by the distinctness and clarity of the image formed
in the eye, because when the object is remote, the eye's opening must be greater
and consequentlyb the rays must converge somewhat confusedly. For this reason, objects that are poorly lighted or that we see confusedly appear to us more
remote, and those bodies, on the other hand, that are luminous and that we see
distinctly, appear to us closer. It is clear enough that these last two means are not
reliable for judging the distance of objects with any certitude, and we need not
pause here before coming to the last of all, which aids the imagination most and
which most easily leads the soul to judge that objects are very remote.
The sixth way ofjudging the distance of objects. The sixth and principal means
lies in the fact that the eye does not inform the soul of a single object apart from
aU others, but also makes it see all those between us and the main object of our
attention.
When, for example, we look at a sufficiently remote bell tower, we ordinarily
see at the same time several fields and houses between us and it. Because we
make a judgment about the remoteness of these fields and houses, and yet see
that the bell tower is beyond them, we also judge it to be farther away and even
wider and higher than if we saw it by itself. Yet the size of the image traced on
the fundus of the eye remains the same, whether or not there are fields and houses
between us and it, provided that we see it from an equal distance, as has been
supposed. Thus, we judge the size of objects by the distance we believe them to
be at, and the things we see between us and the objects aid our imagination a
great deal in judging their remoteness-just as we judge to the extent of our
"See lhe Elucidations on this chapler in the R;spon.'it' aM. R;gis.
"See the laSI Elucidation. number 17.

Th~ S~arch aft~r

Truth

45

duration, or of the time that has passed since we perfonned some action, by the
confused memory of things we have done or thoughts we have had successively
since that action. For it is these thoughts and actions succeeding one another that
help our mind to judge the length of a given time, or of some portion of our
duration. Or rather, the confused memory of all these successive thoughts is the
same thing as the judgment of our duration, just as the confused perception of the
fields between us and the beU tower is the same thing as the natural judgment
about the distance of the bell tower-for these judgments are but compound
sensations.
Hence it is easy to see the real reason why the moon appears much larger to
us when it is rising than when it is well above the horizon.• For when it is rising,
the moon appears to us several leagues away and even beyond the perceptual
horizon or the terMstrial point at which our vision stops; whereas when it has
climbed above the horizon, we judge it to be about half a league from us or seven
or eight times higher than our houses. Thus, we judge it to be much bigger when
it is near the horizon than when it is removed from the horizon, because when it
is rising we judge it to be much farther from us than when it is very high above
the horizon.
It is true that a great many philosophers attribute what we have been discussing
to atmospheres rising from the earth. They claim that these atmospheres, refracting the rays from objects, make them appear larger. But they are certainly
mistaken, because refraction increases only their elevation above the horizon
and, on the contrary, somewhat reduces the visual angle at which they are seen.
Refraction does not prevent the image traced at the fundus of our eyes when we
view the rising moon from being smaller than that formed when it has long since
risen.
Astronomers who measure the diameters of planets observe that the moon's
diameter increases in direct proportion to its distance from the horizon and,
consequently, inversely to its apparent size. Thus, the diameter of its image we
have in the fundus of the eyes is smaller when we see it as larger. Indeed, when
the moon is rising, it is farther from us by half the diameter of the earth than
when it is perpendicular overhead. That is why its diameter increases when it
rises above the horizon, for it is then coming toward us.
What makes us see the moon larger when it is rising, then, is not the refraction
undergone by its rays in the atmospheres emitted from the earth, since the image
fonned by these rays is always smaller; rather, it is the natural judgment of its
distance formed in us because it appears to us beyond the fields we see as remote,
as has been explained previously. It is amazing that philosophers find the reason
for this phenomenon and for this deception of our senses to be more difficult to
find than the greatest ~quations of algebra.
This means of ours for judging the distance of an object by the distance of
objects between us and it is often useful enough when the other means I have
discussed are of no avail; for we can judge by this method that certain objects are
•Sec lhe Elucidations on this chapcer in tbeRisponM iJ M. Rigis. (17(1):263J.

46

Nicolas Malebranche

several leagues removed from us, which we cannot do with the others. Yet if it be
examined, it will be found defective.
First, this means is of use only for objects on earth, since it can be used only
rarely and then very impractically for those in the air or in the heavens. Second, it
can be used on earth only for things at a distance of a few leagues. Third, it must
be made certain that between us and the objects there are neither valleys nor
mountains nor any such thing preventing its use. Actually I think there is no one
who having performed sufficient experiments on the matter is not convinced that
it is very difficult to judge the distance of objects with any certainty by means of
visually perceiving things between us and them. And perhaps we have lingered
on it too long.
These are all the means we have for judging the distance of objects, and their
considerable defects have been noted. It must be inferred from these defects that
judgments based on such unsure means must themselves be very uncertain.
From this the truth of the propositions I have advanced is easily shown. The
object at C has been supposed at some distance from A; it can therefore at
different times progress toward D or move nearer B. and without us realizing it,
since there is no sure way to judge its distance. It can even move back toward D
when it is taken to move toward B. because the object's image on the optic nerve
sometimes increases. This can happen for several different reasons: the transparent matter between the eye and the object may cause greater refraction at one
time than at another, or slight tremors might sometimes occur in this nerve, or
finally, the impression caused by the imprecise conjunction of rays on this same
nerve may diffuse and spread to parts that should not be disturbed by it. Thus the
image of the same objects, being greater in these cases, leads the soul to believe
that the object is moving nearer. The same must be said of the other propositions.
Before finishing this chapter, it should be noted that knowledge of the motion
and rest of bodies in proportion to their greater proximity to us is very important
to the preservation of our life, and that it is of little use to us to know the exact
truth about things occurring in faraway places. For this clearly shows that what I
have set forth generally concerning all the senses (that they inform us of things
only in relation to the preservation of our bodies and not as they are in themselves) holds exactly true in this case-(a) we know the motion or rest of objects
better as they come closer to us and (b) we are unable to judge them through the
senses when they seem no longer to have any relation, or to have almost no
relation, to our bodies (as when they are five or six hundred paces away and are
of insignificant size, or even nearer than this and smaller, or finally, when they
are larger but farther away).
I feel I must again warn that judgments about the distance, size, and so on, of
objects are formed in the ways I have just explained, not by the soul, but by God
according to the Jaws concerning the union of the soul and body. I have therefore
called these sorts of judgments natural in order to emphasize that they occur in us
independently of us, and even in spite of us. But as God fashions them in and for
us in such a way that we could fonn them ourselves it we knew optics and
geometry as God does, if we knew everything that occurs in our eyes and our

The Search after Truth

47

brain, and if our soul could act on its own and cause its own sensations, I
attribute to the soul the perfonnance of judgments and inferences as well as the
subsequent production of its sensations, which can be the effect only of an
infinite power and intelligence. As soon as we open our eyes, God alone can
infonn us instantaneously of the size, figure, motion, and color of objects surrounding us. But as He does so only as a result of the impressions these objects
make on our body, the reason for the variety of our sensations must be drawn
from the known variety of these impressions-just as I have tried to do by
supposing the soul to have a power and knowledge everyone knows it does not
have, and which I have adequately noted that it does not have by tenning the
judgments on which our sensations depend, natural.
Furthermore, if some reflection is given to what takes place in us independently of us when we open our eyes in the countryside, you will visibly recognize
that God must unceasingly act in us. I say God and not nature, for this vague tenn
nature, so much in use, is no more appropriate in explaining what I mean than
Aristotle's entelechy. You will realize, I say, that God always acts in consequence of the same laws, always according to the rules of geometry and optics,
always dependently upon the knowledge of what takes place in our eyes compared with the situation and motion of our bodies, always in consequence of an
infinity of instantaneous inferences, which tend to preserve our life and which
vary with each movement of our eyes. (When I say inferences, I speak from a
human point of view, for they are all perfonned by an eternal act.) In a word, if
one thinks a bit about this single operation, he will pen:eive the hand of the
Almighty and the impenetrable profundities of His wisdom in providence.

BOOK ONE: THE SENSES
Chapter Ten

t

Errors concerning sensible qualities. I. The distinction between soul and body.
II. Explanation of the sense organs. Ill. The part of the body to which the soul is
immediately joined. IV. The effect of objects on bodies. V. Their effect on the
soul and the reasons why tire soul does not perceh·e the movement of the body's
fibers. VI. Four things we confuse in eaclr sensation.
We saw in the preceding chapters that the judgments we form on the testimony of
our eyes concerning extension, figure, and motion are never exactly true.
Nonetheless, it must be agreed that they are not altogether false: they include at
least this truth, that outside us there are figures, motion, and extension, whatever
these may be.
It is true that we often see things that in fact are not, and never were, and that
we should not conclude that a thing is outside us from the sole fact that we see it
as outside us. There is no necessary connection between the presence of an idea
to a man's mind and the existence of the thing the idea represents, and experiences in sleep or delirium sufficiently prove this. But even so, we can be assured
that ordinarily extension, figure, and motion are external to us when we see
them. These things are not merely imaginary; they are real, and we are not
mistaken in believing that they have a real existence, independent of our mind,•
though this is very difficult to prove conclusively.
It is cenain, then, that the judgments we make concerning extension, figure,
and motion of bodies include some measure of truth. But the same is not true of
those concerning light, colors, tastes, odors, and all the other sensible qualities,
for truth is never encountered here, as we shall show in the rest of this first book.
Light is not distinguished from colors here because they are not taken to be
very different and cannot be explained separately. While treating them, we shall
even be obliged to speak of the other sensible qualities in a general way because
they are all explained by the same principle. The following matters demand very
close attention, for they are of the utmost consequence and are useful in a way
quite different from those preceding.
•See die

El~~eidations

(6).

48

49

The Search after Truth
I. The distinction between soul and body.

I assume at the outset that the soul can be distinguished from the body by the
positive attributes and properties these two substances will admit. The body is
only extension in height, breadth, and depth, and all its properties consist only in
(a) motion and rest, and (b) an infinity of different figures.• For it is clear: (l)
that the idea of extension represents a substance, since one can think of extension
without thinking of anything else; (2) this idea can represent only successive or
permanent relations of distance, i.e., instances of motion and figure, for one can
pen:eive in extension only what it contains. If it be assumed that extension is
divided into such parts as may be imagined, at rest or in motion near each other,
the relations among these parts will be clearly conceived; but one will never
conceive them to be relations of joy, pleasure, pain, heat, taste, color, or any of
the other sensible qualities, although these qualities are sensed when a certain
change occun in the body. I feel pain, for example, when a thorn pricks my
finger; but the hole it makes is not the pain. The hole is in the finger-it is clearly
conceived-and the pain is in the soul, for the soul senses it keenly and is
disagreeably modified by it. Only the properties I have just spoken of, then,
should be attributed to the body. The soul, on the other hand, is that I who thinks,
who senses, who wills--it is the substance in which are found all the
modifications of which I have an inner sensation (sentiment intirieur], and which
subsist only in the soul that pen:eives them. Thus, no property other than its
divene thoughts should be attributed to the soul. I assume, then,thatthe soul can
be distinguished from the body. If what I have just said is not enough to illustrate
the difference between these two substances, one can read and meditate on some
passages of Saint Augustine, such as chapter 10 of the tenth book of The Trinity,
chapten 4 and 14 of the Quantity of the Soul, or Descartes's Meditations,
particularly the part concerned with the distinction between the soul and body, or
finally, the sixth discourse from Cordemoy's Discernement de I' ame & du corps.

II.

Explanation of the sense organs.

I assume also that the anatomy ofthe sense organs is known, and that they are
composed of tiny filaments originating in the middle of the brain, that they
spread out into all our memben in which there is feeling and that they finally lead
without interruption to the exterior portions of the body, that so long as one is
awake and in good health one end cannot be moved without the other being
moved at the same time, since they are always made somewhat taut by the animal
spirits they contain -just as one part of a taut string cannot be moved without the
other being disturbed.
There is reason to believe that nerve filaments are hollow like little canals and
are completely filled with animal spirits, especially when one is awake; that
when the end of these filaments is disturbed, the spirits contained in them
transmit to the brain the vibrations they have received from without. But it is not
necessary now to examine whether the action of objects is communicated to the
"Dialogws on Metaphysics. Dialogue I. no. 1.2.

50

Nicolas Malebranche

brain by the vibrations of the animal spirits or by the continuous displacement of
the filaments right up to the brain. It is enough to know that it is communicated
by one or the other means, or by both in conjunction.
It should also be known that these filaments can be set in motion in two ways,
either at the end outside the brain or at the end inside the brain. If they are
agitated externally through the action of objects, and if their agitation is not
communicated to the brain, as happens in sleep, the soul receives no new sensation. But if these tiny filaments are excited in the brain by the flow of animal
spirits, or by some other cause, the soul perceives something, although the parts
of these filaments lying outside the brain and spread throughout all the parts of
our body, may be completely still, as happens during sleep.

Ill. The soul is immediately joined to that part of tire brain where
the filaments of the sense organs end.
It might be noted here in passing that it is known through experience that we
can feel pain in parts of our bodies that have been amputated, because if the
corresponding filaments of the brain are disturbed in the same way as if these
parts had been injured, the soul senses a very real pain in these imaginary parts.
All these things clearly show that the soul immediately resides in that part of the
brain to which all the sense organs lead. When I say that it resides there, I mean
only that it is aware of all the changes taking place there in relation to the objects
that cause them, or customarily cause them, and that it perceives what happens
outside this part only through the agency of the fibers ending there, or if you
wish, through the agency of the different reactions of the spirits contained in
these fibers. For I am convinced that the soul can immediately reside only in
ideas, which alone can affect and stir the soul, and make it happy or unhappy, as
I shall explain elsewhere. With this laid out and well understood, it will not be
very difficult to see how sensation occurs, which must be explained with an
example.

IV. An example of the effect objects ha1·e on the body.
When the point of a needle is pressed against the hand, the point separates and
stimulates the fibers of the flesh. These fibers extend from this point to the brain,
and when one is awake. they are taut enough to be disturbed only if those of the
brain are disturbed. It follows then, that the extremities of these fibers in the
brain are also stimulated. If the movement in the hand's fibers is moderate, so
also will be the movement of the brain's fibers, and if the movement is violent
enough to cause rupture in the hand, it will likewise be stronger and more violent
in the brain.
Likewise, if the hand is brought near fire, the particles of wood, which are
continually emitted in great number and with great violence (as reason, upon the
default of vision, demonstrates), strike these fibers and communicate to them
part of their agitation. Ifthis action is moderate,then that ofthe extremities of the
fibers in the brain, which correspond to the hand, will be moderate; and if this
motion is violent enough to sever its parts, as happens when it is burned, the
movement of the interior fibers of the brain will be proportionately stronger and

The Searc:h after Truth

51

more violent. This is what can be understood of what happens to our body when
objects strike us; we must now see what happens to our soul.

V. The effec:t of objects on the soul and the reasons why the soul is
unaware of the motion of the body's fibers.
It resides primarily. if I may so express it, in the part of the brain to which the
filaments of our nerves lead. It is located there for the maintenance and preservation of aU the parts of our body, and, consequently, it must be advised of all its
changes and must be able to distinguish those that are agreeable to our body's
constitution from those that are not, because it would be of no use to know them
absolutely and without this relation to its body. Thus, although all these changes
in our fibers really consist only in motion, which generally varies only in degree,
the soul of necessity regards them as essential changes. For though they vary in
themselves very little, changes in motion must always be taken as essential
changes in relation to the preservation of the body.
The motion that causes pain, for example, often enough differs but little from
that which causes a tickling sensation. There need not be any essential difference
between these two motions, but there must be an essential difference between the
tickling sensation and the pain that these motions cause in the soul. For the
disturbance of the fibers accompanying the tickling sensation• is evidence to the
soul of the well-being of its body, that it has sufficient strength to resist the
object's impression, and that it need not fear being hurt by it. But the motion
accompanying pain, being rather more violent, can rupture the body's fibers, and
the soul must be warned of this by some unpleasant sensation so that it may guard
against it. Thus, although the motions occurring in the body differ in themselves
only in degree, nonetheless, if considered in relation to the preservation of our
life, they can be said to differ essentially.
This is why our soul is unaware of the disturbances that objects excite in the
fibers of our flesh. It would be of no use for the soul to know them, and it would
not be thereby enlightened in order to judge whether the things surrounding us
were capable of destroying or maintaining the body's equilibrium. But it feels
affected by impressions that differ essentially and that, showing the qualities of
objects in relation to the body, make it immediately and acutely aware of whether
these objects are capable of doing it harm.
It should be considered, funher, that if the soul perceived only what takes
place in the hand when it is being burned, if it saw in it only the movement and
rupture of fibers, it would hardly take any notice; it might even derive from it
some whimsical satisfaction, like those simpletons who amuse themselves by
breaking everything in furious orgies of destruction.
Or just as a prisoner would hardly be upset at seeing the walls enclosing him
being demolished, and would even rejoice in the hope of soon being freed, so too
if we perceived only the separation of the parts of our body when we were being
burned, or were receiving some wound, we would soon be convinced that our
"This confused inference or natunl judgment which applies to the body what the soul senses, is but
what might be called a compound sensation. See what I have aln:ady said about natural judgments,
and the first chapter of the third book. 3.

!52

Nicolas Malebranche

happiness was not contained in a body that prevents us from enjoying the things
that ought to make us happy. Thus, we would be very content to see it destroyed.
Hence, it was with great wisdom that the Author of the union of our soul and
body ordained that we should feel pain when a change capable of destroying it
occurs in the body (as when a needle enters the flesh or fire separates some of its
parts), and that we should feel a tickling sensation or a pleasant warmth when this
movement is moderate, without perceiving what really happens in our bodies, or
the movement of the fibers we have just spoken about. < There arc three reasons
for this:>
First, because while feeling pleasure and pain, which arc things differing more
than in degree, we more easily distinguish the objects that occasion them. Second, because if we must either embrace or flee the bodies surrounding us, this
way of informing us is the quickest, and funher, it less exhausts the capacity of a
mind made only for God. Finally, because pleasure and pain are modifications of
the soul that it feels in relation to the body, and that affect it more than the
awareness of movement in the body's fibers-all of which forces the soul to take
careful note of them and results in a very close union between the two parts of
man. It is clear from all this that the senses were given us only for the preservation of our bodies and not for the acquisition of truth.
What has just been said about pain and tickling sensations should be understood to apply generally to all other sensations, as will be seen better in what
follows. We began with these two sensations rather than with the others because
these are most vivid and best illustrate my meaning.
It is now very easy to show that we fall into an infinity of errors concerning
light and colors, and generally all sensible qualities such as heat, cold, odors,
flavors, sound, pain, tickling; and if I were willing to pause to inquire individually into all the errors we fall into concerning all the objects of the senses, whole
years would not be enough to deduce them because they are almost infmite.
Thus, it will suffice to speak of them in general.
In almost all sensations there are four different things that we confuse because
they all occur instantaneously and together. This confusion is the basis for all
other errors of our senses.
VI. Four things we confuse in each sensation.

The first is the action of the object, i.e., in heat, for example, the motion and
impact of the particles of wood against the fibers of the hand.
The second is the passion of the sense organ, i.e., the agitation of the fibers of
the hand caused by the agitation of the tiny particles of fire, which agitation is
communicated to the brain, because otherwise the soul would sense nothing.
The third is the passion, sensation, or perception of the soul, i.e., what each of
us feels when near fire.
The fourth is the judgment the soul makes that what it perceives is in the hand
and in the fire. Now this natural judgment is only a sensation, but the sensation or
natural judgment is almost always followed by another, free judgment that the
soul makes so habitually that it is almost unable to avoid it.

The Search after Truth

S3

Obviously, these are four different things that are not difficuh to distinguish
but that one is likely to confuse because of the close union between soul and
body, which union prevents us from precisely distinguishing the properties of
matter from those of mind.
Nonetheless, it is easy to see that, of the four things taking place in us when we
perceive some object, the first two pertain to the body but the Iauer can pertain
only to the soul-provided that, as I have assumed, some thought be given to the
nature of the soul and of the body. But these things must be explained individually.

BOOK ONE: THE SENSES
Chapter Eleven

I. The error we fall into concerning the action of objects against the exterior
fibers of our senses. II. The cause of this error. Ill. An objection and reply.

In this chapter and the three following, we shall discuss the four things that we
have just said are confused and taken for a simple sensation. Only in a general way
shall we explain the errors we fall into, because if we wanted to enter into detail,
we would never finish. The hope is always to facilitate the readers' discovery of
all the errors into which the senses can lead us, but to this end, they are asked to
meditate as carefully on the chapters that follow as on the one they have just read.
I. The error we fall into concerning tire action of objects against tire
fibers of our senses.
The first of the things we confuse in each of our sensations is the action of
objects on the exterior fibers of our body. Certainly. the difference between the
soul's sensation and this action of objects is hardly ever noted, and this point
needs no proof. Almost everyone believes that the heat he feels, for example, is
in the fire causing it, that light is in the air, and that colors are on colored objects.
They give no thought to the motion of the imperceptible bodies that cause, or
rather, accompany, these sensations.

II. Tire cause of this error.
True, they do not judge that the pain is in the needle pricking them as they
judge that the heat is in the fire. But the reason for this is that the needle and its
action are visible whereas the particles of wood emitted from the fire, as well as
their movement against our hands, are unseen. Thus, not seeing anything strike
our hands when we warm ourselves and feel heat in them, we naturally judge that
this heat is in the fire, having seen nothing else in it.
As a result, it is generally the case that we attribute our sensations to objects
when the causes of these sensations are unknown. And because pain and tickling
are produced by sensible bodies such as a needle or a feather that we can see and
touch, we do not judge on this account that there is anything resembling these
sensations in the objects causing them.
54

Th~ S~arch aft~r

ss

Truth
Ill. An objection.

It is nonetheless true that we cannot judge the burning sensation to be in the
fin: but only in the hand, although it has as its cause the tiny panicles of wood as
well as the heat, which we still anribute to the fin:. But the reason for this is that
this sensation is a kind of pain-having several times judged that pain is not in
the external body causing it, we an: led to make the same judgment about it.
We an: further inclined to this judgment in that pain or a burning sensation
directs the soul's anention to the pans of our body and this distracts our thought
from anything else. The mind thus assigns the burning sensation to the object
nearest it. Because we realize somewhat later that the bum has left visible marlts
in the place when: we felt pain, we an: confirmed in our judgment that the
burning sensation is in the hand.
But this does not prevent us from embracing the general rule, that we ordinarily attribute our sensations to objects whenever they act on us through the motion
of invisible particles. For this reason, it is generally believed that colors, light,
odors, tastes, sound, and several other sensations, an: in the air or in the external
objects causing them, • because all these sensations an: produced in us through
the motion of imperceptible bodies.
It should not be imagined that it is up to us to assign the sensation of whiteness
to snow or to see it as white, or to assign the pain to the pricked finger rather than
to the thorn that pricks it. All of this occurs in us independently of us and even in
spite of us as the natural judgments I spoke of in the ninth chapter. And this
occurs in us solely in connection with the preservation of life; it is clear that
vivid, affective sensations must be feh in the pricked finger rather than in the
thorn in order to pull it away, and non-affective sensations of colors must be
sensed in objects in order to distinguish them from each other. As I have not yet
proved that objects an: not seen in themselves nor explained what is seen when
one looks at them, I can show clearly neither why nor how whiteness is joined to
snow and color to objects. That depends on knowledge of the ideas that affect the
soul and that enlighten, as it wen:, the mind's eyes when those of the body an:
opened.

•1 shall e1.plain below in what sense objects are c:ause of our sensations.

BOOK ONE: THE SENSES
Chapter Twelve

t

I. Errors concerning the mol•ement of the fibers of our senses. II. That we do
not perceil'e this mo1•ement or we confuse it with our sensations. Ill. An experiment that proves this. IV. Three kinds of sensations. V. Errors accompanying
them.
I. Errors concerning the motion or disturbance of tire fibers of our
senses.

The second thing found in each of our sensations is the disturbance of the fibers
of our senses that is communicated to the brain. We are in error when we
constantly confuse this disturbance with the soul's sensation and when we judge
that there is no disturbance when we do not perceive it with the senses.
II. We confuse it with our soul's sensations, and we sometimes do
not perceive this disturbance at all.
We confuse, for example, the vibration that fire excites in the fibers of our
hand with the sensation of heat, and we say that the heat is in our hand. But
because we do not perceive the disturbance caused by visible objects in the optic
nerve at the fundus of the eye, we think that the nerve is not disturbed at all, and
that it is not covered with the colors we see; rather, we judge that there is only the
external object on which these colors are located. Nevenheless, it can be seen
from the following experiment that colors are almost as strong and vivid on the
fundus of the optic nerve as on visible objects.
Ill. An experiment that pro1•es this.

Take the eye of a freshly slaughtered ox and replace the skin opposite the pupil
where the optic nerve is located with a piece of paper thin enough to be transparent. Then set this eye in a window with the pupil outside and the back of the eye
inside the room, which should be tightly sealed in order to be quite dark. All the
colors of objects outside the room will then be seen distributed on the fundus of
the eye, though represented as inverted. If these colors happen not to be vivid
enough, the eye should be elongated by pressing its sides when the objects
S6

The Search after Truth

57

represented on the fundus of lhe eye are too close, or else it should be flattened
when the objects are too far away.
It can be seen from Ibis experiment chat we should judge or perceive lhe colors
at lhe fundus of the eye just as we judge that heat is in our hand, if our senses
were given us to discover truth, and if we were led by reason in the judgments we
form about lhe objects of our senses.
But to account entirely for lhe strangeness of our judgments about sensible
qualities, it should be considered that the soul is so closely joined to its body and
has even become so carnal since lhe Fall and consequently so incapable of
concentration chat it attributes to the body many lhings chat belong only to itself,
and hardly distinguishes itself from lhe body anymore. As a resull, it not only
attributes to it all the sensations we are now discussing but also lhe power of
imagination and sometimes even the capability of reasoning, for many philosophers have been stupid and dense enough to believe that the soul is only the
subtlest and rarest part of the body.
If you carefully read Tertullian, you will find only too much evidence for what
I say, since he is himself of Ibis opinion, following a great number of authors
whom he cites. So certain is Ibis chat he tries to prove in his book On the Soul that
we are obliged by faith, Scripture, and even by private revelation to believe that
lhe soul is corporeal.• And this should not be surprising, since he has fallen into
lhe utter folly of fancying chat God Himself is corporeal. I have no desire to
refute lhese opinions because I have assumed chat you should have read certain
works of Saint Augustine, or of Descartes, chat will have sufficiently made clear
lhe foolishness of these thoughts, and will have fixed in your mind the distinction
between extension and thought, between lhe soul and the body.
The soul, chen, is so blind that it misunderstands itself and does not recognize
the ownership of its own sensations. But to explain this, lhree sorts of sensations
must be distinguished in the soul: lhe strong and lively, the weak and languid,
and those in between.

IV. An explication of three kinds of sensations in the soul.
Strong and lively sensations are those chat startle and forcefully rouse the mind
because they are either quite pleasant or else very unpleasant; such are pain,
tickling sensations, extremes of beat or cold, and generally all those accompanied not only by traces in the brain but also by movement of spirits toward the
body's interior parts, i.e., by a movement of spirits conducive to changing lhe
body's position and to exciting the passions, as we shall explain elsewhere.
Weak and languid sensations are those having little affect on the soul and that
are neither pleasant nor unpleasant, such as moderate light, alllhe colors, rather
weak, ordinary sounds, and so on.
Finally I term intennediate between the strong and weak those sensations that
moderately affect the soul, such as a strong light, or a great noise, and such. Now
it should be noted that a weak and languid sensation can become intermediate,
"Aug. Ep. 157.

S8

Nicolas

Mal~branch~

and finally strong and lively. For example, the sensation we have of light is weak
when the light of a torch is dying or when the torch is at a distance, but the
sensation can become intermediate if the torch is brought close enough to us, and
it can finally become very strong and lively if we go so near the torch that it
dazzles the eyes, or when we look at the sun. Thus, the sensation of light can be
strong, weak, or intermediate by degrees.

V. Errors accompanying sensations.
Here then are the judgments our soul makes concerning these three kinds of
sensations; we can see here that it almost always blindly follows sensible impressions or the natural judgments of the senses, and that it is content, as it were,
to spread itself onto the objects it considers by clothing them with what it has
stripped from itself.
The first of these sensations are so strong and lively that the soul can hardly
help realizing they belong to it in some way. As a result, the soul not only judges
them to be in objects, but it also believes them to be in the members of its body,
which it considers as a part of itself. Thus, it judges not only that heat and cold
are in fire and ice, but also that they are within its own hands.
As for weak sensations, they affect the soul so little that it does not believe
they belong to it, nor that they are within it or its own body, but that they are only
in objects. This is why we remove light and colors from our soul and eyes in
order to adorn external objects with them, although reason teaches us that they
are not to be found in the idea we have of matter, that we should judge them to be
in our eyes as well as on objects, since they are seen there as well as in objects. as
I have proved by the experiment of the ox's eye set in the opening of a window.
Now the reason why all men do not immediately see that colors, odors, tastes,
and all other sensations are modifications of their soul is that we have no clear
idea of our soul. For when we know a thing by the idea representing it, we clearly
know the modifications it can have. Everybody agrees that roundness, for example, is a modification of extension, because everyone knows extension through a
clear idea representing it.a Therefore, given that we do not know our soul
through an idea, as I shall explain elsewhere, but only by the inner sensation we
have of it, we do not know through simple perception but only through reasoning
whether brightness, light, color. and the other weak and languid sensations are
modifications of our soul. But for lively sensations such as pleasure and pain, we
easily judge that they are in us because we perceive that they affect us, and we
need not know them through their ideas in order to know that they belong to us.
As for the intermediate sensations, the soul finds itself puzzled. For, on the
one hand, it wishes to follow the natural judgments of the senses, and, as a result,
it denies ownership of these sorts of sensations as much as it can in order to
attribute them to objects. But, on the other hand, it cannot but perceive within
itself that they belong to it, particularly when these sensations approach those I
have termed strong and lively. As a result of this, the following is how it operates
with regard to the judgments it makes about them. If the sensation sufficiently
"See book 3, pl. 2. ch. 7.

The Search after Truth

S9

affects it, the soul judges it to be in its own body as well as in the object. If the
sensation affects it but very little, the soul judges it to be only in the object. And
if the sensation is exactly intermediate between the strong and the weak, then the
soul to the extent that it judges it only through the senses does not know what to
believe concerning it.
For example, if you look at a candle from some distance, your soul judges that
the light is only in the object. If you place the candle quite close to your eyes,
your soul judges that the light is not only in the candle but also in your eyes. But
if you step back a pace from the candle, the soul's judgment is suspended as to
whether this light is only in the object. But the correct thought never occurs to the
soul, that light is not and cannot be a property or a modification of matter and that
it is in fact within the soul itself, because it never thinks to avail itself of reason in
order to discover the truth about what is in it; the soul avails itself only of the
senses, which never discover the truth and which were given only for the preservation of the body. Now the reason why the soul does not avail itself of reason,
i.e., of pure intellection, when it considers an object perceptible to the senses is
that the soul is not affected by things it perceives through pure intellection, and
that, on the other hand, it is very much affected by sensible things; for the soul
attends closely to things that greatly affect it and ignores things that do not. Thus,
it almost always accords its free judgments to the natural judgments of the
senses.
In order to judge intelligently, then, about light and colors as well as all other
sensible qualities, the sensation of color must be carefully distinguished from the
movement of the optic nerve, and reason must make it clear that (a) motion and
impulse are propenies of bodies and that therefore they can be found in objects
and in our sense organs, but that (b) the light and colors we see are modifications
of the soul, which are quite different from the above propenies and of which we
also have quite different ideas.
Cenainly, a peasant, for example, sees colors perfectly well and distinguishes
them from those things that have no color. It is also cenain that he does not
perceive any motion either in colored objects or in the fundus of his eye-color,
therefore, is not motion. Likewise, a peasant perfectly well feels heat and knows
it clearly enough to distinguish it from everything that is not heat-however, he
does not believe merely that the fibers of his hand are excited. The heat that he
feels, then, is not an instance of motion because the ideas of heat and of motion
are different and each can be had without the other. There is no other reason for
saying that a square is not a circle than that the idea of a square is different from
that of a circle and that the one can be thought of without thinking of the other.
Little concentration is required to see that the natural cause of our sensations of
anything need not itself contain the sensation. For just as light need not be in my
hand for me to see light when I strike my eyes, so heat need not be in the fire for
me to feel it when I bring my hands near it, nor does any sensible quality I
perceive have to be in the object. It is enough that they cause some disturbance in
the fibers of my flesh so that my soul to which it is joined may be modified by
some sensation. There is no relation, it is true, between instances of motion and
sensations. But neither is there any relation between the mind and body, and

60

Nicolas Malebranche

since nature or the will of the Creator allies these two substances (however
opposed in their nature they may be), it should not be surprising if their modifications are reciprocal. Such must be the case so that together they make a whole.
It should be noted that our senses, having been given us for the preservation of
our body, quite appropriately lead us to judge as we do about sensible qualities. It
is more to our advantage to perceive pain and heat as being in our body than to
judge them to be only in the objects causing them, because, given that pain and
heat can injure our members, we should be warned when they are attacking us in
order to avoid being hurt.
But such is not the case with colors-they ordinarily cannot injure the fundus
of the eye (where they are focused), and we have no need to know that they are
represented there. We need these colors only to know objects more distinctly,
and that is why our senses lead us to attribute them solely to objects. Thus, the
judgments into which our sense impressions lead us are quite correct, if they are
considered in relation to the preservation of the body. But they are nevertheless
quite bizarre and far removed from the truth, as we have already seen in part and
shall see further in the following.

BOOK ONE: THE SENSES
Chapter Thirteen

t

I. The nature of sensations. II. That we know them better than we think.
Ill. An objection and reply. IV. Why we fancy we know nothing of our sensa·
tions. V. That we are mistaken in thinking everyone has the same sensations of
the same objects. VI. An objection and reply.
I. The definition of sensation.
The third thing found in each of our sensations, or what we sense when, for
example, we are near a fire, is a modification ofour soul in relation to what takes
place in the body to which it is joined. This modification is pleasant when what
occurs in the body helps the circulation of the blood and the other vital functions,
and is equivocally tenned heat. The modification is painful and altogether different from the former when what occurs in the body can disturb it or bum it (i.e.,
when the motion in the body can injure some of its fibers) and is ordinarily called
pain or a burning sensation. The same holds for the other sensations, but here are
the commonly accepted views on the matter.

II. We know our own sensations better than we think.
The first mistake is that we think we have no knowledge of our sensations.
There are some people who are at a loss to know what pain is, as well as pleasure
and the other sensations, becauR they confuse the soul and body and do not
agree that sensations are only in the soul and are but modifications of it. Surely
these types are remarkable for wishing to be taught what they cannot fail to
know, because a man cannot be entirely ignorant of what pain is when he feels it.
Someone who bums his hand, for example, distinguishes quite well the pain
he feels from light, color, sound, tastes, odors, pleasures, and from all pains
other than the one he feels; he distinguishes it from wonder, from desire, from
love; he distinguishes it from a square, from a circle, from motion-in short, he
recognizes it as different from everything that is not the pain he feels. Now if he
had no knowledge of pain, I would like to know how he could realize with clarity
md certitude that what he feels is none of these things.
To a certain extent, then, when we see colors or have some other sensation, we
know what we immediately perceive. Indeed, if we did not know, we certainly
61

62

Nicolas Malebranche

would not know any sensible object. because we surely would not be able to tell
wine from water if we did not know that the sensations we have of the one are
different from those we have of the other and hence from everything of which we
have knowledge through the senses.
Ill. An objection and rep(\'.
It is true that if I were pressed and asked to explain what pain, pleasure. color,
and so on, are, I could not completely do so with words. But it does not follow
from this that if I saw color, or if I burned myself, I would not know at least to
some extent what I was then pen:eiving.
Now the reason why all sensations cannot, like all other things, be explained
with words is that it depends on men's will to attach the ideas of things to such
terms as please them. They can call the sky Ouranos. or Schamajim, and so
forth, like the Greeks and Hebrews; but these same men do not attach at will their
sensations to words or to anything else. Though one may talk to them about
colors, if they do not open their eyes, they do not sec colors. They do not taste
flavors unless some change takes place in the order of the fibers of their tongue
and brain. In a word, sensations do not depend upon the will of man, and only He
who fashioned them keeps them in this mutual correspondence of modifications
in soul and body. As a result, if a man wants me to represent heat or color to him,
I cannot do so with words-1 must impress on his sense organs the motion to
which nature has attached these sensations, i.e., I must bring him near fire and
show him pictures.
This is why blind people cannot be given the least knowledge of what is meant
by red, green, yellow, and so on. Since we cannot make ourselves understood
unless our listeners have the same ideas as ours, it is clear that these sensations,
not being attached to the sound of words or to the nerve of the ear but to that of
the optic nerve cannot be depicted for the blind, since their optic nerve cannot be
excited by colored objects.
IV. How it happens tlrat we imagine oursel1•es ignorant of our own
sensations.
We have some knowledge, then, of our sensations. Now let us see how it is
that we still seek to know them and believe we have no knowledge of them.
Here, no doubt, is the reason.
Since Original Sin, the soul has become corporeal, as it were, in its inclinations. Its love for sensible things continuously erodes its union or tie with
intelligible things. Only with distaste does it conceive of nonsensiblc things, and
it is immediately ready to disregard them. It makes every effort to produce
images in the brain representing them, and so accustomed is it from its infancy to
this kind of conception that it believes itself not to know what it cannot imagine.
Nevertheless, there are some things, such as our soul with all its modifications.
that, not being corporeal, cannot be represented to the mind by corporeal images.
When, therefore, our soul wishes to represent to itself its own nature and its own
sensations, it tries to form a corporeal image of them. It looks around among
corporeal beings-it takes itself now for one, now for another, now for air, now

The Search after Truth

63

for fire, now for the hannony of its body's parts. Thus. bent on being located
among bodies and on fancying its own modifications as modifications of bodies,
the soul should cause no wonder if it loses its bearings and altogether misunderstands itself.
What leads the soul even more into wanting a fanciful view of its sensations is
that it judges them to be in objects and even to be modifications of objects, and
consequently that they are corporeal and can be imagined. Thus, it judges that the
nature of its sensations consists only in the motion that causes them, or in some
other modification of body. This is different from what it pen:eives, which has
nothing corporeal about it and cannot be represented by corporeal images. This
state of affairs confuses the soul and makes it believe that it does not know its
own sensations.
As for those who do not waste their time trying to represent the soul and its
modifications with corporeal images and who yet continually ask to have sensation explained to them, they should know that neither the soul nor its modifications can be known through ideas (taking the word idea in its true sense, as I
explain and specify it in the third book•) but only by inner sensation. Thus, when
they wish to have the soul and its sensations explained to them with ideas, they
want what even all men combined cannot give them, since men cannot teach us
by giving us ideas of things, but only by making us think about those we
naturally possess.
The second error we fall into concerning sensation is to attribute them to
objects; this error was explained in chapters eleven and twelve.

V. That we are mistaken in thinking tlrat e,·eryone has the same
sensations of the same objects.
The third error is that we judge that everyone has the same sensations of the
same objects. We believe, for example. that everyone sees the blue sky, the
green meadows, and all visible objects in the same way we see them (and so for
all other sensible qualities of the other senses). Some people will be surprised
that I cast doubt on things they thought indubitable. Nonetheless, I can guarantee
that they have never had any justification for judging these things as they have;
and although I cannot demonstrate mathematically that they are mistaken, I can
nevertheless demonstrate that if they are not mistaken it is through the most
remarkable luck in the world. But I still have reasons that warrant the claim that
they really are in error.
To grasp the truth of what I am suggesting, what I have already proved must be
recalled, namely. that there is a big difference between sensations and the causes
of sensations. It may be concluded from this that. strictly speaking. it can happen
that similar motions in the interior fibers of the optic nerve do not produce the
same sensation for different people, i.e., do not make them see the same colors;
and it might happen that motion that will cause the sensation of blue in one
person will cause that of green or gray in another, or even a novel sensation that
no one has ever had.
•Pt. 2. c:h. 7. See also the Elucidation on the same c:haptcr.

64

Nico/4s Malebranchf

Certainly, this is possible and any demonstration to the contrary is withou1
foundation. Yet I agree that it is not likely that such is the case. It is mon:
reasonable to believe that God always acts in the same way in establishing the
union between our souls and bodies, and that He joins the same ideas and
sensations to similar motion of the brain's interior fibers in different people.
Though the same motion of fibers terminating in the brain may be accompanied by the same sensations in all men, if the same objects happen not to
produce the same motion in their brain, they consequently will not excite the
same sensations in their soul. Now it seems to me beyond question thai
evel)'one's sense organs, not being disposed in the same way, cannot receive the
same impressions from the same objects.
The punches that porters give each other by way of compliment would cripple
more delicate people. The same blow produces quite different motion and consequently quite different sensations in a man of robust constitution and in a child or
a woman of delicate nature. Since there an: no two people who can be guaranteed
to have identical sense organs, it cannot be guaranteed that there an: two people
in this world having completely the same sensations of the same objects.
Here is the source of that vast variety found in men's inclinations. Some like
music a great deal and others an: indifferent to it. Even among those who enjoy
it, some like one kind of music, others another, depending on the almost infmite
variety found in the aural fibers, the blood, and the spirits. How much difference
there is, for example, between the music of France and that of Italy and of China
and of other lands, and as a result, between the taste these different peoples have
for the different kinds of music. It even happens that one receives different
impressions at different times from the same concertos. If your imagination is
carried away by a great abundance of agitated spirits, you enjoy listening more to
robust music that allows more dissonances than to more mellow music, which
follows rules and mathematical precision more closely. Experience proves this,
and the reason for it can easily be supplied.
The same holds true for odors. Those who like orange blossom may find roses
unbearable, and vice versa.
As for tastes, there is as much diversity here as in the other sensations. Sauces
must be altogether different to be equally pleasing to different people, or to be
equally pleasing to the same person at different times. One likes the sweet,
another likes the sour. One finds wine pleasant, another abhors it; and the same
person who finds it pleasant when he is well finds it bitter when in a fever-and
so on for the other senses. Yet all men like pleasure, they all like pleasant
sensations, and in this they all have the same inclination. Hence they do not all
receive the same sensations from the same objects, since they do not like them
equally.
Thus, what makes one man say he likes sweetness is that the sensation he has
of it is pleasant, and what makes another say that he does not like sweetness is, if
the truth be known, that he does not have the same sensation as he who likes it.
When he says that he does not like sweetness, then, it does not me~m that he does
not like to have the sensation the other is having, but only that he does not have
it. As a result, it is incorrect to say that one does not like sweetness; one ought to

The Search after Truth

6S

say that he does not like the sugar, the honey, and so on, that others find sweet
and enjoyable, and that he does not experience the same taste as others because
the fibers of his tongue are differently disposed.
Here is a more illustrative example. Suppose that there are twenty people, and
that one of them, who does not know the words used in France to indicate cold
and wannth, has cold hands, and the others have extremely wann hands. If tepid
water were brought to them during the winter for washing, those with wann
hands, taking their turns to wash first, would say, this is very cold water, I do not
like it at all. But when he with the very cold hands finally had his tum to wash, he
would say, I do not know why you do not like cold water; for myself I find the
sensation of cold water and washing in it quite pleasing.
It is quite clear in this example that when this fellow says, I like cold, it means
nothing if not that he likes wannth and that he feels wannth where others feel the
opposite.
Thus, when a man says, I like what is bitter and cannot stand sweets, it can
only mean that he does not have the same sensalions as those who claim to like
sweets, and who dislike whal is bitter.
It is certain, then, that a sensalion that is enjoyable to one person is enjoyable
to everyone who feels it, but, on account of the different disposition of the sense
organs, the same objects do not produce the sensation for everyone. This matter
is of utmost importance for both physics and morals.
(VI.] An easily resolved objection might be raised here, namely, that it sometimes happens that people who like certain meats a great deal wind up by
abhorring them, either because they have unexpectedly found some foreign matter mixed in while eating it, or because they have eaten it to excess and have
become quite sick, or for some other reason. These people, it will be claimed, no
longer like the same sensations they formerly liked; for they still have the same
sensations when they eat the same meat, and yet these sensations are no longer
pleasant.
To answer this objection, it should be noted that when these people taste meats
that they abhor and find disgusting, they have at the same time two quite different
sensations. They have the sensation of the meat they are eating (which the
objection assumes); but they also have the further sensation of disgust, which
springs, for example, from vividly imagining the foreign matterthey have seen to
be mixed with what they are eating. The reason for this is that when two
movements are produced in the brain simultaneously, the one is no longer
aroused without the other unless a considerable time has elapsed. Thus, because
the pleasant sensation never arises without the distasteful one, and because we
confuse things produced simultaneously, we fancy that the sensation that had
been pleasant is no longer so. Yet if the sensation remains the same, it must
always be pleasant. As a result of this, if the sensalion is fancied unpleasant, the
reason is that it is coupled and confused with another that is more disgusting than
it itself is pleasant.
There is more difficulty in proving that colors and certain other sensations I
have called weak and languid are not the same in all men, because all these
sensalions so little affect the soulthal, unlike tastes or other stronger and livelier

66

Nicolas Malebranche

sensations, one of these cannot be determined as more pleasant than another, and
thus the variety of people's sensations cannot be seen from the diversity of their
pleasure and disgust. Yet reason, which shows that the other sensations are not
alike in different people, also shows that there must be diversity in our sensations
of colors. Indeed, it cannot be doubted that there is a great deal of diversity in
different people's organs of sight as well as of hearing and taste, for there is no
~ason to suppose a perfect resemblance in the optic nerve of all men since there
is an infinite variety found in nature's works and especially in material things.
There is some indication, then, that not all men see the same colors in the same
objects.
Yet I believe that it never, or almost never, happens that people see black or
white other than as we see them, though they may not seem equally black or
white to them. But as for the intermediate colors, such as red, yellow, blue, and
especially those compounded from these three, I do not think there are many
people who have exactly the same sensation of them. There are some people who
see certain objects yellow with one eye and as green or blue with the other. Yet if
these people be supposed born one-eyed, or with two eyes disposed to see as blue
what we call green, they would think they saw objects as having the same color
that we see them as having because they would always have heard called green
what they would see as blue.
That not all men see the same objects as having the same color might further be
shown in that, according to the statements of some, the same colors are not
equally pleasing to all kinds of people, since if these sensations were the same
they would be equally pleasing to everyone. But because very strong objections
based on my reply to the preceding objection could be raised against this proof, it
was not thought sound enough to be proposed here.
Indeed, it is rare enough that one color is much more pleasing than another in
the same way that one taste is much more pleasing than another. The reason for
this is that sensations of color are not given to us for judging whether bodies are
nourishing or not. This is indicated by pleasure and pain, which are the natural
marks of good and evil. Insofar as they are colored, objects are neither bad nor
good for eating. If objects appeared to us pleasant or unpleasant insofar as they
are colored, the perception of them would always be followed by a flow of spirits
that excites and accompanies the passions, since the soul cannot be affected
without being moved emotionally. We would often detest good things and like
the bad, so that we would not long preserve our life. In conclusion, sensations of
color are given to us only for the purpose of picking out one body from another,
and it would do as well to see the grass as red or green as long as the person
seeing it as red or green always saw it in the same way.
But enough of these sensations. Let us now speak about natural judgments and
the free judgments accompanying them. This is the fourth thing we confuse with
the other three we have just dealt with.

BOOK ONE: THE SENSES
Chapter Fourteen

t

I. The false judgments that accompany our sensations and are confused with
them. II. Reasons forthese false judgments. Ill. That error is found not in our
sensations but only in these judgments.
I. The false judgments that accompany our sensations and are
confused with them.
It can be predicted at the outset that few people will not be taken aback by the
following general proposition, viz., lhat we have no sensation of external objects
that does not involve one or more false judgments. It is well known that most
people do not even think there is any judgment, true or false, in our sensations.
Consequently, these people, surprised by the novelty of this proposition, will
undoubtedly say to themselves: but how can lhat be? I do not judge that this wall
is white, I see lhat it is; I do not judge that there is pain in my hand, I assuredly
feel it there; and who can doubt what is so certain unless he senses things in a
way different from mine? Their inclination toward childish prejudices will eventually lead them much further, and if they do not go on to insult and despise those
whom they believe to be of another opinion, they will undoubtedly deserve to be
counted among reasonable people.
But time need not be taken to predict the unhappy reception of our thoughts. It
would be more appropriate to express lhem wilh such strong arguments and to
place them in such a clear light lhat no one wilh his eyes open could attack lhem
or carefully consider lhem without submitting to them. We must now prove that
we have no sensation of external objects lhat does not include some false judgment. Here is lhat proof.
It seems to me beyond question that our souls do not occupy a space as vast as
that between us and the fixed stars, even if it be agreed our souls are extended;
thus, it is unreasonable to think lhat our souls are in the heavens when they see
stars there. It is not even thinkable that they should be projected a thousand feet
from lheir bodies in order to see houses at that distance. Our soul, lhen, must see
stars and houses where lhey are not, since lhe soul does not leave the body where
it is located, and yet sees them outside it. Now given that lhe stars immediately
67

68

Nicolas Malebranche

joined to the soul (which are the only stars it can see) are not in the heavens, it
follows that everyone who sees the stars in the heavens and who then voluntarily
judges they are there performs two false judgments, one of which is natural, the
other free. One is a judgment of the senses or a compound sensation. which is
within us, occurs independently of us, and even in spite of us, and according to
which no judgment should be made. The other is a free judgment of the will,
which can be avoided, and which consequently we must not make if we wish to
avoid error.

II. The reason for these false judgments.
But here is why these same stars that are immediately seen are thought 10 be
extemaliO the soul and in the heavens. The reason is that it is not in the soul's
power to see them at will, for it can perceive them only when the motion to which
the ideas of these objects are joined by nature occurs in the brain. Now, because
the soul is not aware of motion in the sense organs but only of its own sensations,
and because it knows that these sensations are not produced within it by itself, the
soul is led to judge that they are external to it, and in the cause that represents
them to it. It has made these kinds of judgments so many times simultaneously
with its perception of objects, that it can hardly avoid making them.
To explain fully what I have just said, it would be necessary to show the
uselessness of that infinite number of insignificant beings termed species and
ideas, which are as nothing and which yet represent all things, which we create
and destroy at will, and which our ignorance has led us 10 imagine in order 10
make sense of things we do not understand. It would be necessary to demonstrate
the soundness of the opinion of those who believe that God is the true father of
the light that alone enlightens all men and without which the simplest of truths
would not be intelligible, and without which the sun, as bright as it is, would not
even be visible. For this opinion has led me to the discovery of the following,
seemingly paradoxical, truth. Ideas that represent creatures 10 us are but the
perfections of God that correspond to these creatures, and that represent them. In
a word, it would be necessary 10 explicate and then prove my view of the nature
of ideas, and then there would be no difficulty in speaking more clearly about the
things I have just discussed; but that would lead us too far astray. All this will not
be explained until the third book, according to the requirements of order. For the
moment it is enough that I produce an illustrative and uncontroversial example in
which several judgments are found confused with the same sensation.
I do not think there is anyone in the world who in looking at the moon does not
see it about a thousand feet away, and who does not find it larger when it is rising
or sening than when it has risen well above the horizon; indeed, perhaps
everyone believes that he simply sees that it is larger without realizing that there
is any judgment involved in sensation. Yet it is beyond question that if there were
not some kind of judgment involved in sensation, he would not see the moon as
close as it appears 10 him. In addition 10 this, he would see it smaller when it is
rising than when it has risen well above the horizon, since we see it larger when it
is rising only because we judge it as being farther away through a natural
judgment that I discussed in the sixth chapter.

The Search after Truth

69

But over and above our natural judgments, which might be regarded as compound sensations, a free judgment is found in practically all our sensations: for
men not only judge through a natural judgment that pain, for example, is in their
hand, they also judge it by a free judgment; not only do they feel it there, they
also believe it to be there, and they have become so accustomed to forming such
judgments that they have great difficulty avoiding them. Yet in themselves these
judgments, though quite useful for the preservation of life, are quite false. Our
senses instruct us only for the benefit of the body, and all free judgments in
agreement with the judgments of sense are far removed from the truth.
But in order not to leave these things without giving some way of discovering
their causes [raisons], it should be noted thai there are two kinds of beings, those
our soul sees immediately, and those it knows only by means of the former. • For
example, when I see the sun rise, I first perceive what I see immediately, and
because I perceive this only because there is something outside me that produces
cenain motions in my eyes and brain, I judge thai this first sun, which is in my
soul, is external to me and that it exists.
Yet it can happen that we see this first sun, which is intimately joined to our
soul, without the other being on the horimn, and even without it existing at all.
Likewise we can see this first sun as larger when the other is rising than when it
has risen well above the horimn; and although it is true that this first sun that we
see immediately is larger when the other is rising, it does not follow thai this
other thai we are looking at, or, rather, toward which we are turning our eyes, is
larger. For it is really not the rising sun that we see or are looking at, since this
one is several million leagues away. Rather, we see the former, which really is
larger and is such as we see it, because all things that we see immediately are
always such as we see them, and we err only because we judge that what we see
immediately is found in the external objects thai are the cause of whal we see.
Likewise, when we see light while looking at the sun thai is immedialely
joined to our mind, we do not err in believing that we see it-it is impossible to
believe otherwise. Our error is that, without any reason and indeed against all
reason, we require the light we immediately see to exist in the sun outside us.
The same holds true for the other objects of our senses.
Ill. Error is found not in our sensations but only in our judgments.

If attention is paid to what we have said in this wort, it will be easy to see that,
of all the things found in every sensation, error is encountered only in the
judgments we make thai our sensalions are in objects.
First, it is no error not to know that the action of objects consists in the motion
of their pans and that this motion is communicaled to our sense organs, which are
the first two things found in every sensation. For there is a big difference between
not knowing something and being in error with regard to thai thing.
Second, we do not err at all with regard to the third thing, which is strictly
speaking the sensation. When we feel heal, when we see light, or colors, or other
"Ia order 10 fully ulldenlaDd this it is nec:essuy 10 have read what I sball say coaceniag the DatUre
of ideas iD the third book. or iD the first two Dialottws 011 M~taphysics.

70

Nicolas Malebranche

objects, we do in fact see them, even in delirium. Nothing is truer than that all
visionaries see what they see; their error lies only in their judgments that what
they see really exists externally because they see it externally.
This judgment involves the consent of our freedom and. as a result. is liable to
error. We should always avoid making it, according to the rule we laid down at
the outset of this book: that we should never judge of anything at all when we can
avoid doing so and when we are not constrained by evidence and certainty, as is
the case here. For although we feel ourselves strongly inclined by an entrenched
habit toward judging that our sensations are in objects, e.g .• that heat is in fire
and colors in pictures, yet we see no clear and cenain reason compelling us to
believe this; and thus we voluntarily submit to error through the misuse of our
freedom when we freely form such judgments.

BOOK ONE: THE SENSES
Chapter Fifteen

An ezpliJMtion of the panicuhu errors of sight as an emmple of the general
errors of our senses.
It seems to me we have sufficiently exposed the errors of the senses with regard
to sensible qualities in general, which we discussed with regard to light and
colors, whose explanation was required by order. We might now be expected to
descend to particulars somewhat, and examine in detail the errors into which
each of our senses leads us. But we shall not linger over these matters, because
after what has already been said, a little concentration will easily provide the
tedious explanation that would have to be given. We shall relate only the general
errors into which our vision plunges us concerning light and colors. This example
will be enough, we believe, to demonstrate the errors of the other senses.
When we have looked at the sun for a while, here is what happens to our eyes
and our soul, and here are the errors into which we stumble.
Those who know the rudiments of dioptrics and something of the eye's remarkable structure must know that the sun's rays undergo refraction in the
crystalline lens and in the other humors, and that they then converJe on the retina
or optic nerve, which covers the entire fundus of the eye-just as the sun's rays,
after passing through a magnifying glass or convex lens, converJe at the focus or
the burning point of the lens, two, three, or four inches from it, inversely
proportional to its convexity. Now experience teaches that if a piece of cloth or
black paper- is piKed at the focus of the magnifying glass, the rays of the sun
make so great an impact on the material or paper, and agitate their particles with
such violence, that they break them and separate them from each other. In a
word, the rays bum them or reduce them to smoke and ashes.
It must therefore be concluded from the experiment that if the optic nerve were
black and the pupil or the opening in the uvea by which light enters the eye were
to eolafJe, letting the sun's rays pass in freely instead of contracting to obstruct
them, what happens to the black cloth or paper would happen to our retina, and
"Black ..per buras easily, bulalarBCr or more convex mapifyina alan is needed 10 bum whille
..per.

71

72

Nicolas Malebranche

its fibers would be so agitated that they would soon be broken down and burned.
This is why most people feel great pain if they look at the sun for a bit-because
they cannot close the opening in the pupil sufficiently to prevent enough rays
from entering and so violently agitating the fibers of the optic nerve that they
stand in danger of being broken.
The soul has no knowledge of all we have just said, and when it looks at the
sun it is aware neither of its optic nerve nor of the motion in this nerve. But this is
not error, only ignorance. The first error it falls into is to judge that the pain it
feels is in the eye.
If immediately after looking at the sun one enters a dark place with open eyes,
this violent disturbance of the optic nerve's fibers caused by the rays of the sun
diminishes and is gradually transformed. This is the only change conceivable in
the fibers of the retina, except for some minor convulsions that occur in all nerves
when they are injured. Yet the soul does not perceive this, but only a white and
yellow light, and its second error is to judge that the light it sees is in its eyes or
on a nearby wall.
Finally the agitation of the retina's fibers diminishes continually and gradually
ceases altogether. This is not what the soul senses in the eyes. It sees that the
white color becomes orange, then changes into red, into green, and finally into
blue, that the brilliance of the colors gradually diminishes with the disturbance of
the retina, and that the former colors return, though in disorderly fashion due to
the convulsion it undergoes. The third error into which we fall is to judge that in
our eye or on the wall nearby there are alterations that differ other than quantitatively, because the blue, orange, and red colors we see do not differ from one
another merely quantitatively.
There you have some of the errors into which we fall concerning light and
colors, and these errors lead us into many others, as we are going to explain in
the following chapters.

BOOK ONE: THE SENSES
Chapter Sixteen

t

I. That the errors of our senses provide us with general premises ''ery conducive
to false conclusions, which themse"•es provide further premises. II. The origin
of essential differences. Ill. Substantial forms. IV. Several other errors of the
school philosophy.
[1.] The errors of our senses provide us with general premises
conducive to false conclusions, which themselves provide
further premises.
I feel that we have sufficiently explained for those who are not distracted or
incapable of concentration just whal our sensations consist of and the general
enon found in them. It is now appropriate to show (a) thai these general enon
are used as indubitable premises in the explanation of everything; (b) that an
infinite number of false conclusions are drawn from them thai are then used as
premises from which other conclusions are drawn; and finally, (c) thai these
fictitious sciences have been built up gradually without substance or reality and
ultimately lead only to blind groping-sciences that are like ghosts and only
yield their supporten either confusion and shame for letting themselves be
seduced, or thai insanity which enjoys feasting on illusions and chimeras. This is
what must be shown in detail through examples.
We have already said that we habitually attribute our own sensations to objects, and that we judge colon, odon, tastes, and other sensible qualities to be in
the bodies we call colored, odiferous, and flavored, and so on for the other
sensible qualities. We have seen that this is a mistake. Now it must be shown that
we employ this error as a premise in drawing false conclusions, which in tum are
considered as premises upon which we continue to base arguments. In a word,
we must indicate the path the human mind takes in looking for particular truths
when the false premise, that our sensations are in objects, appears indubitable.
But to illustrate this better, let us take a particular body whose nature we might
inquire into-let us look at what a man would do who wanted to know what
honey or salt is. The first thing he would do would be to examine the color, odor,
taste, and other sensible qualities, both of the honey and of the salt, asking how
they agree, how they differ, and the relations they might have with other bodies.

73

74

Nicolas Malebranche

After that, the following is roughly how he would reason, given that he assumed
as an indubitable premise, that our sensations are in the objects of sense.

II. The source of differences we attribute to objects: that these
differences are in the soul.
Everything I perceive while tasting, seeing, and handling the honey and the
salt are in the honey and the salt. Now, what I perceive in the honey undoubtedly
differs essentially from what I perceive in the salt. The whiteness of sah and the
color of honey unquestionably differ more than merely quantitatively. The same
holds for the sweetness of the honey and the sharp tast of the salt. Consequently,
there must be an essential difference between honey and salt, since what I
perceive in each differs not merely quantitatively, but essentially.
Here we have the first move this person would make. For undoubtedly he can
judge that honey and salt differ essentially only because he finds the appearances
of one to differ essentially from those of the other, i.e., that his sensations of
honey differ essentially from his sensations of salt, since he can judge them only
by the impression they make on his senses. He then views his conclusion as a
new premise, drawing from it other conclusions in similar fashion.

Ill. The origin of substantial forms.
Since honey. salt, and other natural bodies differ essentially from each other. it
follows that a great mistake is made by those who would have us believe that all
difference between bodies is but a matter of the different configuration of the
particles composing them. For, given that figure is not essential to different
bodies, if the figure of these particles changes, the honey will remain honey,
even if these particles were to have the figure of salt particles. Thus, there must
of necessity be some substance that, being joined to the primary matter common
to each different body, makes them differ essentially from one another.
Here we have the second move he would make, as well as the happy discovery
of substantial forms ~those fertile substances that make everything we see in
nature, though they subsist only in the imagination of our philosopher. But let us
take a look at the properties he is going to liberally bestow upon this entity of his
own invention, for he will undoubtedly strip all other substances of their most
essential properties in order to invest it with them.

IV. The source of all the other most general errors of school
physics.
Since every natural body is composed of two substances, one that is common
to honey, salt, and all other bodies, and the other that makes honey, sah, and all
other bodies what they are, it follows that the first (matter), indifferent to all
forms and having no contrary, must remain impotent and inactive, since it need
not defend itself. But substantial forms, on the other hand, must always be
accompanied by qualities and faculties to defend them. They must always stand
guard against being surprised; they must continually try to preserve themselves,
to extend their dominion over neighboring matter, and to push their conquest as
far as they can, because if they were impotent or failed to act, other forms would

Th~ s~llTCh aft~r

T11lth

75

immediately catch them unawares and annihilate them. They must struggle continuously, then, and they must nourish these antipathies and irreconcilable hatred
against those hostile forms whose only mission is to destroy them.
Should a fonn happen to ensnare another form's matter, should the form
cadaver, for example, catch hold of the body of a dog, the form need not indulge
itself in annihilating the dog's fonn; the satisfaction of its haired requires the
destruction of all the qualities that were part of the enemy's camp. The hair on
the cadaver must immediately be white with a newly created whiteness, its blood
must be red with an unmistakable redness, the entire body must be blanketed by
qualities faithful to their mistress, and these qualities must defend her with the
little strength had by a corpse's qualities that in tum must soon perish. But
because one cannot struggle endlessly, and because all things have a place of
rest, it is undoubtedly necessary that fire, for example, have its center, which it
continually hies to achieve through its lightness and natural inclination so that it
might be at rest, cease burning, and even give up its heat, which it keeps here
below only to defend itself.
Here is a small part of the conclusions drawn from the premise that there are
substantial forms, which we have had our philosopher draw a bit too freely, for
others usually say these same things more seriously than we have here.
There is an infinity of still other conclusions drawn daily by every philosopher,
depending on his mood and inclination, and on the fertility or sterility of his
imagination, for these are the only things that distinguish one philosopher from
another.
We shall not pause here to combat these chimerical substances, which others
have sufficiently examined. They have shown that substantial forms never
existed in nature, and that they serve to draw a very great number of false,
ridiculous, and even contradictory conclusions. It is enough here to have recognized that their origin is in the mind of man and that they owe their present
existence to that prejudice common to all men, that their sensations are in the
objects they sense. For if you carefully consider what we have already said,•
namely, that for the preservation of the body, our sensations must be essentially
different, though the impressions that objects make on our body differ but very
little, you will clearly see that it is wrong to imagine such great differences in the
objects of our senses.
But I should point out here in passing that then: is nothing wrong with the
terms form and essential difference. Honey is undoubtedly honey through its
form, and in this lies its essential difference from salt. But this form or essential
difference is only a matter of the different configuration of its parts. This different configuration makes honey and salt what they are; and although matter in
general has the configuration of the parts of honey or of salt, and hence the form
of honey or of salt, only accidentally, yet it can be said that a given configuration
of their parts is essential for honey or sah to be what they are. Likewise sensations of cold, heat, pleasure, and pain are not essential to the soul, but only to the
soul sensing them, because through these sensations it is called upon to feel heat,
cold, pleasure, and pain.
"Ch. 10. llrt. s.

BOOK ONE: THE SENSES
Chapter Seventeen

t

I. A different example drawn from morals, which shows that our senses offer us
only false goods. II. That only God is our good. Ill. The source ofthe errors of
the Stoics and Epicureans.
We have presented proofs that would seem to show that the prejudice that our
sensations are in objects is a fertile source of errors in physics. We must now
produce others taken from morals, in which it, in conjunction with the following
prejudice, that the objects of our senses are the true causes of our sensations, is
also very dangerous.

I. An example taken from morals. to the effect that our senses
provide us only with false goods.
Nothing is so common as the sight of people dedicated to sensible goodssome like music, others good living, and others are moved by other things. Now
the following is approximately how they must have reasoned to be of the opinion
that these objects are goods. All the enjoyable savors that please us at feasts, the
sounds that delight the ear, and the other pleasures we occasionally experience
are no doubt contained in sensible objects; or these objects at least make us aware
of them, and without their means we cannot enjoy these things. Now, it cannot
be doubted that pleasure is good and pain bad; of this we are inwardly convinced,
and, consequently, the objects of our passions are genuine goods to which we
should be dedicated in order to be happy.
That is the argument we ordinarily employ almost unconsciously. Thus, because we believe our sensations to be in objects, or objects to have in themselves
the power of making us sense them, we take as our goods things that we are
infinitely above, things that can act only on our bodies• and produce motion in
their fibers, but that can never act on our souls or make us feel pleasure or pain.

II. That only God is our good, and that no sensible object can make
us feel pleasure.
Certainly, if it is not our soul that acts on itself according to what takes place in
the body, only God can have this power. And if the soul does not cause its own
•t shall explain in the last book the sense in which objects ac:t on the body.

76

Tile Sl!tlrcll after Truth

77

pleasure and pain as changes occur in the disturbances in irs body's fibers, as is
apparently the case,• sillce it feels pleasure and pain involuntarily, I know of no
hand strong enough to make it feel them other than that of the Author of Nature.
Indeed, only God is our true good. Only He can fill us with all the pleasures of
which we are capable. He has decided to make us experience them only in
knowledge and love of Him, while those He has attached to the motion taking
place in our body, so that we should care for its preservation, are weak and
fleeting, though in the state to which sin has reduced us, we are like irs slaves.
But the pleasures He makes available to the elect in heaven are infmitely greater,
since He made us to know and love Him. For, given that order requires thai we
feel greater pleasure when we possess greater goods, the pleasure of those who
possess God will certainly surpass all others, since He is infinitely above all
things.

Ill. The source of the errors of the Stoics and Epicureans.
What we have just said about the cause of our enors with regard to good also
reveals the falsity of the Stoics' and Epicureans' positions concerning the
sovereign good. The Epicureans located it in pleasure, and because pleasure is
experienced in vice as well as in virtue, and even more commonly in the former
than in the latter, it is generally held that they abandoned themselves to every sort
of sensual delight.
Now the first cause of their enor is that because they falsely judged that there
was something pleasurable in the objects of their senses, or that these objects
were the true causes of what they felt, and because they were convinced through
their inner sensation of themselves that pleasure was a good for them at least as
long as they enjoyed it, they abandoned themselves to every passion with no
thought to the unhappy consequences they would suffer as a result. Instead they
should have reckoned thai the pleasure experienced in sensible things cannot be
in these things as their true cause, or in any other way, and consequently, that
sensible goods cannot be goods with regard to our soul; <they also should have
considered> the other things we have explained.
The Stoics, who were ofthe contrary opinion thai sensible pleasures are in and
for the body only, and that the soul must have irs own good, placed happiness in
virtue. Here is the source of their errors.
That soun:e is their belief that sensible pleasure and pain are not in the soul but
only in the body. This false judgment then serves them as a premise for other
false conclusions: e.g., that pain is not an evil, nor pleasure a good; that the
pleasures of senses are nor good in themselves; that they are had by both man and
beast, and so forth. Yet though the Stoics and Epicureans were wrong on many
counts, they were clearly right about some things. For the happiness of the
blessed [/e bonheur des bienheureux] consists only in perfect virtue, i.e., in
knowledge and love of God, and in a delicate pleasure that always attends them.
Let us keep in mind, then, (a) that external objects contain nothing either
enjoyable or disagreeable; (b) that they are not the causes of our pleasures; (c)
•See bk. 3. ch. I. no. 3.

78

Nicolas Malebranche

that we have reason neither to embrace nor fear them; but (d) that only God
should be loved and feared, as only He is powerful enough to punish and reward
us and to make us feel pleasure and pain; and finally, (e) that only in and from
God should we hope for the pleasures for which we have so strong, so natural,
and so appropriate an inclination.

BOOK ONE: THE SENSES
Chapter Eighteen

I. That our s~ns~s lead us into error e'·en about things that are not sensible.
II. An example taken from m~n·s com·~rsation. Ill. That we should not be
concern~d with ~xternal mann~rs.
Our senses deceive us not only with regard to their objects, such as light, colors,
and the other sensible qualities; they [also] mislead us about objects beyond their
scope by preventing us from considering them carefully enough to make a wellfounded judgment. This matter needs to be explained.

I. That our s~nses lead us into error even about things that are not
sensibl~.

The mind's attention and application to our clear and distinct ideas of objects is
the most necessary thing in the world for discovering what they really are. For
just as the beauty of a work cannot be seen without opening the eyes and
contemplating it, so the mind cannot clearly see most things with their relations
to one another unless it considers them attentively. Now, certainly nothing distracts our attention to clear and distinct ideas more than our own senses; and as a
result, nothing removes us further from the truth and so quickly throws us into
error.
To fully understand this truth, it is absolutely necessary to know that the three
ways in which the soul perceives, namely, by the senses, the imagination, and
the mind, do not affect it equally, and that as a result, it does not pay equal
attention to what it perceives by means of each of them. It attends greatly to what
affects it greatly, and little to what affects it little.
Now, what it perceives by the senses affects and stirs it greatly. What it knows
through the imagination affects it much less. But what the understanding represents to it, i.e., what it perceives by itself, or independently of the senses and the
imagination, hardly stirs it at all. Nobody can doubt but that the least sensuous
pain is more present to the mind and occupies it more than meditation upon
something of much greater consequence.
The reason for this is that the senses represent objects as present, and the
imagination represents them only as absent. Now, it is fitting that of several
79

80

Nicolas Malebranche

goods or evils proposed to the soul. those present should affect and occupy it
more than absent ones, because the soul must decide quickly what it should do
about them. Thus, the soul is more occupied with a simple pinprick than with
lofty speculations, and the ills and pleasures of this world impress it more than
the terrible pains or inifinite pleasures of eternity.
Thus, the senses harness the soul to what they represent to it. Now, as the soul
is limited and cannot clearly conceive many things simultaneously, it cannot
clearly perceive what the understanding represents to it at the same time that the
senses present something for it to consider. It then abandons the clear and distinct
ideas of the understanding (though suited to discovering the truth of things in
themselves) and attends only to the confused ideas of the senses, which greatly
affect it, but which do not represent things to it according to what they are in
themselves but only according to their relation to the body.

II. An example drawn from men's com·ersation.
If. for example, someone wishes to explain some truth, he must use words and
explain his inner sensations and inclinations with behavior perceptible to the
senses. Now, the soul cannot distinctly perceive several things at the same time.
Thus diverted by what comes to it through the senses, the soul pays hardly any
attention to the rational considerations it hears. But it is occupied a great deal by
the sensible pleasure it receives from the vocal cadence, gesticulation, pleasant
mien, and general deportment of the speaker. Yet after it has listened, the soul
usually wants to judge. Thus, its judgments must be different according to the
diversity of the impressions it has received through the senses.
If, for example, the speaker expresses himself with facility, and speaks with a
pleasant cadence, if he has the mien of an honest and intelligent man, if he is a
person of quality and is followed by a great entourage, if he speaks with authority
and seriousness and if others listen to him in respectful silence, if he has some
reputation and contacts with minds of the first rank, in a word, if he is lucky
enough to be pleasing, or to be held in esteem, he will be right in everything he
proposes, and everything about him, even his collar and cuffs. will prove something.
But if he is unlucky enough to have the contrary qualities. his most elegant
demonstrations will never prove anything. Let him utter the most beautiful things
in the world and he will go unnoticed. With his listeners' attention directed only
to what affects the senses. their distaste in seeing such an ill-formed man will
distract them entirely and disrupt the attention they should be giving to his
thoughts. The dirty and ragged collar casts suspicion on him who wears it and on
everything coming from him. His philosophical or reflective manner of speaking
will cause ordinary men, incapable of lofty and sublime thoughts, to treat them as
extravagances and dreams.
There we have the judgments of men. Their eyes and ears make judgments
about the truth, and not their reason, even in matters that depend only on reason,
because men attend only to perceptible and agreeable manners, and pay hardly
any close and serious attention to discovering the truth.

The Search after Truth

81

Ill. That we should not be concerned with pleasing external
manners.
What is more inordinate than to judge things according to external character,
and to despise the tnath because it does not come arrayed in a garb that pleases us
and flatters our senses? Philosophers and anyone who has any intellectual pride
should be ashamed to look for these pleasing manners more solicitously than for
the truth itself, and to imbue the mind with the emptiness of words rather than the
solidity of things. It is the lot of mankind, and of flesh and blood souls, to be won
by measured cadences and by looks and gestures that arouse the passions.
Omnia enim stolidi magis admirantur, amantque.
lnversis quae sub verbis latitantia cernunt.
Veraquae constituunt, quae belle tangere possunt
Aures, & lepido quae sunt fucata sonore.
But wise men try to defend themselves against the powerful charms of external
manners. The senses afflict them as much as other men (for they are indeed
men), but they scorn the reports the senses make to them. They follow the
famous example of the judges of the AmJP&gUs who stricdy prohibited their
advocates from employing these misleading words and rhetorical devices and
who listened to them only in darkness, lest the pleasure of their words and
gestures should persuade them of something contrary to truth and justice, and so
that they might be better able to apply themselves to the soundness of their
arguments.

BOOK ONE: THE SENSES
Chapter Nineteen

t

Two other examples. I. The first: of our errors concerning the nature of bodies.
II. The second: of the errors pertaining to the qualities of these bodies.
Most of our enors clearly have as their main cause the soul's rapt attention to the
deliverances of the senses and its indifference toward what is represented to it by
the pure understanding. An example of this. drawn from our way of conversing,
which is of great importance for morals, has just been given. Here are still others,
taken from our relations with the rest of nature, which must be recognized for the
success of physics.

I. Errors concerning the nature of bodies.
One of the main enors we fall into in physics is to imagine that there is more
substance in bodies that are more perceptible than in those that are hardly perceptible at all. Most people believe that there is more matter in gold or lead than in
air or water, and children, who have not noticed its effects through their senses,
generally even think that air is not something real.
Gold and lead are very heavy, very hard, and very perceptible; water and air,
on the contrary, are hardly perceptible. From this men conclude that the former
have more reality than the latter, or that there is more matter in a cubic foot of
gold than in a cubic foot of air or of invisible maner. They judge the truth of
things by sense impressions, which always deceive us, and they ignore the
mind's clear and distinct ideas, which never deceive us, because the sensible
affects and stirs us while the intelligible lulls us to sleep. These enoneous
judgments pertain to the substance of bodies; the following, to their qualities.

11. Errors concerning their qualities and perfections.
Men almost always judge that the objects exciting the most pleasant sensations
in them are the purest and most perfect-without knowing what the perfection
and purity of matter consists in, and without worrying themselves about it.
They say, for example, that mud is impure and that water is pure and clear.
But camels, who like muddy water, and animals that enjoy themselves in mud
would be of a different opinion. These are beasts, it is true. But people who like
82

The Search after Truth

83

woodcock intestines and who savor stone marten droppings do not mention the
impurity of these things, though they point it out in the e~tcrement of all other
animals. Finally, musk and amber are highly regarded by everyone, even by
those who think they are only e~tcrement.
Cenainly the perfection and purity of matter is judged only in relation to our
senses, and as a result (given that everyone's senses differ, as has been sufficiently e~tplained), everyone's judgments about the perfection and purity of
matter must differ a great deal. Thus, the books that men write daily on the
imaginary perfections they attribute to certain bodies are of necessity filled with
em>rs of an altogether strange sort, since the arguments they contain are based
only on the false, confused, and erratic ideas of our senses.
Philosophers should refrain from saying that matter is pure or impure unless
they know e~tactly what they mean by these words, for one should never speak
without knowing what one is saying, i.e., without having distinct ideas corresponding to the terms one is employing. Now, had they affi~ted clear and distinct
ideas to both these words, they would see that what they call pure is often quite
impure, and what seems to them impure is often quite pure.
If, for e~tample, they would have it that matter whose parts are least solid and
most mobile is the purest and most perfect, then gold, silver, and precious stones
would be e~ttremely imperfect bodies, whereas air and fire, on the other hand,
would be very perfect. When Oesh has started to corrupt and smell bad, that
would mean it had begun to perfect itself, and fetid carrion would be a body more
perfect than ordinary Oesh.
But if, on the other hand, they would have it that the most perfect bodies are
those whose parts are largest, most solid, and least mobile, earth would be more
perfect than gold, and air and fire would be the most imperfect bodies.
If, however, the clear ideas I just mentioned are not to be attached to the terms
pure and perfect, others may be substituted in their place. But if the attempt is
made to define these words through sensible notions only, everything will
forever be confused, since the meaning of the terms e~tpressing them will never
be tilted. Everyone has different sensations of the same object, as has already
been proved; therefore, if unintelligible speech and general confusion are to be
avoided, these objects should not be defined through the sensations had of them.
In the final analysis, however, I do not see that any matter, even if it be the
matter of the heavens, would contain more perfection in itselfthan any other. All
matter seems capable only of figure and motion, and the regularity of its figure
and motion is a matter of indifference to it. Reason does not tell us that the sun is
more luminous and more perfect than mud, or that the creations of our novelists
and poets are any better than the most decomposed cadavers. It is our false and
deceiving senses that tell us so. Protest here is useless-all railing and e~tclaim­
ing will seem empty and trivial to those who have carefully e~tamined the arguments presented here.
Those capable only of sensation believe the sun to be filled with light, but
those capable of both sensation and reasoning, given that they can reason as well
as they can sense, do not believe so. I am firmly convinced that even those who

84

Nicolas Malebranche

defer most to the testimony of their senses would agree with my view if they had
meditated on the things I have said. But they are too fond of the illusions oftheir
senses, they have yielded for too long to their prejudices, and their soul has been
too much ignored for them to realize that all the perfections their soul fancies it
sees in bodies in fact belong to itself.
It is not to these people I am speaking-1 worry little about their praise or
approval-for they who are unwilling to listen cannot be good judges. It is
enough to defend the truth and gain the approval of those who earnestly labor to
free themselves from the errors of their senses and to make good use of their
mind's lights. These people are asked only to meditate on these thoughts as
carefully as they can and then to judge, either to approve or reject them. They are
called upon to judge because, by their meditation, they have acquired the right of
life and death over them, which cannot be denied them without injustice.

BOOK ONE: THE SENSES
Chapter Twenty

t

Conclusions ofthr first book. I. That our senses are gi,·en to us only for the sakr
of our body. /1. That whatthey reportto us must lw doubted. Ill. That knowing
how to doubt properly is no small matter.
I think we have adequately covered the general enors our senses lead us into,
whether with regard to their own objects or with regard to things perceived only
with the understanding. I think that there is no enor we fall into while following
them whose cause cannot be learned from what has been said here, provided we
meditate on them a little.
I. That our senses are gi,·en to us only for the presen·ation of our
body.
We have also seen (a) that our senses are accurate and precise for informing us
about the relations our body has with all the bodies sunounding it, but that they
cannot tell us what these bodies are in themselves; (b) that their proper use is only
to preserve its life and health; and (c) that they are to be thoroughly rejected when
they attempt to dominate the mind. The chief result I want from the entire first
book is a clear understanding that our senses are given to us only for the preservation of our body, that this thought be a strengthening one, and that in order to
escape ignorance, help other than that provided by the senses be sought.
II. That the reports they make to us must be doubted.
But if there are people, as undoubtedly there will be only too many, who are
not convinced of these last propositions by what has been said up to now, even
less is asked of them. It is enough that they cast some suspicion on their senses;
and if they cannot entirely reject their testimony as false and deceptive, they are
asked only to genuinely doubt that their testimony is altogether true.
And it really seems to me that enough has been said to generate at least some
misgiving in the mind of reasonable people and consequently to move them to
employ their freedom in a way other than they have done until now. For if they
can entenain any doubt at all that the testimony of their senses is true, they will
more easily withhold their consent and thus avoid falling into their former enors,

85

86

Nico/Qs Malebranche

panicularly if they bear in mind the rule at the beginning of this treatise: That
complete consent should be gi~·en only to things that appear altogether clear, and
from which we cannot withhold consent without reali::.ing witlr complete certainty
that we would misuse our freedom in not granting it.
Ill. Tlrat knowing how to doubt properly is no trifle.

Moreover, let no one think he has progressed but little if he has only learned to
doubt. Knowing how to doubt reasonably for good cause is not so small a thing
as one may think. It should be noted hen: that then: is doubting and then then: is
doubting. Then: an: doubts springing from passion and stupidity, from blindness
and malice, or simply from caprice and the will to doubt. But one may also doubt
from caution and distrust, from wisdom and intellectual insight. The Academic
<skeptics'> and atheists' doubt is of the former kind, true philosophers' of the
latter. The former is a doubt of darkness, never leading toward, but always away
from, light. The latter is generated by light and in tum helps to some extent in
producing light.
Those who doubt only in the first way do not understand what it is to doubt
reasonably. They scoff at Descartes's instructions for doubting in the first of his
metaphysical meditations, because they believe that then: is only capricious
doubt, that by and large all that can be said is that our nature is infirm, that our
mind is replete with blindness, that great can: must be taken to get rid of its
prejudices, and other such things. They think this is enough to avoid seduction by
the senses as well as all error. But it is not enough to say that the mind is weak; it
must be made aware of its weaknesses. It is not enough to say it is subject to
error; the nature of its errors must be pointed out to it. We believe we have begun
to do this in the first book by explaining the nature of our senses and their errors,
and we an: going to follow the same plan by explaining the nature of the
imagination and its errors in the second book.

BOOK TWO
PART ONE: THE IMAGINATION
Chapter One

I. The general idea ofthe imagination. II. Two faculties in the imagination, one
active, the other passive. Ill. General cause of the changes that occur in the
imagination, and the foundation of this second boo/c.
In the p~eding book we discussed the senses. We tried to explain their nature,
and to determine ~isely what usc ought to be made of them. We revealed the
chief and most general errors into which they lead us, and tried to limit their
power in such a way that we should expect very much and fear nothing from
them, if we always keep them within lheir prescribed borders. In this second
book we shall discuss the imagination, as the natural progression of things
obliges us to do, for there is such a close relationship between the senses and the
imagination thai they should not be separated. We shall even see that the difference between these two faculties is but one of degree.
This is the order we observe in this treatise: il is divided into three parts. In the
first the physical causes of disorders and errors of the imagination are explained.
In the second some of the most general errors ofthe imaginalion are explained in
terms of these causes, and we shall also speak of what might be called moral
causes ofthese errors. In the third pari we speak about the contagious communication of strong imaginations.
If most things contained in this trealise are not as novel as what has already
been presented in explaining the errors of the senses, they will be no less useful.
Enlighlened persons are very aware of the errors and even the causes of the errors
of which I treat; but there are very few who give it enough reflection. I do not
claim to teach everyone: I teach the ignorant, and merely advise the resl, or
rather, in this work I try both to teach and advise myself.

I. The general idea of the imagination.
We have said in the first book that our sense organs are composed of tiny fibers
that on the one hand terminatc in the external parts of the body and skin, and on
the other lead toward the centeroflhe brain. Now, these tiny fibers can be moved
in two ways, either beginning with the ends in the brain, or with those outside.
The agitation of these tiny fibers cannot be communicated to the brain without
87

88

Nicolas Ma/ebranche

the soul perceiving something. If the agitation originates through the impressions
made by objects on the exterior surface of our nerve fibers and is communicated
to the brain, then the soul senses, and it judges• that what it senses is outside,
i.e., it perceives an object as present. But if the internal fibers alone are lightly
disturbed by the flow of animal spirits, or in some other way, then the soul
imagines, and judges that what it imagines is not outside, but inside the brain,
i.e .• it perceives an object as absent. This is the difference between sensing and
imagining.
But it should be noted that the fibers of the brain are agitated much more by the
impressions of objects than by the flow of spirits. And this is why the soul is
much more influenced by external objects that it judges as present and capable of
making it feel pleasure and pain than it is by the flow of animal spirits. However,
it sometimes happens that persons whose animal spirits are highly agitated by
fasting. vigils, a high fever, or some violent passion have the internal fibers of
their brains set in motion as forcefully as by external objects. Because of this
such people sense what they should only imagine, and they think they see objects
before their eyes, which are only in their imaginations. This shows that with
regard to what occurs in the body, the senses and the imagination differ only in
degree, as I have just suggested.
But in order to give a more distinct and particular idea of the imagination, it is
necessuy to understand that every time a change occurs in the part of the brain in
which the nerves terminate, changes also occur in the soul. That is, as we have
already explained, if any movement of the spirits occurs in this part, which
slightly changes the order of its fibers, a new perception occurs in the soul also; it
senses necessarily, or it imagines something anew; and the soul can never sense
anything or imagine anything anew unless there is some change in the fibers of
this same part of the brain.
So the faculty of imagining, or the imagination, consists only in the soul's
power of forming images of objects producing changes in the fibers of that part of
the brain which can be called the principal part, because it corresponds to all the
parts of our body, and is the place where the soul immediately resides, if one may
so speak.

II. Two faculties in the imagination, one actil'e, the other passive.
That shows clearly that this power of the soul to form images includes two
things, one depending upon the soul itself, the other upon the body. The first is the
action and the command ofthe will. The second is the obedience rendered to it by
the animal spirits that trace these images, and by the brain fibers on which they
must be imprinted. In this work we shall call both ofthese things indifferently by
the word imagination, and we shall not distinguish them by the words acti1·e and
passive, which we might well assign to them. This distinction will not be made
because it will be sufficiently clear from the context whether one intends to speak
of the acti1•e imagination of the soul or the passi1•e imagination of the body.
"By a natural judgment, of which I have frequently spoken in the preceding book.

The

s~arch qft~r

Truth

89

Funher, we shall not determine in particular what that principal pan of the
brain is of which I have just spoken, first, because I believe it would serve no
purpose; second, because it is very uncertain; and finally, because I believe it
would be better to say nothing about it, even if I were quite certain what the
principal pan is, for I could not convince others since this is not a fact that cam be
proved here.
Whether the common sense resides, as Willis would have it, in the two tiny
bodies that he calls corpora striata, while the sinuosities of the brain preserve the
species of the memory and the corpus callosum is the seat of the imagination; or
whether, following the opinion of Femel, in the pia mater, which encloses the
substance ofthe brain; whether it be in the pin~al gland of Descartes; or finally in
some other portion hitherto unknown, that our soul exercises its principal functions, does not trouble us much here. It suffices that there is a principal part and
this is absolutely necessary just as the Cartesian system remains basically intact.
For it must be noted that even when he is mistaken, as seems probable when he
assures us that it is to the pineal gland that the soul is immediately united, this
nevenheless could not basically invalidate his system, from which we shall
always draw all the utility that can be expected from the true, in order to advance
in the knowledge of man.

Ill.

G~neral cause of the changes that occur in the imagination. and
the foundation of this second book.

Since the imagination consists only in the soul's power to form images of
objects by imprinting them, so to speak, in the fibers of its brain, the greater and
more distinct the traces of the animal spirits, which are the strokes of these
images, the more strongly and distinctly the soul will imagine these objects.
Now, just as the breadth, depth, and clarity of the strokes of an engraving depend
upon the pressure applied to the burin, and the pliancy of the copper, so the depth
and clarity of the traces in the imagination depend upon the pressure of the
animal spirits, and upon the constitution of the brain fibers. And it is the variety
found in these two things that constitutes nearly all the great diversity observed
among minds.
For it is easy enough to explain all the different characters encountered among
the minds of men, on the one hand by the abundance and scarcity, by the rapidity
or slowness of agitation, and by the density or lightness of the animal spirits, and
on the other hand by the delicacy or coarseness, the moistness and dryness, and
the malleability of the brain fibers; and finally, by the relation the animal spirits
might have to these fibers. And it would be quite appropriate if everyone would
try at the outset to imagine all the different combinations of these things, and if
they themselves would apply them to all the differences we notice among minds.
For it is always more fruitful and even more agreeable to use one's own mind,
training it to discover truth by itself, than to leave it to stagnate in idleness by
applying it only to things already completely digested and worked out. Besides,
differences among minds are so delicate and fine that we can sometimes easily
discover and sense them ourselves, while being unable either to represent them to
others. or to make others aware of them.

90

Nicollu Malebranche

But in order to explain all these differences among minds as completely as I
can, and in order that everyone be able to note the cause of all these changes
within themselves more easily, it seems appropriate to examine in general the
causes of the changes that occur in the animal spirits and in the brain fibers,
because in so doing we shall discover all those found in the imagination.
Man never remains the same for very long; everyone has sufficient inner
evidence of his changeability. At one moment we judge in one way, the next in
another, on the same subject. Briefly, man's life consists only in the circulation
of the blood, and in another circulation of his thoughts and desires. And it seems
we can hardly use our time better than in seeking the causes of these changes that
happen to us, thereby learning to know ourselves.

BOOK TWO: PART ONE
Chapter Two

+
I. The animal spirits and the general changes to which they are subject. II. That
the chyle goes into the heart and brings about changes in the spirits. Ill. That
wine does the same.
<J. The aninuJI spirits and the general changes to which they are

subject.>
Everyone agn:cs that the animal spirits are merely the most refined and agitated
parts of the blood, which is refmed and agitaled principally by fermentation and
by the vigorous movement of the muscles constituting the heart; and that these
spirits are conducted, with the rest of the blood, through the arteries to the brain,
and that there they are separated from it by some pans intended for that purpose,
concerning which there is no agreement at all.
It must be concluded from this that if the blood is very refined, there will be
abundant animal spirits in the brain, whereas if it is coarser, there will be only a
little; if the blood is composed of panicles that are very easily inflamed in the
bean, or well adapted to movement, the spirits in the brain will be extremely
heated or agitated; that if, on the contrary, the blood is not sufficiently fermented, the animal spirits will languish, inactive and powerless; and finally,
that, depending on the stability of the blood panicles, the animal spirits will be
more or less stable themselves, and as a result, move more or less forcefully. But
we must explain all these things at greater length, using examples and indisputable experiments, in order to show their truth more Pfrceptibly.

II. That the chyle goes to the heart, causing changes in the spirits.
The authority of the ancients has not only blinded some people's minds, but it
might even be said to have closed their eyes. For there are still some persons so
respectful of ancient opinions, or perhaps so opinionated, that they do not want to
see things that they could no longer contradict if they would only open their eyes.
One sees people every day who are very esteemed for their speech and learning,
who write books and argue publicly against the obvious and sensible experiments
for the circulation of the blood, against the evidence for the weight and the elastic

91

Nicolas Malebranche

92

force of air, and other similar things. M. Pecquet's recent discovery, which is
needed here, is among those lacking only the good fortune to have been born
quite aged, with a venerable beard, so to speak. However, I shall not hesitate to
use it, and I have no fear that it will give judicious people any reason to complain.
According to this discovery, it is established that the chyle does not go immediately from the viscera to the liver through the mesaraic veins, as the
ancients thought, but through the lacteal veins from the bowels, and thence into
certain resevoirs where all these veins terminate. From there, it ascends through
the thoracic canal along the vertabrae ofthe spine, and becomes mixed with the
blood in the axillary vein, which enters into the superior trunk of the vena cava,
and, being thus mixed with the blood, it returns to the heart.
It must be concluded from this experiment that, since the blood mixed with the
chyle is very different from other blood already circulated several times by the
heart, the animal spirits, which are only its most refined parts, should also be
very different in people whose stomachs are empty and in those who have just
eaten. Moreover, because infinitely many kinds of food and drink are used, and
also because the bodies of those who use them are differently disposed, two
people who have just eaten at the same table are bound to sense an indescribable
variety of changes in their faculties of imagination.
It is true that those who enjoy perfect health digest so easily that the chyle
going into their heart and from there to their brain is as suitable to forming spirits
as is ordinary blood. It hardly either increases or diminishes the heat there, and
the blood continues to ferment in just the same way. Accordingly, their animal
spirits, and consequently their faculty of imagination, hardly change. But the
elderly and the infirm note very obvious changes in themselves after eating.
Nearly all of them become sleepy, or at least their imaginations become quite
languid, neither alert nor quick. They conceive nothing distinctly, and cannot
apply themselves to anything. In a word, they are quite different than they were
beforehand.
Ill. That wine does the same.

But in order for the healthier and more robust also to have sensible proof of
what has just been said, they need only reflect upon what happens to them when
they have drunk more wine than usual, or upon what will happen to them if they
drink only wine at one meal and only water at another. For we can be assured that
unless they are stupid, or their bodies are composed in some quite extraordinary
way, they will immediately feel some gaiety, or slight drowsiness, or some other
similar accident.
Wine is so spiritous that it is almost fully formed animal spirits, but libertine
spirits, which do not voluntarily submit to the commands of the will, apparently
because they are so easily moved. Thus, even in the strongest and most vigorous
men, it produces greater changes in the imagination and in all parts of the body
than do food and other beverages. It "trips us up," to speak with Plautus,• and
""Vinum luctator dolosus est.··

The Search after Truth

93

produces many effects in the mind less advantageous than those Horace describes
in these lines:
Quid non ebrietas designat; operta recludit:
Spes jubet esse ratas: in praelia trudit inermem:
Sollicitis animis onus eximit: addocet artes.
Faecundi calices quem non fecen: disertum?
Contracta quem non in paupertate solutum?

It would be easy enough to find very probable reasons for the principal effects
that the mixing of the chyle with the blood produces in the animal spirits, and
then in the brain and the soul itself, such as why wine cheers us, why it gives the
mind a certain vivacity when taken in moderation, but brutalizes it after a while
if taken in excess, why one is sleepy after eating, and of many other similar
things, for which quite ridiculous reasons are ordinarily given. But aside from the
fact that I am not doing anatomy here, it would be necessary for an adequate
explanation of such events to give some idea of the structure of the brain, or to
make certain hypotheses or suppositions as Descartes has done in his treatise De
l'homme, without which it is impossible to explain what I mean. Besides, if you
read Descarte's treatise attentively, you will perhaps be satisfied on all these
questions because of the indications he gives for their resolution.

BOOK TWO: PART ONE
Chapter Three

t

That tile air we breathe also causes some change in tile spirits.
The second general cause of the changes that occur in the animal spirits is the air
we breathe. For although it does not immediately cause such sensible impressions as the chyle in the long run, it still produces the same effects as do the
juices of food in a shon time. This air enters the branches of the arteria venosa•
from the trachea anery; from there it ferments and mixes with the rest of the
blood in the hean. and, according to its particular disposition and that of the
blood, it produces great changes in the animal spirits and consequently in the
faculty of imagining.
I know some people do not believe that air mixes with the blood in the lungs
and hean, because they cannot discover with their eyes the passages in the
branches of the tracheal anery and in the arteria venosa through which this air
travels. But the action of the mind need not stop with that of the senses: it can
penetrate what is impenetrable to them, and grasp things that have no grip for the
senses. There is no doubl that some blood continually passes through the
branches of the arterial veinb into those of the tracheal anery: the odor and
moisture of the breath is sufficient proof of this; and yet the passages for this
communication are imperceptible. Why then can the panicles of refined air not
pass through the branches of the tracheal anery into the arteria venosa, even if the
passages for this communication be visible? Finally, many more humors leave
the body through the imperceptible pores of the arteries and skin than leave
through the other passages of the body, and even the most solid metals do not
have such constricted pores that there are no natural bodies small enough to pass
freely through them, since otherwise these pores would be closed.
It is true that the coarser and rougher panicles of air cannot pass through the
ordinary pores of the bodies, and that even water, though very coarse, can slide
through openings where this air is forced to stop. But at this point we are not
discussing these coarsest air panicles: they seem to be rather useless for fermen"The vein of the lungs.
"The artery of the lunas.

94

The Search after Truth

9S

tation. We are only considering the smaller, firmer, pungent ones, having very
few appendages which can impede them, because these are apparently the most
suited to fermentation of the blood.
However, I could affirm the repon of Silvius that even the co.sest air passes
from the tracheal artery into the hean, since he himself assures us that he saw its
passage through the ingenuity of M. de Swammerdam. For it is more reasonable
to believe one man who claims to have seen, than idle talk of a million others.
Thus, it is cenain that the most refined air particles we breathe enter our hearts; that
together with the blood and the chyle there, they maintain the heat that gives life
and movement to our body, and that, according to their varying qualities, they
cause great changes in the fermentation of the blood and in the animal spirits.
We recogniZe: these facts every day through the various humors and mental
characteristics of persons of different countries. The Gascons, for example, have
a much more lively imagination than the Normans. The people of Rouen, Dieppe, and Picardy, are all different from each other: and they all differ even more
from the Low Normans, although they are all quite similar to one another. But if
we consider the people of more remote lands, we shall encounter even stranger
differences, as between an Italian and a Aeming or a Dutchman.
And finally, there are places renowned throughout history for the wisdom of
their inhabitants, such as Theman and Athens, and others known for their stupidity, such as Thebes, Abdera, and some others.•
'' Athenis tenus coelum, ex quo acuitiores etiam putantur Attici, crassum
Thebis." Cic. De jato. (4. S)
"Abderitanae pectora plebis babes." Man. [Epig. S. 25. 4]
"Boetum in crasso jurares aerc natum." Hor., [Epist. 2. I. 144].

• •'Nunquid non ultra c:SI sapienlia iD Tbeman." Jer. 49: 17.

BOOK TWO: PART ONE

Chapter Four

t

I. The changes in the spirits caused by the nerves tlrat go to the heart and lungs. II.
Those caused by the nen·es that go to the lil•er, spleen, and viscera. Ill. Tlrat all
these changes occur without our willing them, but that they could not occur
without a Pro1•idence.

The third cause of the changes occurring in the animal spirits is the most common
and the most activating of all, because it is what produces, maintains, and fortifies
all the passions. In order to understand this well, it is essential to know that the
fifth, sixth, and eighth pair of nerves send most of their branches into the chest and
abdomen, where they serve purposes very useful for the preservation of the body
but extremely dangerous for the soul. This is because these nerves are not at all
dependent in their action upon the will of man, as are those used to move the arms,
legs, and other external parts of the body, and because they act upon the soul much
more than the soul acts upon them.
I. The change in the spirits caused by the nerves tlrat go ro the heart
and lungs.

It is necessary to understand that many branches of the eighth pair of nerves
work their way in among the fibers of the most important of all the muscles, the
heart: that they surround its openings, its auricles, and its arteries; that they even
spread into the substance of the lungs, and so through their different motions
produce very considerable changes in the blood. For the nerves spread among the
fibers of the heart sometimes make it expand and contract too forcefully and
rapidly, thus violently pushing an extraordinary quantity of blood toward the head
and all the exterior parts of the body. And occasionally these same nerves produce
just the opposite effect. As for the nerves around the openings, auricles, and
arteries of the heart, they have almost the same effect as the registers with which
chemists control the heat of their furnaces, or the taps used in fountains to regulate
the flow of water. For the purpose of these nerves is alternately to contract and
enlarge the openings ofthe heart, thus hastening or slowing the entrance or exit of
the blood, thereby increasing or decreasing its heat. Finally, the nerves spread
throughout the lungs clearly have the same purpose, because the lungs are com-

96

The Search after Truth

97

posed only of the branches of the tracheal artery. the vena arteriosa, and the arteria
venosa, interlaced with each other, it is clear that by their contraction the nerves
throughout the substance of the lungs must obstruct the free passage of air from the
branches ofthe tracheal artery as well as the passage of blood from the branches of
the vena arteriosa to the arteria venosa, in order to flow into the heart. Thus, these
nerves, according to their different movements, increase or decrease the heat and
movement of the blood.
In all our passions we have very perceptible experiences of these different
degrees of heat in our hearts. We feel it diminish perceptibly, and sometimes
increase suddenly. And as we falsely judge that our sensations are in the parts of
our bodies, on the occasions when they are excited in our souls, as has been
explained in the first book, almost all philosophers imagine that the heart is the
principal scat of the passions of the soul, and even today this is the most common
opinion.
Now, because the imagination receives great changes through those that happen
to the animal spirits, and because the animal spirits arc quite different, according to
the different fermentation or agitation of the blood occurring in the heart, it is easy
to understand how the same things can be imagined quite differently by impassioned persons on the one hand, and those who consider them in cold blood on
the other.

II. The change in the spirits caused by the nerves that go to the liver,
spleen, and the other viscera.
The other cause that contributes greatly to diminishing or increasing these
extraordinary fermentations of the blood consists in the action of many other
branches of the nerves.
These branches spread to the fiver, which contains the most refined pan of the
blood, normally called bile, to the spleen, which contains the most coarse or
melancholy part of the blood, to the pancreas, which contains an acidic fluid very
suitable, it seems, for fermentation, to the stomach, the bowels and the other parts
that contain the chyle. In sum, they spread to all parts of the body that can influence
the variations in the fermentation or motion of the blood. Even the very arteries and
veins themselves are linked to these nerves, as Willis has discovered in the case of
the lower trunk of the great artery, which is linked to them near the heart, and in the
cases of the axillary anery on the right side, the emulgent vein, and some others.
Thus, the purpose of the nerves being to agitate the parts to which they are
attached in various ways, it is easy to conceive how, for example, the nerve
surrounding the liver can force a large quantity of bile to flow into the veins by
squeezing the liver, and how this bile, being mixed with the blood in the veins and
with the chyle in the bile canal enters the heart, where it produces an unusually
intense heat. Thus, when one is moved by cenain passions, the blood boils in the
arteries and veins, intense heat spreads throughout the body, rising to the head, and
the head becomes filled with such a large number of overly activated, too lively
animal spirits whose impetuous flow obstructs the imagination from representing
to itself anything other than the images and impressions that these spirits form in

98

Nicolas Malebranche

the brain, that is, the imagination is prevented from thinking about any objects
other than those of the dominating passion.
It is the same with the little nerves that go to the spleen, or to other parts of the
body that contain coarser material, less susceptible to heat and movement; they
render the imagination quite languid and dull by releasing some coarse matter that
is hard to set in motion.
The purpose of the nerves surrounding the arteries and veins is to squeeze them,
impeding the flow of blood, forcing it to flow into places where it finds free
passage. Thus, when the portion of the great artery that supplies blood to all the
parts below the heart is linked and restricted by these nerves, the blood necessarily
enters the head in greater abundance, thereby producing changes in the animal
spirits, and consequently in the imagination.
Ill. That these c·hanges occur independent/)' of our will, through the
order of Providence.
Now it should be noted well that all this happens mechanically, that is to say,
that all the various movements of these nerves in all the different passions do not
occur through any command ofthe will, but, on the contrary without its orders, and
even against them. Accordingly, a body without a soul, composed like that of a
healthy man, would be capable of all the movements that accompany the passions
to which we are subject; thus beasts can have similar ones, although they are
nothing but pure machines.
This is why we are bound to admire the incomprehensible wisdom of the Being
who has so well arranged all these forces, that it is sufficient for an object to touch
the optic nerve lightly in this or that way to produce so many different movements
in the heart, the other interior parts of the body, and even in the face. For it has
recently been discovered that the same nerve that extends some of its branches into
the heart and other interior parts also has some branches connected to the eyes, the
mouth, and other parts of the face. Thus, it is impossible for any passion to arise
within that does not seem to be outside, since there can be no movement in the
branches that go to the heart without some occurring in those spread throughout the
face.
The correspondence and harmony found among the facial nerves and some
others answering to other nameless parts of the body is even more remarkable. And
what produces this great harmony is, as in all the other passions, that the little
nerves that go to the face are still only branches of the one that descends to the
lower parts of the body.
When one is surprised by some violent passion, if one is careful to reflect upon
what one feels in one's entrails and in the other parts of the body where the nerves
are embedded, as well as upon the accompanying changes in one's face, and
considers that all these different agitations of our nerves are entirely involuntary,
happening even despite all the resistance our will can muster against them, one will
have little difficulty letting oneself be convinced of the simple explanation just
given, of all these relations among the nerves.
But if one examines the reasons and purpose of all these things, one will find so
much order and wisdom that a little serious thought will convince even the most

The Search after Truth

99

devoted disciplies of Epicurus and Lucretius that there is a providence which rules
the world. When I see a watch, I have reason to conclude that there is an
intelligence, because it is impossible that chance could produce and arrange all its
wheels. How then would it be possible for chance, and the encounter of atoms, to
be capable of arranging in all men and in all the animals so many different forces,
with the precision and proportion that I have just explained? And how, by chance,
could it happen that men and animals procreate other beings that exactly resemble
them? Thus, it is simply ridiculous to think or to say with Lucretius that chance
formed all the parts that make up a man, that eyes were not made in order to see, but
rather that one thinks of seeing because one has eyes, and similarly with the other
parts of the body. Here are his words:
Lumina ne facias oculorum clara creatae.
Prospicere ut possimus, et ut proferre viai.
Proceros passus, ideo fastigia posse
Surarum ac seminum pedibus fundata plicari.
Brachia tum porro validis exapta lacertis
Esse, manusque datas utraque ex parte ministras
Ut facere ad vitam possimus, quae foret usus.
Caetera de genere hoc inter quaecumque pretantur
Omnia perversa praepostera sunt ratione
Nil ideo natum est in nostro corpore ut ibi
Possimus, sed quod natum est id procreat usum.

Must he not have a strange aversion to Providence who would voluntarily blind
himself from fear of recognizing it, and to make himself insensible to such strong
and convincing proofs of it as those which nature gives us? It is true that once one
pretends to be a freethinker, or rather a blasphemer, as did the Epicureans, one
fmds oneself confused as if by shadows and capable of seeing only false glimmerings; he denies the clearest things impudently, while haughtily and magisterially
affinning the most false and obscure.
The poet I just quoted can serve as proof of this blindness of freethinkers, for he
arrogantly pronounces, with no semblance of truth, upon the most difficult and
obscure questions, and it seems he does not perceive even the clearest and most
distinct ideas. Citing passages from this author to justify what I say would require
too long and bothersome a digression. For although it is permissable to make some
reflections that briefly fix the mind's attention upon essential truths, it is never
right to make digressions that tum the mind's attention for a considerable time
from its principal subject, in order to apply it to things of little importance.
We have just explained the general causes, external as well as internal, which
produce changes in the animal spirits and as a result in the imagination. It has been
shown that the external ones are the food with which we nourish ourselves and the
air we breathe, aDd that the internal ones consist in the involuntary stimulation of
certain nerves. No other general causes are known, and we are sure there are none.
So, since the imagination depends upon no other bodily parts than these two
things, namely, the animal spirits and the disposition of the brain on which they
act, in order to give some knowledge of the imagination we need only expose the
different changes that can occur in the substance of the brain. But before examining these changes, it is appropriate to explain the connection between our thoughts
and the brain traces, and the reciprocal connection of these traces. It will also be

100

Nicolas Malebranche

necessary to give some idea of memory and habits, that is, of our capacity for
thinking ofthings of which we have already thought, and of doing things we have
already done.

BOOK TWO: PART ONE
Chapter Five

t

I. The connection of the ideas of the mind with the impressions in the brain.
1/. The reciprocal connection among these impressions. Ill. The memory.

IV. Habits.

or all material things, none is more worthy of men's attention than the structure of
their bodies and the harmony among all the pans composing it. And of all spiritual
things, there is none of which knowledge is more necessary to them than that of their
soul and all the relations it indispensably has with God, and naturally with the body.
It is not enough merely to feel, or to have a vague understanding, that the brain
traces are linked to each other, and are followed by movement of the animal spirits,
that the traces aroused in the brain arouse ideas in the mind, and that the movements excited in the animal spirits excite passions in the will. It is necessary, as far
as possible, to understand distinctly the cause of all these different connections,
and especially the effects they are capable of producing.
It is necessary to understand the cause, because we must understand that in us
which alone is capable of acting, and of making us happy or unhappy; and it is
necessary to understand the effects, because we must understand ourselves and the
other men with whom we must live as well as we can. Then we shall know how to
guide and preserve ourselves in the happiest and most perfect state we can attain,
according to the order of nature and the rules of the Gospel. And we shall be able to
live with other men, knowing precisely both how to use them for our needs, and
how to help them in their miseries.
I do not pretend to explain such a vast and general subject in this chapter. I do not
even pretend to do so completely in this entire work. There are many things I do not
yet understand, and do not even hope to understand. And there are some I think I
know but cannot explain. For there is no mind, however limited, that cannot
discover more truth by meditating on it than the most eloquent man in the world
could deduce from it.

I. The union of soul and body.
One need not imagine, as do most philosophers, that the mind becomes material
101

102

Nicolas Malebranche

when united with the body, and that the body becomes mind when it unites with the
mind. The soul is not spread through all parts of the body, in order to give life and
movement to it, as the imagination might have it; and the body does not become
capable of sensation through its union with the mind, as our false and misleading
senses seem to convince us. Each substance remains what it is, and as the soul is
incapable of extension and movement, so the body is incapable of sensation and
inclinations. The only alliance of mind and body known to us consists in a natural
and mutual correspondence of the soul's thoughts with the brain traces, and of the
soul's emotions with the movements of the animal spirits.
As soon as the soul receives some new ideas, new traces are imprinted in the
brain; and as soon as objects produce new traces, the soul receives new ideas. It is
not that it considers these traces, since it has no knowledge of them; nor that these
traces include these ideas, for they have no relation to them; nor, finally, that the
soul receives its ideas from these traces: for, as we shall explain in the third book, it
is inconceivable that the mind receive anything from the body and become more
enlightened by turning toward it, as these philosophers claim who would have it
that it is by transformation to fantasms, or brain traces, per com·ersionem ad
phantasmata, that the mind perceives all things. But that all takes place according
to the general laws of the union of soul and body. which I shall also explain in the
third book.
Likewise as soon as the soul wills that the arm be moved, it is moved, even
though the soul does not know what it must do in order to move it; and as soon as
the animal spirits are agitated, the soul is affected, even though it might not even
know whether there are animal spirits in its body.
When I come to speak of the passions, I shall talk about the connection between
the brain traces and the movements of the spirits, and that between the ideas and the
emotions of the soul, for all the passions depend on them. Right now, I need only
mention the connection between the ideas and the traces, and the connection of the
traces with each other.
Three causes ofthe connection between the ideas and the traces. There are three
very important causes of the connection of ideas with traces. The first, and the one
the others presuppose, is nature, or the constant and immutable will of the Creator.
There is, for example, a natural connection, independent of our will, between
the ll·aces producing a tree c:- a mountain ·Ne see and the ideas of tree or mountain,
between the traces that produce in our brain the cry of a suffering man or animal
and our understanding him to complain, between the expression of a man who
threatens or fears us and the ideas of pain, strength, weakness, and even among the
feelings of compassion, fear, and courage arising in us.
These natural connections are the strongest of all. They are generally similar in
all men, and they are absolutely necessary for the preservation of life. This is why
they do not depend at all upon our wills. For, if the connection of ideas with sounds
and certain characters is weak, and quite different in different countries, it is
because it depends upon the weak and changeable will of men. And the reason why
this connection depends upon it is that this connection is not absolutely necessary

The Search after Truth

103

for living, but only for living as men, who should form a rational society among
themselves.
The second cause of the connection of ideas with traces is the identity of the
times. Our having had certain thoughts at a time when there were some new traces
on our brain often suffices to make it impossible for these traces to recur without
our having these same thoughts again. If the idea of God is presented to my mind at
the same time that my brain has been struck by the sight of the three characters iah,
or by the sound of this same word, the recurrence of the traces these characters, or
their sound, will have produced, will suffice for me to think of God. And I could
not think of God without the occurrence in my brain of some confused traces of the
characters or sounds that accompanied the thoughts I had of God, because since the
brain is never without traces or impressions, it always has those which have some
relation to what we are thinking at any given moment, though these traces are often
vecy imperfect and vecy confused.
The third cause of the connection of ideas and traces, which always assumes the
two others, is the will of men. This will is necessacy so that the connection of ideas
with traces be regulated and accommodated to practice. For if men did not
naturally have the inclination to agree among themselves to attach their ideas to
sensible signs, not only would this connection of ideas be completely useless for
society, it would also be vecy irregular and vecy imperfect.
First, because the ideas are not strongly connected to the traces, when the spirits
are agitated, they render these traces deep and lasting. Thus, the spirits being
agitated only by the passions, if men did not have them for communicating their
feelings and sharing in those of others, the precise connection of their ideas to
certain traces clearly would be vecy weak, since they only submit themselves to
these precise and regular connections in order to communicate their thoughts.
Second, since repetition of the encounter of the same ideas with the same traces
is necessary to form a durable connection, because a first encounter, unaccompanied by a violent movement of the animal spirits, cannot make strong connections, it is clear that if men did not want to agree, the occurrence of these
encounters of the same traces would be the greatest coincidence in the world. So
the will of men is necessary in order to regulate the connection of the same ideas
with the same traces, although this will to agree is not so much an affect of their
choice and reason as it is an impression ofthe Author of nature who made us all for
each other, and with vecy strong inclination to unite spiritually as much as we are in
body.
It must be carefully noted here that the connection of ideas that represent
spiritual things distinct from us by means of brain traces is not and cannot be
natural, and as a result it is or can be different in all men, since it has no other cause
than their will and the identity of time, of which I have already spoken. On the
other hand, the connection of the ideas of all material things with certain particular
traces is natural, and consequently there are certain traces that arouse the same idea
in all men. We cannot doubt, for example, that all men have the idea of a square
when they see a square, because this connection is natural. But they do not all have

104

Nicolas Malebranche

the idea of a square when the hear the word square because this connection is
entirely voluntary. The same thing must be thought concerning all the traces tied to
ideas of spiritual things.
But, because the traces with a natural connection to ideas affect and engage the
mind, and consequently render it attentive, most men rather easily understand and
retain sensible and palpable truths, that is to say, relations among bodies. And on
the other hand, because traces with no other connection 10 the ideas than those the
will places there do not strike the mind vividly, all men have difficulty understanding, and even more in retaining, abstract truths, i.e., relations among things that do
not come under the imagination. But since these relations are slightly complicated,
they seem absolutely incomprehensible, especially to those not accustomed 10
them, because they have not strengthened the connection of these abstract ideas
with their traces through continual meditation. And although others have perfectly
understood them, they forget them in a short time, because this connection is
almost never as strong as natural ones.
It is so true that all of the difficulty in understanding and retaining spiritual and
abstract things comes from the difficulty we have in strengthening the connection
between their ideas and the brain traces, that when one finds a way to explain them
through their relations with material things, one makes them easily understandable. And they are impressed on the mind in such a way that not only are we firmly
convinced of them but they are retained with much greater facility. The general
idea of the mind given in the first chapter of this work may be a sufficiently good
proof of this.
On the other hand, when we express the relations found among material things
in such a way that there is no necessary link between these things and the traces of
their expressions, it is much more difficult to understand them, and one easily
forgets them.
For example, those who begin the study of algebra or analysis can understand
algebraic demonstrations only with great difficulty, and once they have understood
them, they do not long remember them. <This is> because, for example, squares,
parallelograms, cubes, solids, and so on, being expressed by aa, ab, a 3 , abc, and
so on, since these traces have no natural connection with their ideas, the mind can
find no grip by which it can fasten onto them and examine their relations.
But those who begin the study of common geometry conceive very clearly and
quickly the little demonstrations one explains to them, provided they very clearly
understand the terms used, because the ideas of square, circle, and so forth, are tied
naturally to the traces of the figures they see before their eyes.
It often happens that even a single exposition of the figure used in the demonstration enables them to understand it better than the discourses that explain it.
Because the words are connected 10 the ideas only by an arbitrary convention, they
do not arouse these ideas with enough speed and clarity for easy recognition of the
relations, and this is the principle cause of difficulty in learning the sciences.
One might in passing recognize through what has just been said that these
writers who coin a large number of words and new symbols to explain their
opinions often write rather useless works. They think they are making themselves
intelligible, when in fact they make themselves incomprehensible. We define all

The Search after Truth

lOS

our tenns and all our symbols, they say, and others should adapt to them. It is true,
the others adapt to them voluntarily, but their nature repels them. Their ideas are
not attached to these new tenns, because that requires use and more use. The
authors may have this practice, but their readers do not. When one claims to
instruct the mind, it is necessary to understand it, because it is necessary to follow
nalllre, and neither to irritate nor outrage it.
However, one need not condemn the care mathematicians take in defining their
tenns, because obviously they must define them to avoid equivocations. But as far
as possible, one must use accepted tenns or tenns whose ordinary signification is
not so far removed from what one is claiming to introduce, and this is not always
observed in mathematics.
Nor do we mean to condemn algebra by what has just been said, especially as
Descartes has restored it. For although the novelty of some expressions in this
science initially affords the mind some trouble, there is so little variety and
confusion in these expressions-and the help the mind receives from them so far
surpasses the difficulty-that one cannot believe it possible to invent a way of
reasoning, and expressing its reasonings, that is better suited to the nature of the
mind and that can carry it further toward the discovery of unknown truths. The
expressions of this science do not exceed the capacity of the mind; they do not tax
the memory; they summarize all our ideas and reasonings in a marvelous way, and
with practice even render them to some extent sensible. Finally, their utility is very
much greater than that of the natural expressions of drawn figures of triangles,
squares, and the like, for purposes of searching out and expounding hidden truths.
But this is enough discussion of the connection of ideas with brain traces: it is
appropriate to say something about the connection of the traces with each other
and, consequently, that between the ideas corresponding to these traces.

II. The mutual connection of the traces.
This connection consists in the fact that the brain traces are so well tied to one
another than none can be aroused without all those which were imprinted at the
same time being aroused. If, for example, a man finds himself in some public
ceremony, if he notes all the cin:umstances and all the principal persons assisting at
it, the time, place, day, and all the other paniculars, it will suffice for him to
remember the place, or even some other less noteworthy circumstance of the
ceremony, to have all the others recur to him. This is why, when we do not recall
the principal name of a thing, we designate it sufficiently by using a name that
signifies some property or circumstance of that thing. For example, if we cannot
remember the proper name of a church, we can use another name that signifies
something related to it in some way. We could say, it is that church where there
was such a crowd, where Father so-and-so preached, where we went on Sunday.
And being unable to remember a person's name, or where it is more appropriate to
identify him in another way, we can single him out by this pocked face, or as this
tall, handsome man, this little hunchback, according to one's inclinations toward
him, although of course it is wrong to use words of scorn.
Now the mutual connection of the traces and consequently of the ideas with one
another is not only the basis for all rhetorical figures but also for an infinity of other

106

Nicolas Malebranche

things of greater importance in morality, politics, and generally in all the sciences
having some relation to man, and consequently to many things of which I shall
speak in the sequel.
The cause of this connection of many traces is the identity of the times at which
they were imprinted in the brain. For it is enough that many traces were produced at
the same time for them all to rise again together. This is because the animal spirits,
finding the path of all the traces made at the same time half open, continue on them
since it is easier for them to travel those paths than through other parts of the brain.
This is the cause of memory and ofthe bodily habits we share with the beasts.
These connections of the traces are not always joined with the emotions of the
spirits, because all the things we see do not always seem good or bad. These
connections can also change, and break, because not always being necessary for
the preservation of life, they need not always be the same.
But there are traces in our brains that are naturally tied to one another, and even
to certain emotions of the spirits, because that is necessary to preservation of life;
and their connection cannot be broken, or at least cannot easily be broken, because
it is good that it be always the same. For example. the traceofagreatelevation one
sees below oneself, and from which one is in danger of falling, or that of a large
body, about to fall on us and crush us, is naturally tied to the one that represents
death to us, and to an emotion of the spirit that disposes us to flight and to the desire
to flee. This connection never changes, because it is necessary that it be always the
same, and it consists in a disposition of the brain fibers that we have from birth.
All the connections that are not natural can be and should be broken, because
different circumstances of time and place are bound to change them so that they can
be useful to the preservation of life. It is good that partridges, for example, flee
from men with guns in places and times they are being hunted, but it is not
necessary that they flee at other times and places. Thus, it is necessary for the
conservation of all animals that there be certain connections of traces that can
easily be fonned and destroyed, and that there be others that can be broken only
with difficulty, and finally, still others that can never be broken.
It is very useful to seek with care for the different effects that these various
connections are capable of producing, because these effects are very numerous and
of very great importance for the knowledge of man.

Ill. Memory.
For the explanation of memory, it is sufficient to understand this truth well: That
all our different perceptions are attached to the changes occurring in the fibers of
the principal part of the brain, where the soul resides more particularly; because
assuming this single principle, the nature of memory is explained. For just as the
branches of a tree that have remained bent in a certain way for some time preserve a
certain facility for being bent anew in the same way, so too our brain fibers, having
once received certain impressions through the flow of the animal spirits and by the
action of objects, retain some facility for receiving these same dispositions for
some time. Now, memory consists only in this facility, since one thinks of the
same things when the brain receives the same impressions.

The Search after Truth

107

As the animal spirits act sometimes more and sometimes less strongly upon the
substance of the brain, and as sensible objects cause much greater impressions than
the imagination by itself. it is easy to understand why we do not recall all the things
we have perceived equally well. Why, for example, what has been perceived many
times is usually presented to the soul more clearly than what has been perceived
only one or two times, and why the things one has seen and remembered more
distinctly than those one has only imagined, which would explain, for example,
why we would understand the distribution of the veins in the liver after seeing a
dissection of this organ only once better than after reading it several times in an
anatomy book, and so for other similar things.
But if one wishes to reflect upon what was said before about imagination, and
upon the little that has just been said about memory, and if one is delivered from the
prejudice that our brain is much too small to be able to preserve such large numbers
of traces and impressions, then one will have the pleasure of discovering the cause
of all these surprising effects of the memory, of which Saint Augustine speaks with
so much admiration in the tenth book of his Confessions. I do not want to explain
these things at greater length here, because I believe it is more appropriate for each
man to explain them for himself through an effortofthe mind, since the things one
discovers by this means are always more agreeable, and moreover make a greater
impression upon us than those we learn from others.

IV. Habits.
For the explanation of habits, it is necessary to understand the way in which
there is reason to think that the soul moves the parts of the body to which it is
united, which is this: by all appearances, there are always in some places in the
brain, wherever they may be, a very great number of animal spirits, highly agitated
by the heat of the heart whence they came. and quite ready to flow into any places
where they find an open passage. All the nerves terminate in the reservoir of these
spirits, and the soul has the power" to determine their movement and to conduct
them through these nerves into all the muscles of the body. The spirits, entering the
muscles, cause them to swell, and consequently they contract them. Thus, they
move the parts of the body to which these muscles are attached.
You will have no difficulty convincing yourself that the soul moves the body in
the way I have just explained if you will notice that when someone has gone a long
time without eating, will as he might to impart certain motions to his body, he will
not be able to do so; indeed, he may even have some difficulty staying on his feet.
But if a way is found to make something of a strongly spirituous nature flow into
his heart, such as wine or some other comparable substance, he will immediately
perceive that the body obeys with much greater facility, and that it can be moved in
any way desired. For this single experiment seems to me to show that the soul
cannot impart movement to its body without animal spirits, and that it is through
them that it recovers its control over the body.
•1 shall explain the na1ure of lhis power shonly [6.2.3 and Eluc:idalion IS).

108

Nicolas Malebranche

Now the swelling of the muscles is so visible and sensible in the agitations of our
arms and all partsofourbodies, and it is so reasonable to believe that these muscles
cannot swell themselves unless some body enters them, just as a balloon cannot be
blown up or become inflated unless entered by air or something else, that it seems
indubitable that the nerves push the animal spirits from the brain into the muscles to
inflate them and to produce in them all the movements we wish to make. For when
a muscle is full, it is necessarily shorter than when it is empty, so that it pulls and
moves the part to which it is attached, as is explained at greater length in the books
on the Passions and Man by Descartes. Nevertheless, I do not offer this explanation as one that is perfectly demonstrated in every detail. To render it completely
clear, many things are to be desired, without which it is almost impossible to
achieve clarity. But knowing them is also rather useless to our subject here,
because whether this explanation be true or false, it will be equally useful for
understanding the nature of habits; if the soul does not move the body in this way at
all, it must move it in some other way sufficiently similar to it for drawing the
consequences we shall infer from it.
But in order to follow our explanation, it must be noted that the spirits do not
always find the paths through which they must flow sufficiently open and free, and
this is why, for example, we have difficulty moving our fingers with the speed
necessary for playing musical instruments, or in moving the muscles used in
pronounciation in order to pronounce the words of a foreign language. But little by
little the animal spirits open and smooth these paths by their continual flow, so that
in time they find no more resistance. Now it is in this facility the animal spirits have
of flowing into the members of our bodies that habits consist.
It is very easy according to this explanation to resolve an infinity of questions
concerning the habits, as, for example, why children are more capable of acquiring
new habits than older persons are; why it is very hard to rid oneself of old habits;
why it is that by virtue of speaking, men have acquired such great facility at it that
they pronounce their words with incredible speed, even without thinking, as
happens only too often to those who recite prayers they have been accustomed to
saying for many years. Nonetheless, in order to pronounce but a single word, it is
necessary to move many muscles, such as those of the tongue, lips, throat, and
diaphragm, all at once, within a certain time, and in a certain order. But one can,
with a little meditation, satisfy oneself on these questions, and on many other very
curious and rather useful ones, and they need not detain us here.
It is obvious from what has just been said that there is a great similarity between
memory and habits, and that in one sense, the memory may pass for a habit. For
just as corporeal habits consist in the facility the spirits have acquired for flowing
through certain places in our bodies, so memory consists in the traces the same
spirits have imprinted upon the brain, which are the causes of our facility in
recalling things to ourselves. Thus, if there were no perceptions attached to the
paths of the animal spirits, nor to these traces, there would be no difference
between the memory and the other habits. a Nor is it any more difficult to conceive
•Sec the Elucidations concerning memory and the spiritual habits (Eiuc. 7].

The Search after Truth

109

that beasts, though without a soul and incapable of any perception can, in their
way, recall the things that have made an impression in their brain, than it is to
conceive that they are capable of acquiring various habits. And after what( have
just said about habits, I do not see much more difficulty in imagining to oneself
how the members of their bodies gradually acquire various habits than there is in
conceiving why a newly made machine does not run as easily as it does after it has
been used for awhile.

BOOK TWO: PART ONE
Chapter Six

I. That brain fibers are not subject to such rapid changes as the spirits.
II. Three important changes at the three different ages.
I. That brain fibers are not subject to such rapid changes as the
spirits.
All parts of living bodies are continually in motion, the solids and fluids, the
flesh as well as the blood. The only differences between the motion of the one
and the others is that the motion of the pa11S of the blood is visible and sensible,
whereas that of the fibers of our flesh is completely imperceptible. There is, then,
this difference between the animal spirits and the substance of the brain: the
animal spirits are highly agitated and fluid, whereas the substance of the brain
has some solidity and consistency. Thus, the spirits are divided into tiny pa11icles
and are dissipated in a few hours, transpiring through the pores of the vessels
containing them, and they are often replaced by others not at all like them. But
the brain fibers are not so easy to disperse, they do not often undergo considerable changes, and their entire substance changes only after many years.

II. Three imp()rtant changes that happen in tire three different ages.
The most important differences found in the brain of an individual man
throughout the course of his life take place in childhood, at the peak of his
growth, and in old age.
In childhood, the brain fibers are soft, flexible, and delicate. With age they
become drier, harder, and stronger. But in old age they are completely inflexible,
responding to the flow of the animal spirits only with difficulty; they are also
thick, and sometimes mixed with superfluous humors that the very low heat of
this age can no longer disperse. For just as we see that the fibers that make up
flesh harden with time, and that the flesh of a young partridge is without doubt
more tender than that of an old bird, so the brain fibers of a child or a young man
must be much softer and more delicate than those of persons more advanced in
age.

110

The Search after Truth

Ill

One will understand the reason for these changes if one considers that these
fibers are continually agitated by the animal spirits, which flow about them in
many different ways. For just as the winds dry the earth over which they blow, so
the animal spirits through their continual agitation gradually render most of a
man's brain fibers drier, more compressed, and more solid, so that the brain
fibers of older persons are almost always less flexible than those of younger
persons. And in those of the same age, the drunkard, who over the course of
many years has imbibed wine or other intoxicating beverages to excess, must
have more solid and inflexible fibers than those who have abstained from these
beverages throughout their lives.
Now, the different constitutions of the brain in children, grown men, and the
aged are very important causes of the differences that may be noted in the faculty
of imagination in these three ages, of which we shall speak in the sequel. Let us
begin by examining what happens to the brain of a child in its mother's womb.

BOOK TWO: PART ONE
Chapter Seven

t

I. The communication between the brain of a mother and that of her child.
II. The communication between our brain and other parts of our body. which
disposes liS toward imitation and compassion. Ill. Explanation of the generation ofmonstrOIIS children. and propagation of tire species. IV. Explanation of
some disorders of mind and some inclinations of the will. V. Concupiscence and
Original Sin. VI. Objections and replies.
It is, it seems to me. evident that we are connected to all things and that we have
natural relations to all things around us that are very useful for the preservation
and convenience of life. But these relations are not all equal. We are much more
closely attached to France than to China, to the sun than to some star, to our own
house than to our neighbor's. There are invisible ties that bind us much more
closely to men than to beasts, to our parents and friends than to strangers, to
those upon whom we depend for the preservation of our being than to those from
whom we neither fear nor hope for anything.
What is most noteworthy in this natural union between us and other men is that
it is greater in proportion as we have greater need of them. Parents and friends are
closely bound to each other. It might be said that their pains and sorrows, as well
as their pleasures and happiness, are mutual, for all the passions and sentiments
of our friends are communicated to us through their conduct, and by the expressions on their faces. But because we can in the absolute sense live without
them, the natural union between us and them is not the greatest possible.
I. The communication between the brain of the mother and that of
her child.
Infants in their mothers' womb, whose bodies are not yet fully formed and
who are, by themselves, in the most extreme state of weakness and need that can
be conceived, must also be united with their mother in the closest imaginable
way. And although their soul be separated from their mother's, their body is not
at all detached from hers, and we should therefore conclude that they have the
same sensations and passions, i.e., that exactly the same thoughts are excited in
their souls upon the occasion of the motions produced in her body.

112

The Search after Truth

113

Thus, children see what their mothers see, hear the same cries, receive the
same impressions from objects, and are aroused by the same passions. For just as
the facial expression of an impassioned man penetrates those who look at it,
naturally imprinting in them a passion similar to that exciting him, though the
union between this man and those considering him be not very intense, thus, it
seems to me, there is reason to believe that mothers are capable of imprinting in
their unborn children all the same sensations by which they themselves are
affected, and all the same passions by which they are agitated. For basically the
body of the child is but a part of the mother's body, the blood and spirits are
common to both, their sensations and passions are the natural fruits of the
movements of the spirits and the blood, and these movements are necessarily
communicated from the mother to the child. Thus, the passions and the sensations, and in general all the thoughts of which the body is the occasion, are
common to mother and child.
These things seem incontestable to me for many reasons. Consider only that a
mother who is very frightened at the sight of a cat begets a child with a horror that
surprises him every time this animal is presented to him. It is easy to conclude
from this that the child must have seen with the same horror and emotions of
spirit what its mother saw when she carried it in her womb, since the sight of a
cat that does it no harm still produces in it such strange effects. However, I
propose all this only as a hypothesis that, if I am correct, will be sufficiently
demonstrated by the following, for any hypothesis that satisfies the test of resolving whatever difficulties can be raised in opposition to it should be accepted as an
indisputable principle.

II. The communication between our brain and the parts of our body,
which disposes us to imitation and compassion.
The invisible ties with which the Author of nature unites all his works are
worthy of God's wisdom and men's admiration. Nothing is at once more surprising or instructive, but we do not notice it. We allow ourselves to be guided
without considering what guides us or how it guides us. Nature is hidden from us
as well as its Author, and we feel the motions produced in us without considering
their sources. However, there are few things more necessary for us to know, for
it is on their knowledge that the explanation of all things relating to man depend.
Of course, there are powers in our brain that naturally incline us toward
imitation, for this is necessary to civil society. Not only is it necessary that
children believe their parents, pupils their teachers, and inferiors those above
them, but also that all men have some disposition to adopt the same manners and
perform the same actions as those with whom they wish to live. For in order for
men to be bound to one another, they must resemble one another in body and
spirit. This is the principle of infinitely many things of which we shall speak in
what follows. But for what we have to say in this chapter, it is necessary to know
that there are natural dispositions in the brain that incline us to compassion as
well as to imitation.

114

Nicolas Malebranche

Thus. it is necessary to know that not only are the animal spirits borne naturally into the parts of our bodies in order to perform the same actions, and the
same movements that we see others perform, but also for the purpose of suffering
their injuries in some way and to share in their miseries. For experience teaches
us that when we carefully attend to a man someone has rudely struck, or who has
a serious wound. the spirits are forcefully borne into the parts of our bodies that
correspond to those we see wounded in another provided that the flow of these
spirits is not turned elsewhere, by deliberately stimulating with some force, a part
of the body other than that seen to be injured. Or that the natural flow of spirits
toward the heart and viscera, which ordinarily takes place in sudden disturbances, does not lead away or change that of which we are speaking in any way.
Or finally that no extraordinary connection between the traces in the brain and the
movements of the spirits produces the same effect.
This transport of spirits in the parts of our bodies that correspond to those parts
one sees injured in others causes an acute impression in sensitive people with a
vivid imagination and very soft and tender flesh. For they very often feel a kind
of shivering in their legs, for example, when they look carefully at someone with
a wound there. or actually receive a blow there. Here is what one of my friends
writes, which might be taken to confirm my thinking:
An aged man, who resides with one of my sisters, being ill. a young maid servant of
the house held the candle while he was being bled through the foot. When she saw
that he Will about to be lanced, she was seized with such apprehension that for three or
four days afterwards she felt a pain in the same place in her foot so vivid that she was
obliged to stay in bed during that time.

The reason for this occurrence is, according to my principle, that the spirits are
forcefully spread into the parts of our bodies that correspond to those we see hurt
in others and that in order to keep them more taut, they render them more
perceptible to our souls so that it can be on its guard to avoid the evils we see
happening to others.
This compassion in bodies produces a compassion in the spirits. It excites us to
help others because in so doing we help ourselves. Finally, it checks our malice
and cruelty. For the horror of blood, the fear of death-in a word, the sensible
impression of compassion-often prevents the massacre of animals, even by
those most convinced that they are merely machines, because most men are
unable to kill them without themselves being wounded by the counterblow of
compassion.
What must be especially noted here is that the sensible sight of the wound a
person receives produces another wound in those who see it that is greater in
proportion as they are weaker and more delicate. This is so because sensible
sight, pushing the animal spirits powerfully into the parts of the body corresponding to those they see wounded, makes a greater impression in the fibers of a
delicate body than in those of a strong and robust one.
Thus, men who are full of strength and vigor are not wounded by the sight of a
massacre, and they are not moved to compassion so much because this sight
shocks their bodies as because it shocks their reason. These persons have no
compassion at all for criminals; they are inflexible and inexorable. But as to

The Search after Truth

liS

women and children, they suffer much pain from the wounds they see others
receive. They instinctively have much more compassion for the miserable, and
they cannot even see a beast beaten or hear it cry without some disturbance of
mind.
For unborn children, still in the womb, the delicacy ofthe fibers of their flesh
being infinitely greater than that of women and children, the flow of the spirits is
bound to produce more considerable changes in them, as we shall see in the
sequel.
What I have just said can still be regarded as a simple hypothesis if one wishes,
but we should try to understand it well if we wish to conceive distinctly the things
I propose to explain in this chapter. For the two suppositions I have just made are
tbe principles of an infinity of things ordinarily thought to be very difficult and
very complex, and which seem to me impossible to clarify without accepting
these hypotheses. Here are examples that can serve to clarify and even to prove
the two suppositions I have just made.

Ill. Explanation of the generation of monstrous children and of the
propagation of the species.
About seven or eight years ago, I saw at the Incurables a young man who was
born mad, and whose body was broken in the same places in which those of
criminals are broken. He had remained nearly twenty years in this state. Many
persons saw him, and the late queen mother, upon visiting this hospital, was
curious to see and even to touch the arms and legs of this young man where they
were broken.
According to the principles just established, the cause of this disastrous accident was that his mother, having known that a criminal was to be broken, went to
see the execution. All the blows given to this miserable creature forcefully struck
the imagination of this mother and, by a sort of counterblow,• the tender and
delicate brain of her child. The fibers of this woman's brain were extremely
shaken and perbaps broken in some places by the violent flow of the spirits
produced at the sight of such a terrible occurrence, but they retained sufficient
consistency to prevent their complete destruction. On the other hand, the child's
brain fibers, being unable to resist the torrent of these spirits, were entirely
dissipated, and the destruction was great enough to make him lose his mind
forever. That is the reason why he came into the world deprived of sense. Here is
why he was broken at the same parts of his body as the criminal his mother had
seen put to death.
At the sight of this execution, so capable of frightening a woman, the violent
flow of the mother's animal spirits passed very forcefully from her brain to all the
parts of her body corresponding to those of the criminal, b and the same thing
happened in the child. But, because the mother's bones were capable ot reststmg
the violence of these spirits, they were not wounded by them. They may not even
have felt the slightest pain, or the least trembling in her arms and legs, when
• Al:c:ording to the firll hypothesis.
b Al:c:ordiag 10 the second hypothesis.

116

Nicohu Malebranche

those of the criminal were broken. But this rapid flow of the spirits was capable
ofsweeping away the soft and tender parts of the child's bones. For the bones are
the last parts of the body to be formed, and they have very little consistency in a
child still in the mother's womb. And it must be noted that if this mother had
determined the motion of these spirits toward some other parts of her body by
forcefully stirring them, her child would not have had its bones broken at all, but
the part corresponding to that toward which the mother would have determined
these spirits would have been badly injured, according to what I have already
said.
The explanations of this accident are broad enough to explain how pregnant
women who see people marked on cenain parts of the face imprint these same
marks on their unborn children, and on the same parts of their bodies; and one
can judge from this that it is with reason that pregnant women are urged to rub
some hidden part of their body when they see something that surprises them, or
when they are excited by some violent passion, for that can make the marks
appear on these hidden pans rather than on face of their child.
We would have many examples like the one I have just reponed if children
could live after after having received such great wounds, but ordinarily they are
aborted. For it can be said that nearly all infants who die in the womb without
being ill have no other cause of their misfortune than the terror, or some ardent
desire, or some other violent passion of their mothers. Here is another rather
peculiar example.
It has not been more than a year since a woman, having attended too carefully
to the portrait of Saint Pius on the feast of his canonization, gave birth to a child
who looked exactly like the representation of the saint. He had the face of an old
man, as far as is possible for a beardless child; his arms were crossed upon his
chest, with his eyes turned toward the heavens; and he had very little forehead,
because the image ofthe saint being raised toward the vault of the church, gazing
toward heaven, had almost no forehead. He had a kind of inverted miter on his
shoulders, with many round marks in the places where miters are covered with
gems. In shon, this child strongly resembled the tableau after which its mother
had formed it by the power of her imagination. This is something that all Paris
has been able to see as well as me, because the body was preserved for a
considerable time in alcohol.
The example has this peculiarity: it was not the sight of a living man, agitated
by some passion, that moved the spirits and blood of the mother to produce such
a strange effect, but only the sight of a tableau, which, however, was very
sensible and accompanied by a great movement of the spirits, whether through
the ardor and application of the mother or by the agitation that the turmoil of the
festival caused in her.
Thus, this mother looking intently and with agitation of the spirits at this
tableau, it follows from the first hypothesis that the unborn child also saw it
intently and with agitation of the spirits. The mother, being vividly struck by the
tableau, imitated it at least in posture, according to the second hypothesis. For
her body, being completely formed, and the fibers of her flesh being hard enough
to resist the flow of the spirits, she could not imitate it or render herself like it in

The Search after Truth

117

all respects. But, the fibers of the child's flesh, being extremely soft, and as a
result susceptible to all kinds of configurations, the rapid flow of the spirits
produced in its flesh all that was necessary to make it exactly like the image it
perceived. And the imitalion to which children are the most disposed is nearly
always as perfect as can be. But this particular imitation, having given to the
body of this infant a shape too far removed from its ordinary one, caused its
death.
There are many other examples of the power of a mother's imagination in the
literature, and there is nothing so bizarTe that it has not been aborted at some
time. For not only do they give birth to deformed infants but also fruits they have
wanted to eat, such as apples, pears, grapes, and other similar things.
If the mother imagines and strongly desires to eat pears, for example, the
unborn, if the fetus is alive, imagines them and desires them just as ardently; and,
whether the fetus be alive or not, the flow of spirits excited by the image of the
desired fruit, expanding rapidly in a tiny body, is capable of changing its shape
because of its softness. These unfortunate infants thus become like the things
they desire too ardently. But the mother does not suffer from it, because her body
is not soft enough to take on the figure of the things she imagines, and so she
cannot imitate them or make herself entirely like to them.
Now it need not be imagined that this correspondence I have just explained,
which is sometimes the cause of such great disorders, is a useless thing. or an
ordained evil in nature. On the contrary, it seems very useful to the propagation
of human bodies or to the formation of the fetus, and it is absolutely necessary to
the transmission of certain dispositions of the brain, which should be different at
different times and in different countries. For it is necessary, for example, that
the lambs of certain countries have a brain disposed to flee immediately from
wolves, because there are many of them in these places and they have much to
fear from them.
It is true that this communication between the brain of the mother and that of
her child sometimes has bad results when the mother allows herself to be overwhelmed by some violent passion. Nevertheless, it seems to me that without this
communication, women and animals could not easily bring forth young of the
same species. For although one can give some explanation of the formation of the
fetus in general, as Descartes has tried successfully enough, nevertheless it is
very difficult, without this communication of the mothers brain with the child's,
to explain why a mare does not give birth to a calf, or a chicken lay an egg
containing a partridge or some bird of a new species; and I believe that those who
have mediated on the formation of the fetus will be of this opinion.
It is true that the most reasonable thinking, that which conforms most closely
to experience in this very difficult question of the formation of the fetus, is that
infants are already almost completely formed even before the action by which
they are conceived, and during the gestation period their mothers do nothing but
provide them their normal growth. However. this communication of the mother's
animal spirits and brain with those of the infant seems to serve to regulate this
growth, determining the particles used to nourish it to be arranged gradually in
the same way as in the mother's body; which is to say, this communication of the

118

Nicolas Malebranche

spirits renders the child like its mother, or of the same species. This would seem
to be proved by the mutations or accidents that occur when the imagination of the
mother is deranged and when some violent passion changes the natural disposition of her brain, for then, as has just been explained, this communication
changes the conformation of the child's body, so that the mother sometimes
aborts a fetus more similar to fruits she has desired, because the spirits fmd less
resistance in the fibers of the child's body.
However, I do not deny that God could have disposed all things necessary for
the propagation of the species throughout the infinite ages in a manner so precise
and regular that mothers would never abort, but would always give birth to
children of the same size and color or, in a word, so similar they would be taken
for one another, without this communication of which we have just spoken. For
we should not judge God's power by our feeble imagination and we do not know
the ends he might have in the construction of his work.
Every day we see that without the aid of this communication plants and trees
reproduce their like regularly enough, and that birds and very many other small
animals have no need of it in order to make other little ones hatch and grow when
they nest on the eggs of a different species, as when a hen sits on partridge eggs.
For, however it may be, there is reason to think that seeds and eggs already
contain the plants and birds that come from them, and that they can themselves
ensure that the tiny bodies of these birds have received their conformation by the
communication of which we have spoken, and the plants have received theirs
through another equivalent means of communication. However, this may be
guessing. But even if one is not guessing, one should not judge what God can do
entirely by the things He has done.
Nonetheless, if one considers that plants which receive their growth from the
action of their mothers resemble them much more than those from seeds, as
tulips, for example, which come from a bulb, are normally of the same colors as
their mother, those from a seed being almost always very different, one cannot
doubt that if communication of the mother with the offspring is not absolutely
necessary to its being the same species, then at least it is always necessary to its
being completely like the mother.
So, even if God has foreseen that this communication of the mother's brain
with her child's will sometimes make the fetus die and produce monsters because
of the derangement of the mother's imagination, still this communication is so
admirable, and so necessary for the reasons I have just given as well as for many
others I could add, that God's knowledge should not have impeded the execution
of His plan. In one sense. it can be said that God never intended to make
monsters; for it seems obvious that if God made only one animal, He would
never have made it monstrous. But, having had a plan to produce an admirable
work by the simplest means. and to link all His creatures with one another, He
foresaw certain effects that would necessarily follow from the order and nature of
things. and this did not deter Him from his plan. For in the end, although a
monster considered by itself would be an imperfect work, nevertheless when it is

The Search after Truth

119

joined with the rest of the creatures, it does not render the world imperfect or
unworthy of the Creator's wisdom when the work is compared with the simplicity of the means by which it is produced.
We have sufficiently explained what a mother's imagination can do to the
body of her child. We shall presently examine the power she has over its mind,
and try in the same way to discover in its origin the primary derangement of the
mind and will of men, for that is our principal intention.

IV. Explanation of some derangements of mind and inclinations of
tile will.
It is certain that the brain traces are accompanied by sensations, and by ideas
of the soul, and that the movements of the animal spirits in the body do not occur
without corresponding impulses in the soul. In short, it is clear that all the
passions and all the bodily sensations are accompanied by genuine sensations and
passions of the soul. Now according to our first hypothesis, mothers communicate their brain traces to their children, and hence the movement of their animal
spirits. Thus do they cause in their children's minds the same passions and
sensations with which they are affected, thereby corrupting their hearts and their
reasoning in many ways.
If it is found that many children carry marks or traces of the idea that struck
their mother, even though the skin fibers offer much more resistance to the flow
of the spirits than do the soft parts of the brain and the spirits are much more
agitated in the brain than nearer the skin, one cannot reasonably doubt that the
animal spirits of the mother produce many traces of their irregular motions in the
brain of their child. Now, the major brain traces and the corresponding movements of the spirits are preserved for a long time, sometimes throughout one's
life. So it is clear that as there are few women without some weakness, or who
have not been disturbed by some passion during pregnancy, there must be very
few children whose minds are not distorted in some way, and who are not
dominated by some passion.
We have only too many experiences of these things, and everyone knows well
enough that there are whole families afflicted with great weaknesses of imagination inherited from their parents. But it is not necessary to give particular examples here. On the contrary, it is more appropriate to offer assurances, in order to
reassure some people that these parental weaknesses are not natural or proper to
man's nature and that the brain traces and vestiges that cause them can be erased
with time.
One might nevertheless relate here the example of King James of England, of
whom Sir Kenelm Digby speaks in his book on the Power of Sympatlly. He
assures us in this book that when Mary Stuart was pregnmt with King James,
some Scottish Lords entered her chambers and killed her secretary, who was
Italian, in her presence, even though she threw herself in front of him in an effort
to obstruct them. This princess received some minor wounds, and her fright so
impressed her imagination that they were communicated to the child she carried

120

Nicolas Malebranche

in her womb. Thus, her son King James remained incapable all his life of looking
at a naked sword. Digby says he experienced this himself when he was knighted,
for when this prince began to touch his shoulder with the sword, he moved it
directly toward his face. and he would even have been wounded had someone not
adroitly guided it to where it belonged. There are so many similar examples that
seeking them in authors is useless. Undoubtedly, no one disputes these things.
For after all one sees very many persons who cannot bear the sight of a rat, a
mouse, a cat, or a frog, and especially animals that crawl, such as serpents and
lizards. and who know no other cause of these extraordinary aversions than the
feat their mothers had of these various animals during pregnancy.

V. Explanation of concupiscence and Original Sin.
But what I want to have especially well noticed is that there is every possible
evidence that men retain in their brains even today the traces and impressions of
their first parents. For just as animals produce other animals that resemble them,
with similar traces in their brains that are the reason why animals of the same
species have the same sympathies and antipathies, and perform the same actions
in the same circumstances, so our first parents after their sin received such great
vestiges and such deep traces in the brain from the impressions of sensible
objects that these could well have communicated them to their children. Accordingly, this great attachment we have since birth to all sensible things. and this
great gulf between us and God in this state, could somehow be explained by what
we have just said.
For as it is necessary according to the established order of nature that the
thoughts of the soul con form to the traces in the brain, so one could say that from
the time we were formed in the wombs of our mothers we were in sin and
infected with the corruption of our parents, for we are very strongly attached to
the pleasures of the senses after that time. Having traces in our brains similar to
those of the persons who brought us into being, we necessarily also have the
same thoughts and inclinations with respect to sensible objects.
And so we are bound to be born with concupiscence and Original Sin,• with
concupiscence, if it is nothing other than a natural effort by the brain traces to
anach the mind to sensible things, and with Original Sin, if Original Sin is nothing
but the reign of concupiscence grown victorious, and master of the mind and heart
of the child.b Now, there is much to suggest that the reign or victory of
concupiscence is what we call Original Sin in infants, and actual sin in free men.
If one pays serious attention to these two truths, the first that it is through the
body, by generation, that Original Sin is transmitted and that it is not engendered
by the soul and the second that the body can only act upon the soul and corrupt it
through the traces of the part of the brain upon which its thoughts are naturally
dependent, I hope you will be convinced that Original Sin is transmitted in the way
just explained.
•Sec further Elucidation 8 on Original Sin.
0 Rom. 6:12. 14, ell:.

Tile Search after Trutll

121

VI. Objections and replies.
It seems that one could conclude something conlraly to experience from the
principles I have just established, namely, that the mother must always communicate to her child habits and inclinations similar to her own, and facility in
imagining and learning the things she knows, for all these things as has been
said, depend only on the traces and vestiges of the brain. Now, it is certain that
the traces and vestiges ofthe mother's brain are communicated to the child. This
has been proved by reported examples about men, and is further confirmed by the
example of animals, whose young have brains filled with the same vestiges as
those from which they came. This is why all members of the same species have
the same voice, the same way of moving their limbs, and finally the same ruses
for capturing their prey and defending themselves against their enemies. It must
then follow from this that since all the traces of the mothers are engraved and
imprinted in the brains of the children, they must be born with the same habits
and other qualities as their mothers, and even normally retain them throughout
their lives, since the habits one has from earliest youth are the ones preserved the
longest, which nevertheless is contrary to experience.
In order to reply to this objection, it must be understood that there are two
kinds of traces in the brain. The first are natural, or proper to man's nature, the
others are acquired. The natural ones are very deep, and it is impossible to erase
them completely. The acquired ones on the contrary can easily be lost, because
ordinarily they are not as deep. Now although the natural and the aatuired traces
differ only in degree, and although the first often have less strength than the
second, since we commonly train animals to do things quite contrary to those to
which they are inclined by these natural traces (for example, we train a dog not to
touch bread and not to run after a partridge he sees and smells) nevertheless there
is this difference between these traces: the natural ones have, so to speak, secret
alliances with other parts of the body, for all the organs of our machine help
maintain themselves in their natural state. All parts of our bodies mutually
contribute to all the things necessary for this conservation, or for the restoration of
natural traces. And so they cannot be completely erased, and they begin to revive
just when one believes they have been destroyed.
On the other hand, the acquired traces, although greater, deeper, and stronger
than the natural ones, are gradually lost if one does not take care to preserve them
by the continuous application of the causes that produced them, because the other
parts of the body do not contribute to their preservation at all but, on the contrary,
continually work to lose and efface them. One can compare these traces to
ordinary wounds of the body; these are wounds our brain has received, which
heal themselves as do other wounds through the admirable construction of the
machine. If one made a cut in the cheek even larger than the mouth, this opening
will gradually close. But the mouth itself, being a natural opening, can never be
rejoined. It is the same thing with the brain traces; the natural ones are never
effaced, but the others are healed with time. This truth has infinite consequences
for morality.

122

Nicolas Malebranche

Thus, there is nothing in the entire body that does not confonn to the natural
traces; they are transmitted full strength to infants. Hence, panots make young
that have the same cries or the same natural songs as they themselves have. But
because the acquired traces are only in the brain and do not radiate to the rest of
the body, or at least do so very infrequently, as when they have been imprinted
by the motions accompanying violent passions, they should not be transmitted to
infants. Thus, a panot that bids good day and good night to its master will not
generate offspring as knowing as itself, and learned, skillful persons will not
have children who resemble them in this respect. And so even if it is true that
whatever happens in the brain of the mother also happens at the same time in that
of her child, that the mother can neither see nor feel anything, nor imagine
anything, without the child seeing, feeling, and imagining the same thing, and
finally that all the mother's false traces corrupt the child's imagination, nevertheless, if these traces are unnatural in the sense just explained, there is no need to
be surprised if they are ordinarily closed as soon as the infant leaves the mother's
womb. For at that point, the cause that fonned and sustained these traces no
longer subsists, the natural constitution of the whole body contributes to their
destruction, and sensible objects produce other quite new, very deep, and
numerous ones that efface nearly all those the infant had in the womb. For, since
a great pain always causes us to forget those that preceded it, it is impossible for
such vivid sensations as those of a child receiving the impression of objects on its
delicate sense organs for the first time, not to efface most of the traces it
received from the same object only through a sort of indirect impression when
it was almost shielded from them in its mother's womb.
Nonetheless, when these traces are fonned by a strong passion, and accompanied by a vecy violent agitation of the mother's blood and spirits, they act so
forcefully on the child's brain and the rest of its body that they are imprinted
there as deeply and durably as natural traces, as in the example from Sir Kenelm
Digby, and that of the infant born crippled and an idiot, in whose brain and
members the mother's imagination had produced such great ravages, and finally
as in the example of the general corruption of man's nature.
And there is no reason to be surprised if the children of the king of England did
not have the same weakness as their father. First, because these kinds of traces
are never imprinted as deeply in the rest of the body as are the natural ones; and
second, because the mother's not having the same weakness as the father, her
sound constitution prevented this from happening; and finally, because mothers
have infinitely more influence on the brains of children than do fathers, as is
evident from the things just said.
But it must be noted that all these reasons which show that the children of King
James of England need not share the weakness of their father do not apply against
the explanation of original sin, or of this dominant inclination toward sensible
things, or this great distance between ourselves and God that we inherited from
our parents, because the traces imprinted on the brain ofthe first men by sensible
objects were vecy deep, they were accompanied and augmented by violent
passions. They were also fortified through the continual and necessll}' use of

123

The Search after Truth

sensible things for the preservation oflife, not only in Adam and Eve but even, as
should be well noted, in the greatest saints, in all the men and all the women from
whom we are descended; so there is nothing that could have stopped this corruption of our nature. Thus, far from these traces of our first parents having to be
gradually effaced, on the contrary, they are bound to be reinforced from day to
day; and without the grace of Jesus Christ, which continually opposes this torrent, it would be absolutely true to say with the pagan poet:
Aetas parentum pejor avis tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.

For we must realize that the vestiges that arouse sentiments of piety in the most
saintly mothers do not communicate piety to the infants in their wombs, whereas
on the contnuy the traces that arouse the ideas of sensible things, and are
followed by passions, never fail to communicate the sensation and the love of
sensible things to them.
A mother. for example, who is excited to the love of God by the movement of
spirits that accompanies the impression of the image of a venerable old man,
because this mother has anached the idea of God to this impression of age (for, as
we have seen in the chapter on the relation of ideas, this can easily happen, even
though there is no relation between God and the image of an old man), this
mother, I say, can only produce the trace of an old man in her child's brain, and a
favorable anitude toward old men, which is not at all the love of God by which
she was touched. For in the end there are no traces in the brain that can, of
themselves, arouse any other ideas than those of sensible things, because the
body was not made to instruct the mind, and it speaks to the soul only for itself.
Thus, a mother whose brain is full of traces that, by their nature, are related to
sensible things and that she cannot erase because concupiscence dwells within
her, and whose body is not at all submissive to her, necessarily communicates
them to her child, engendering a sinner, even if she be righteous. This mother is
righteous, because actually loving or having loved God with a voluntary love,
concupiscence does not render her at all criminal, even if she follows its impulse
in her sleep. But the child she engenders, never having loved God with a voluntary love and its heart not having been turned toward God, it is clear that it is
disordered and deranged, and that there is nothing in it not deserving the anger of
God.
But when children have been regenerated through baptism, and have been
justified either by a disposition of the heart similar to that which dwells in the just
during the dreams of night, or perhaps by a free act of love of God they have
made, being anticipated by an actual and infallible help, and delivered for some
moments from domination by the body through the power of the Sacrament (for
as God has made them to love Him, it is inconceivable that they could actually be
justified and in the order of God if they do not love Him, or have not loved Him,
or if their hearts are not disposed as they would be if they had actually loved
Him) thus, even though they submined to concupiscence during their childhood,
their concupiscence is no longer sinful. It renders them no more guilty or deserv-

124

Nicolas Malebranche

ing of wrath; they do not cease being just and pleasing to God, for the same
reason that we do not lose grace even though we follow the impulse of concupiscence in sleep. For infants, having such a soft brain and receiving such strong
and vivid impressions from the weakest objects, do not have sufficient freedom
of mind to resist them. But I have lingered too long on subjects that are not quite
the concern of this treatise. It is enough that I can conclude here, from what I
have just explained in this chapter, that all these false impressions that mothers
imprint in the brain of their children falsify their minds and corrupt their imagination, and thus most men are subject to imagining things other than as they are,
attributing some wrong color to them, or bestowing some irregular trait on the
ideas of the things they perceive. But if anyone wishes further clarification of a
more profound nature concerning what I think about original sin and the way I
think it is transmitted to infants, they can read the Elucidation [8] corresponding
to this chapter at a sitting.

BOOK TWO: PART ONE
Chapter Eight

+

I. Changes occurring in the imagination of a child emerging from the womb
through con,•ersation with its nurse, its mother, and other persons. II. Advice for
their upbringing.
<J. Changes occurring in the imagination of a child emerging from
the womb through conversation with its nurse. its mother, and
other persons. >

In the preceding chapter we considered the brain of an infant in its mother's
womb; let us now examine what happens to it after emerging from it. At the same
time it leaves the darkness and sees light for the first time, the cold of the outside
air seizes it, the most caressing embraces of the woman who receives it offend its
delicate members, all external objects surprise it; they are all objects of fear to it
because it docs not yet know them and has no strength to defend itself or flee.
The tears and cries with which it consoles itself are infallible signs of its pain and
fear, for they are in effect the appeals that nature provides attendants, so that they
may relieve it from the pain it suffers and fears.
To fully understand the inadequacies of its mind in this state, it must be
remembered that its brain fibers are very soft and very delicate, and, consequently, all external objects make very deep imprints in it. For since the smallest
objects are occasionally found capable of wounding a feeble imagination, such a
great number of wondrous objects cannot but injure and confuse that of a child.
But in order to conceive still more vividly the confusions and pains of children
at birth, and the injury their imaginations must suffer, let us represent to ourselves the surprise of a man who saw that he was being approached by giants five
or six times taller than himself who gave no indication of their intentions; or at
seeing some new species of animal, which had no relation to those he had
previously seen; or how he would react if a flying horse or some other chimera
suddenly came down from the clouds to earth. What a profound impression these
marvels would make upon the mind, and how addled the brain would be, at
having seen them but once!

12S

126

Nicolas Malebranche

Quite commonly, unexpected events with terrible consequences cause grown
men whose brains are not very susceptible to new impressions, who have experience, and can defend themselves, or at least who can make some decisions, to
lose their minds. In coming into the world, infants suffer something from all the
unfamiliar objects which strike their senses. All the animals they see are new
kinds of animals for them, since they have seen nothing outside the womb before;
they have neither strength nor experience; their brain fibers are very delicate and
malleable. How then could their imaginations remain uninjured by so many
different objects?
It is true that the mothers have already accustomed their children somewhat to
the impressions of objects, since they have already traced profound impressions
on them while they were still in the womb. and it is for this reason that they are
not more badly injured when they first see with their own eyes what they have
already perceived in some way through their mothers'. And it is true that the false
traces and wounds their imaginations suffer from so many objects terrible to them
are closed and healed with time, because they are unnatural, and hence the entire
body opposes and erases them, as we have seen in the preceding chapter. And
this is what generally keeps all men from being mad from binh. But that does not
keep some impressions from being so strong and deep they can never be erased,
and so they remain with us throughout our lives.
If men would seriously reflect upon what occurs within themselves, and in
their own thoughts, they would not lack evidence for proving what has just been
said. They would ordinarily recognize secret inclinations and aversions in themselves, which others do not have, for which it seems that we can give no other
explanation than these traces from our earliest days. For since the causes of these
inclinations and aversions are panicular to us <as individuals>, they are not
founded in the nature of man; and since they are unknown to us, they must have
acted upon us at a time when our memories were not yet capable of retaining the
settings of things, which would have enabled us to remember them. This time
could be no other than our most tender infancy.
Descanes wrote in one of his letters that he had a special affection for all who
are crosseyed, and that after carefully searching for the cause, he finally recognized that this defect was seen in a young girl he liked when he was a child, the
affection he had felt for her having spread to all persons resembling her in some
way.
But these little disorders of the inclinations are not what lead us into most of
our errors; rather, all or most of our minds are mistaken about something, and we
are almost all subject to some kind of folly, although we think we are not. When
one carefully examines the nature of those with whom one converses, one is
easily convinced of this; even if one should perhaps be unique and others should
consider him so, one finds that others are also unique, differing only in degree.
There is, then, a fairly ordinary source of men's errors: this disruption of their
brain caused by the impression of external objects when they are coming into the
world; but this cause does not cease operating as quickly as one might imagine.
The ordinary conversation children are obliged to have with their nurses, or

The Search after Truth

127

even their mothers, who often have no education, completes the process of
corrupting and destroying their minds. These women talk nothing but nonsense,
or ridiculous and frightening tales. They speak to them only of sense-perceptible
things, and in such a way as to confirm them in the false judgments of sense. In a
word, they cast into their minds the seeds of all their own weaknesses, such as
their extravagant fears. their ridiculous superstitions, and similar defects. Accordingly, the child, neither accustomed to nor desirous of seeking the truth,
fmally becomes incapable of discerning it, of making any usc of his reason.
Whence he derives a cenain timidity and meanness of spirit that remains with
him for a long time, for there are many children fifteen or twenty years of age
who still have the demeanor of their nurses.
It is true that infants do not appear very well suited to meditating on truth, or to
the abstract and revealed sciences, because, their brain fibers being very delicate
and very easily agitated even by the weakest and least perceptible objects, and
their souls necessarily having sensations proponioned to the agitation of these
fibers, they avoid metaphysical thoughts and pure intellection, applying themselves exclusively to their sensations. Thus, it seems that infants cannot consider
the pure ideas of truth with sufficient attention, being so often and so easily
distracted by the confused ideas of the senses.
However, one can reply, first, that it is easier for a child of seven years to be
delivered from the errors to which his senses have brought him than for a person
of sixty who has followed the prejudices of his childhood throughout his life.
Second, that if a child is not capable of clear and distinct ideas of truth, he can at
least be warned that his senses deceive him on all kinds of occasions; and if we
cannot teach him the truth, at least we should not maintain or fonify him in his
errors. Finally, the youngest child, completely occupied as he is with feelings of
pleasure and pain, still learns in a shon time what older persons cannot learn any
faster, such as the order and relations among all the words and all the things they
see and hear. For although these things hardly depend on more than memory, still
it seems they make considerable usc of their reason in the way in which they
learn their language.

II. Ad,•ice for bringing 11p clrildren.
But since the ease with which the child's brain fibers receive impressions of
sensible objects is why we judge them incapable of the abstract sciences, this is
difficult to remedy. For we must admit that if we protect children from fear,
desires, and hopes, if we make them suffer no pain and keep them as far removed
as possible from their little pleasures, they could be taught the most difficult and
abstract things, or the least intuitive mathematics, mechanics, and other such
things necessary in the pursuit of life, as soon as they could speak. But they do
not care to apply their minds to abstract sciences when they are agitated by
desires and we trouble them with fears. which is quite necessary to consider
carefully.
For as an ambitious man who had just lost his wealth and his honor, or who
had suddenly been raised to a position of great dignity that he had not anticipated,

128

Nico/Qs Makbranche

would be in no state to resolve metaphysical questions or algebraic equations but
only to do the things present passion inspired him to do, so children, in whose
brains an apple or a sugarplum makes as deep an impression as do responsibilities
and honors in a man of forty, are in no state to hear the abstract truths we teach
them. So it can be said that there is nothing so opposed to the advancement of
children in the sciences as the continual diversions with which we reward them,
and the pains with which we ceaselessly punish and threaten them.
But what is infinitely more important is that these fears of chastisement and
these desires for sensible rewards with which the mind of a child is filled completely alienate them from piety. Devotion is still more abstract than science;
corrupt natures have still less taste for it. The mind of man is sufficiently inclined
to study, but it is not inclined toward piety. If, then, great agitations prevent us
from studying, even though it is naturally pleasant, how could children, completely occupied with sensible pleasure with which we reward them and pain with
which we frighten them, preserve sufficient freedom of mind to appreciate piety?
The capacity of the mind is very limited; it does not require many things to
occupy it, and when it is occupied it is incapable of new thoughts unless first
emptied. But when the mind is full of sensible ideas, it does not get rid of them at
its pleasure. In order to understand this, it must be considered that we are
incessantly carried toward the good by natural inclinations, and that, pleasure
being the property by which we distinguish good from evil, it is necessary that
pleasure concern us and occupy our attention more than all the rest. Pleasure thus
being attached to the use of sensible things, because they are the good of man's
body, there is a kind of necessity that these goods fill our minds to capacity, until
God spreads a cenain bitterness over them, which disgusts and horrifies us, or
which enables us to sense, through His grace, that heavenly sweetness which
effaces all the pleasures of earth: "Dando menti coelestem delectationem qua
omnis terrena delectatio superetur. " 8
But because we are as inclined to flee evil as to love good, and because pain is
the characteristic that nature has attached to evil, everything just said of pleasure
should be understood to apply to pain in the opposite sense.
Since therefore the things that make us feel pleasure and pain fill our minds to
capacity, and because we do not have the power to rid ourselves of them or to
avoid being affected by them at will, it is obvious that children cannot be made to
enjoy piety any more than the rest of mankind, unless one begins according to the
precepts of the Gospel, by privation of all things affecting the senses and exciting
great desires and fears in us; for all the passions impede and extinguish grace, or
that interior delectation God causes us to feel in our duty.
The smallest infants have reason just as well as full grown men, though they
do not have experience; they also have the same natural inclinations, though they
are inclined to very different objects. It is therefore necessary to train them to be
led by reason, since they have it, and they must be stimulated to their duty by
adroitly managing their good inclinations. To hold them to their duty by sensible

•st.

Augustine.

The Search after Truth

129

impressions is to stifle their reason and corrupt their bener inclinations. They
then seem to be interested in their duty, but it is only an appearance on their part.
Virtue is firmly embedded neither in their minds nor their hearts; they hardly
know it, and love it much less. Their minds are only full of fears and desires,
sense aversions and attractions, from which they cannot be disengaged and set
free to usc their reason. And so children raised in this base and servile manner
gradually become accustomed to a certain insensibility to all the sentiments of an
upright man and a Christian, and remain so all their lives; and when they try to
escape punishment by their authority or by their skill, they are abandoned to
everything that flaners concupiscence and the senses, for indeed they know no
other goods than sensible ones.
It is true that there are occasions when it is necessary to instruct children
through their senses. But this is needed only when reason will not suffice to do
so. They must first be persuaded through reason of what they should do, and if
they do not have sufficient light to recognize their obligations, it seems best to
leave them alone awhile. For to make them exhibit externally what they do not
believe to be their duty would not be to teach them, since it is the mind that must
be taught and not the body. But if they refuse to do what reason shows them they
ought to do, they need never be endured but instead one must go so far as some
kind of violence; for in such situations, he who spares his son shows him more
hatred than love, according to the wise man. •
If punishment neither instructs the mind nor makes one love virtue, at least it
teaches the body to some extent and impedes one's enjoyment of vice, thereby
preventing one from becoming a slave. But it is especially important to note that
pains do not fill the mind's capacity as do pleasures. We easily stop thinking of
them when we cease to suffer from them and when there is no more reason to fear
them. For then they do not provoke anention of the imagination, nor excite the
passions; they do not inflame concupiscence; finally, they leave the mind free to
think of whatever it pleases. Thus, one can usc the worse side of children to keep
them dutiful, or apparently dutiful.
But, even if it is sometimes useful to frighten and punish children with sensible
chastisement, it must not be concluded that one should entice them with sensible
rewards; what strongly affects the senses should not be used except in dire
necessity. We must not give them sensible rewards, representing these to them as
the purpose or end of the occupation. On the contrary, this would corrupt all their
actions and lead them toward sensuality rather than virtue. The traces of pleasure
one has enjoyed remain strongly imprinted in the imagination; they continually
revive the ideas of sensible goods; they always excite importunate desires that
disturb the peace of the mind; finally, they inflame concupiscence in every
situation, which is a leaven that corrupts everything. But this is not the place to
explain these things as they deserve.

• "Qui pare; it virpe odit filium suum." Prov. 13:24.

PART

BOOK TWO
Two: THE IMAGINATION
Chapter One

t

I. The imagination ofwomen. II. Of men. Ill. Of tile aged.
We have given some idea of the physical causes of disorder of men's imagination
in the other part. In this part we shall try to apply these causes to the most general
enors, and we shall speak again of those causes of our enors called moral causes.
One could see from the things said in the preceding chapter that the delicacy of
the brain fibers is one of the principal causes impeding our efforts to apply
ourselves to discovering truths that are slightly hidden.

I. The imagination ofwomen.
This delicacy of the brain fibers is usually found in women, and this is what
gives them great understanding of everything that strikes the senses. It is for
women to set fashions, judge language, discern elegance and good manners.
They have more knowledge. skill. and finesse than men in these matters. Everything that depends upon taste is within their area of competence, but nonnally
they are incapable of penetrating to truths that are slightly difficult to discover.
Everything abstract is incomprehensible to them. They cannot use their imagination for working out complex and tangled questions. They consider only the
surface of things, and their imagination has insufficient strength and insight to
pierce it to the heart. comparing all the pans, without being distracted. A trifle is
enough to distract them, the slightest cry frightens them, the least motion fascinates them. Finally, the style and not the reality of things suffices to occupy their
minds to capacity; because insignificant things produce great motions in the
delicate fibers of their brains, these things necessarily excite great and vivid
feelings in their souls, completely occupying it.
If it is certain that this delicacy of the brain fibers is the principal cause of all
these effects. it is not at all certain that it is to be found in all women. Or, if it be
found in them, their animal spirits are sometimes so proportioned to the brain
fibers that some women are found to have stronger minds than some men.
Strength of mind consists in a certain constitution of the volume and agitation of
the animal spirits with the brain fibers; and sometimes women have the right

130

The Search after Truth

131

constitution. There are strong, constant women, and there are feeble, inconstant
men. There are learned women, courageous women, women capable of anything; and on the other hand, one finds men who are soft and effeminate,
incapable of penetrating or accomplishing anything. In short, when we attribute
certain defects to a sex, to certain ages, to certain stations, we mean only that it is
ordinarily true, always assuming there is no general rule without exceptions.
For it need not be thought that all men or all women of the same age, nationality, or family have the same brain constitution. It is more appropriate to believe
that just as no two faces are exactly alike, no two imaginations are entirely alike,
and that all men, women, and children differ from each other only in degree with
regard to the delicacy of their brain fibers. For just as we need not hastily suppose
an essential identity between things between which we see no differences, so we
need not posit essential differences where we do not find perfect identity. For
these are mistakes we usually make.
What can be said ofthe brain fibers is that normally they are very soft and very
delicate in children, that with age they become hardened and strengthened;
however, most women's and some men's remain extremely delicate throughout
their lives. Nothing is known of further determinations. Suffice it to say of
women and children that since they are not involved in seeking truth and teaching
others, their errors do not sustain much prejudice, for one hardly takes their
proposals seriously. Let us speak of grown men, whose minds are strong and
vigorous, those one could believe capable of finding the truth and teaching it to
others.

II. The imagination of men at the prime of life.
Ordinarily, the greatest perfection of mind is from thirty to fifty years. At this
age the brain fibers have acquired a moderate consistency. The pleasures and
pains ofthe senses do not make much impression on us. So that one now needs to
be defended only against violent passions, which occur rarely and which one can
protect oneself against if one is careful to avoid all its occasions. Thus, the soul,
being no longer diverted by sensible things, can easily contemplate the truth.
A man in this state, who was not filled with childhood prejudices, who would
have acquired the facility for meditation in his youth, who would be unsatisfied
except by clear and distinct notions of the mind, who carefully rejected all the
confused ideas of the senses, and who had the time and will to meditate, would
doubtless fall into error only with difficulty. But this is not the man of whom we
must speak; we must talk about ordinary men, who usually have none of this.
I say then that the solidity and consistency found with maturity in the fibers of
the brains of men, makes their errors solid and consistent, if one may so speak. It
is the seal that confirms their prejudices and all their false opinions, and that
hides them from the force of their reason. In brief, however advantageous this
constitution of the brain fibers may be to well-bred persons, it is just as harmful
to most men, since it confirms them in the thoughts they already have.
But men are not merely confirmed in their errors by the time they reach the age
of forty or fifty, they are still more liable to fall into new ones, because believing

132

Nicolas Malebranche

themselves capable of judging everything, as indeed they ought to be, they make
decisions with presumption and consult only their prejudices. For men reaon
about things only in relation to their most familiar ideas. When a chemist wants
to reaon about some natural body, his three principles immediately come to
mind; a Peripatetic thinks first of the four elements and the four primary qualities;
and another philosopher relates everything to other principles. Thus, nothing can
enter a man's mind without being immediately infected with the errors to which
he is subject, thereby increasing their number.
This consistency of the brain fibers has another very bad effect, principally in
older persons, which is to render them incapable of meditation. They cannot
bring their attention to bear on most of the things they want to know, and thus
they cannot penetrate slightly hidden truths. They cannot consider the most
reaonable opinions when they are founded upon principles that seem novel to
them, though they are otherwise very intelligent concerning things of which age
has given them much experience. But everything I say here is intended to be true
only of those who have spent their youth without using their mind, without
applying it.
To clarify these things, it must be realized that we cannot learn anything if we
do not give it our attention, and that we can hardly be attentive to something if we
do not imagine it and do not represent it vividly in our brain. Now, in order to be
able to imagine certain objects, we must make some part of our brain submit, or
imprint some other motion upon it, to be able to form the traces to which ideas
are attached, which represent these objects to us. So that if the brain fibers are
slightly hardened, they will only be capable of the dispositions and motions they
formerly had. Thus, the soul would be unable to imagine, and consequently
unable to attend to, whatever it wishes, but only to the things familiar to it.
From this it must be concluded that it is very advantageous to be practiced in
meditating on all kinds of subjects to acquire a certain facility in thinking about
whatever one wishes. For just as we acquire a facility for moving the fingers of
our hands in all kinds of ways and with great speed by the frequent use we make
of them in playing instruments, so too the parts of our brain whose movement is
necessary for imagining whatever we wish acquire through use a certain facility
for being bent that enables one to imagine what one wishes with great ease,
promptness, and even clarity.
Now, the best means for acquiring this facility that makes the principal
difference between a man of intelligence and any other is to be trained from
youth to seek the truth of even the most difficult things, because at that age the
brain fibers are capable of all kinds of inflections.
Nevertheless, I do not pretend that this facility can be acquired by those called
studious persons who apply themselves only to reading without meditating, and
without seeking the resolutions to problems on their own before reading about
them in the Authors. It is very obvious that by this route one acquires only the
facility of remembering what has been read. We see every day that those who
have read much cannot focus their attention on new things one discusses with
them, and that the vanity of their erudition makes them want to judge these new

The Search after Truth

133

things before conceiving them, and makes them fall into gross errors of which
other men are incapable.
But although lack of attention is the main cause of their errors, there is still
another one peculiar to them. It is that, fmding constantly in their memories an
infinity of confused species, they immediately settle upon one they considerto be
in question; and because the things one says do not conform to it, they ridiculously judge that one is misled. When we wish to show that they themselves are
mistaken, and that they do not even understand the state of the question, they
become irritated, and being unable to understand what is being said to them,
continue to be attached to this false species their memory has presented to them.
If one shows them too clearly the falsity of this species, they substitute a second
and a third for it, which they sometimes defend against all appearance of truth
and even against their own conscience, because they have scarcely any respect or
love for truth, while being very confused and ashamed to admit there are things
another knows better than they.

Ill. The imagination of the aged.
Everything that has been said about persons forty and fifty years old should
again be understood to be true, with more reason, of aged people, because their
brain fibers are even more inflexible, and because, lacking the animal spirits to
trace new vestiges in their brains, their imagination is quite languid. And as their
brain fibers are normally mixed with an abundance of superfluous humors, they
gradually lose the memory of things past and fall into the ordinary weaknesses of
children. And so in this decrepit age they have defects that depend upon the
constitution of the brain fibers found in children and mature men; but it can be
said that they are wiser than either, because they are no longer so subject to their
passions, which derive from the movement of the animal spirits.
I shall not explain these things further because it is easy to judge this age by
comparison with those of which I have spoken, and to conclude that the aged
have still more difficulty than all the others in conceiving what is said to them,
that they are more anached to their prejudices and their entrenched opinions, and,
as a result, that they are still more attached to their errors, their bad habits, and
other such things. I only aver that the state of being aged does not occur precisely
at sixty or seventy years, that not all old people are senile, that those beyond sixty
are not always free from the passions of young people, and that we must not draw
too general consequences from the principles that have been established.

BOOK TWO: PART TWO

Chapter Two

t

That the animal spirits ordinarily flow in the traces of the ideas most familiar to
us, which is why we do not judge things soundly.
I think I have sufficiently explained in the preceding chapters the various changes
encountered in the animal spirits, and in the constitution of the brain fibers,
according to the different ages. Thus, provided one meditates a little on what I
have said of them, one will soon have a rather distinct knowledge of the imagination and of the most ordinary physical causes of the differences among minds,
since all the changes occurring in the imagination and the mind are only the
consequences of those encountered in the animal spirits and the fibers of which
the brain is composed.
But there are many particular causes, which could be called moral, of the
changes that happen to the imagination of man, namely, their different conditions, their different work-in a word, their different ways of living-that must
be considered because these kinds of changes are the cause of almost infinitely
many errors, each person judging things by reference to his condition. I do not
believe I should stop to explain the effects of some less ordinary causes, such as
major illnesses, surprising misfortunes, and other unforeseen accidents, that
make very violent impressions in the brain, and even completely disrupt it,
because these things rarely happen; besides, the errors into which these persons
fall are so gross they are not contagious, since everyone easily recognizes them.
In order to understand completely all the changes the different conditions
produce in the imagination, it is absolutely necessary to be reminded that we
imagine objects only by forming images of them, and that these images are
nothing other than the traces the animal spirits make in the brain; that we imagine
things more strongly in proportion as these traces are deeper and better engraved,
and as the animal spirits have passed through them more often and more violently; and that when the spirits have passed through these traces many times,
they enter there more easily than other places nearby, through which they have
never passed, or have not passed as often. This is the most ordinary cause of the
confusion and falsity of our ideas. For the animal spirits that were directed by the
action of external objects, or even by orders of the soul, to produce certain traces
134

The Search after Truth

13S

in the brain often produce others that truly resemble them in some things, but that
are not quite the traces of these same objects, nor those the soul desired to be
represented, because the animal spirits, finding some resistance in the parts of the
brain whence they should pass, and being easily detoured crowd into the deep
traces of the ideas that are more familiar to us. Here are some very obvious and
intuitive examples of all this:
When those who are slightly nearsighted look at the moon, they ordinarily see
two eyes, a nose, a mouth, in a word, they seem to see a face. However, there is
nothing on the moon corresponding to what they think they see there. Many
persons see something else there. And those who believe the moon really is as it
seems to them will be easily corrected if they look at it through a telescope, no
matter how small, or if they consult the descriptions that Hevelius, Riccioli, and
others have given to the public. Now, the reason we normally see a face in the
moon, and not the irregular blotches that are there, is that our brain traces of a
face are very deep, because we often look at faces, and with much attention. So
that the animal spirits, meeting resistance in the other places of the brain, are
easily detoured from the direction that the light of the moon impresses on them
when we look at it, in order to enter into those traces to which the ideas of a face
are attached by nature. Besides, the apparent size of the moon is not very
different from that of an ordinary head at a certain distance. Hence the moon
forms traces through her impressions that are very much linked to those representing a nose, a mouth, and eyes, thereby determining the spirits to follow the
traces of a face. There are those who see a man on horseback in the moon or
something other than a face, because, their imaginations having been vividly
struck by certain objects, the traces of these objects are reopened by the least
thing relating to them.
It is also for this same reason that we imagine ourselves to see chariots, men,
lions, or other animals in the clouds, when there is any slight relationship between their shapes and these animals; and this is why everyone, especially those
accustomed to drawing, sometimes see men's heads on walls with many irregular
colored patches.
It is again for this reason that spirits of wine, entering into the most familiar
traces without direction from the will, cause the most important secrets to be
revealed, and why in sleep we usually dream of objects we have seen during the
day, which have formed the deepest traces in the brain, because the soul always
represents the things of which it has the greatest and most profound traces. Here
are other more complex examples.
A disease is new: it causes ravages that astonish the world. This imprints such
profound traces in the brain that this disease is always before the mind. If this
disease is called scurvy, for example, then all diseases will be scurvy. Scurvy has
a dozen symptoms, of which many are common to other maladies; this means
nothing. If it happens that a sick man has some one of these symptoms, it will be
scurvy, and no one will even think of the other diseases having the same
symptoms. One will expect that all the accidents that have happened to those
observed ill with scurvy will also happen to him. The same medicines will be

136

Nicolas Malebranche

given, and everyone will be surprised when they do not have the same effect
observed in the others.
An author is so involved in a species of study, that the traces of the subject of
his occupation are so profoundly imprinted, and spread so vividly throughout his
brain, that they sometimes efface the traces of even quite different things. There
was one ofthem, for example, who had written many volumes on the Cross; that
made him see crosses in everything, and it is with reason that Father Morin takes
him to task for believing that a medal represented a cross, when it represented
something quite different. It is by a similar tum of the imagination that Gilbert
and many others, after having studied the magnet and admired its properties,
wanted to relate a large number of natural effects to these magnetic qualities,
which had not the least relation to them.
The examples just presented suffice to prove that the imagination's great
facility for representing familiar objects, and the difficulty it encounters in imagining those new to it, nearly always makes men form ideas that can be called
mixed and impure, and that the mind judges things in relation to itself and to its
first thoughts. Thus, men's different passions, their inclinations, conditions,
employments, qualities, studies, in short, all the different ways ofliving, causing
very great differences in their ideas, make them fall into an infinite number of
errors we shall explain in the sequel. And it is this which made Chancellor Bacon
utter these very judicious words:
Omnes perceptiones tam sensus quam mentis sunt ex analogia hominis, non ex
analogia universe: estque intellectus humanus instar speculi inacqualis ad radios
rerum qui suam naturam naturae rerum immiscet, eamque disrorquet, et inficit.

BOOK TWO: PART TWO
Chapter Three

I. That studious persons are most subject to error. II. Reasons why we prefer to
be guided by authority than to make use of our minds.
The differences in men's ways of life are almost infinite. There are a very great
number of different conditions, employments, responsibilities, and communities.
These differences make nearly all men act for quite different ends, and reason
according to different principles. It would even be rather difficult to find several
residents with identical views in the same community, where they should have a
united mind, and the same pattern. Their different jobs and relationships necessarily posit some difference in the course and manner they wish to take in
accomplishing things, even those things on which they agree. This shows it
would be an impossible undertaking to explain in detail the moral causes of error,
and it would be useless to do so here. I wish only to speak of ways of living that
sustain more errors, and more important errors. When these have been explained,
we shall have given sufficient opening for the mind to proceed further, and each
will be able to see at a glance, and with great ease, the very hidden causes of
many particular errors, that one could not otherwise explain without much time
and trouble. When the mind sees clearly, it is pleased to race to the truth; and it
races there with inexpressible speed.

I. That studious men are the most subject to error.
1be occupation of which it seems most necessary to speak here, because it
produces more considerable changes in the imagination of men that are more
conducive to error, is the occupation of scholars, who use their memories more
than their minds. For experience has always shown that those who applied
themselves with more ardor to reading books and the sean::h for truth are the ones
who have thrown us into more errors.
The same is true of students as of travelers. When a traveler has the misfortune
to mistake one mute for another, the farther he goes, the farther he is from where
he wanted to go. He goes farther astray as he is more diligent and hastens to
anive where he wants to be. Thus, these ardent desires men have for the truth
throw them into reading books where they think they will find it, or else they

137

Nicolas Malebranche

138

fonn for themselves a chimerical system of things they want to know. to which
they stubbornly cling. And they even try through vain efforts of mind to interest
others in it, in order to receive the honor usually given to inventors of systems.
Let us explain these two defects.
It is rather difficult to understand how it can be that men who have a mind
prefer to use the minds of others in the search for truth, rather than that which
God has given them. There is no doubt infinitely more pleasure and honor in
being guided by one's own eyes than by those of others, and a man who has good
eyes will never think of closing them, or removing them, in the hope of finding a
guide. "Sapientis oculi in capite ejus, stultus in tenebris ambulat. "a Why does
the fool walk in the dark? Because he sees only through the eyes of another, and
to see in this way is. strictly speaking, to see nothing. The use of the mind is to
the use of the eyes as the mind is to the eyes. And just as the mind is infinitely
above the eyes, so the use of the mind is accompanied by much more solid
satisfactions that gratify it in a quite different way than light and colors gratify
sight. Nevertheless. men are always guided by their eyes, and almost never use
their minds to discover truth.

II. Reasons why we prefer to follow authority rather than to use our
minds.
But there are many causes that contribute to this overthrow of the mind. First,
the natural laziness of men, who do not want to take the trouble to meditate.
Second, the lack of a capacity for meditating, into which we have fallen for
lack of application to it during youth, when the fibers of the brain were capable of
all kinds of inflections.
In the third place, our Jack of Jove for abstract truths, which are the foundation
of everything we can know in this lower world.
In the fourth place, the satisfaction one receives from the knowledge of probabilities, which are very agreeable and very moving, because they are founded
upon sensible notions.
In the fifth place, the stupid vanity that makes us hope to be esteemed as
scholars, for we call scholars those who have read the most. The knowledge of
opinions is much more useful for conversation, and for causing admiration in the
minds of ordinary people, than the knowledge of the true philosophy one learns
in meditating.
In the sixth place, because we imagine without reason that the ancients were
more enlightened than we can be. and that there is nothing to do at which they
have not already succeeded.
In the seventh place, because a false respect mixed with a stupid curiosity
makes us admire those things farthest removed from us, the oldest things, those
from the farthest or most unknown countries, and even the most obscure books.
Thus. in the past Heraclitusb was esteemed for his obscurity. We search for
•&ctes. 2:14.
b•'Ctarus ob obscuram linguam. ··Lucretius [DI!' rl!'r. nat. I. 639).

The Search after Truth

139

ancient medals although they are encrusted with rust, and we carefully guard the
lantern and wonn-ealen slipper of some ancient: their antiquity constitutes their
price. People apply themselves to reading the Rabbis, because they wrote in a
very corrupt and obscure foreign tongue. We greatly esteem the opinions of the
oldest, because they are the farthest from us. And without doubt, if Nimrod had
written the history of his reign, all the finest policy and even all the other sciences
would be included, just as some people find that Homer and Virgil had a perfect
knowledge of nature. It is said that we must respect antiquity: could Aristotle,
Plato, Epicurus, these great men, be mistaken? We do not consider that Aristotle,
Plato, and Epicurus were men like us, ofthe same species as we; that, moreover,
in our time the world is older by two thousand years, it has gained more experi·
ence, and should be more enlightened; thll it is the age of the world and its
experience that make for the discovery of truth.•
In the eighth place, when we esteem a new opinion, or a contemporary author,
it seems their glory effaces our own because we are too near to it; but we have no
comparable fear of the honor rendered to the ancients.
In the ninth place, truth and novelty cannot be found together in things of the
faith. Because men do not wish to make the distinction between truths thal
depend upon reason and those that depend upon tradition, they do not consider
that one should learn them in completely different ways. They confuse novelty
with error, and antiquity with truth. Luther, Calvin, and others innovated, and
erred; therefore, Galileo, Harvey, Descartes are mistaken in anything novel they
say. Luther's impanation is novel, and it is false; therefore Harvey's theory ofthe
circulation of the blood is false, since it is new. It is also forthis reason that they
call both heretics and the new philosophers indifferently by the odious name of
innovator. The ideas and the words truth and antiquity ,falsity and no,·rlty have
been linked to one another, which has resulted in the fact that common men no
longer separate them, and even thinking people have some difficulty keeping
them distinct.
In the tenth place, we are in an age when the knowledge of ancient opinions is
still in vogue, and hardly anyone who uses his mind can be placed above evil
customs by the strength of his reason. When one is in the press and the mob, it is
difficult not to give in to the torrent carrying one along.
Finally, because men act only for interest, and this is whll causes even those
who have disabused themselves and recognize the vanity of such studies,
nevertheless to continue applying themselves to them; because honors, dignities,
and even benefices are attached to them, and those who excel in such studies
always have more of these than those who are unaware of them.
All these reasons make it sufficiently comprehensible, it seems to me, why
men proudly follow the ancient opinions as true and why they indiscriminately
reject all new ones as false, in shon, why they never or hardly ever use their own
minds. There are doubtless many more particular reasons that contribute to this.
But if one carefully considers those I have reponed, one will have no cause to be
surprised at cenain people stubbornly clinging to the authority of the ancients.
•Verilas filia temporis, non auctorilatis.

BOOK TWO: PART TWO
Chapter Four

t

Two bad effects of reading upon the imagination.
This false and blind respect men have for the ancients• produces a great many
very pernicious effects deserving of note.
The first is that they become accustomed to not using their minds, which
gradually makes them really incapable of using them. For it need not be imagined
that those who grow old on the books of Aristotle and Plato make much use of
their minds. They usually spend much more time reading these books than trying
to enter into the opinions of their authors, and their principal end is truly to know
the opinions they held, without giving much trouble to what must be held about
them, as will be proven in the following chapter. Thus, the science and the
philosophy they learn is properly a science of memory and not a science of
understanding. They understand only histories and facts and not evident truths,
and they are historians rather than true philosophers, men who do not think but
who can recount the thoughts of others.
The second effect produced in the imagination by the reading of the ancients is
that it causes a strange confusion in all the ideas of most of those who apply
themselves to it. There are two different ways of reading the authors; one is very
good and useful, the other useless and even dangerous. It is very useful to read
when one meditates on what one reads; when one tries, through an effort of the
mind, to resolve the questions one sees in the chapter titles, even before beginning to read them; when one arranges and compares the ideas of things with each
other; in a word, when one uses his reason. On the contrary, it is useless to read
when we do not understand what we read; but it is dangerous to read, and to
conceive what we read, when we do not examine it sufficiently to judge it
carefully, especially if we have sufficient memory to retain what we conceive,
and sufficient imprudence to agree to it. The first way enlightens the mind, it
fortifies it, and augments its understanding. The second diminishes its understanding, and gradually renders it weak, obscure, and confused.
Now most of those who glory in knowing the opinions of others study only in
the second way. Hence, the more they read, the weaker and more confused their
"Sec the first anicle of the preceding chapter.

140

The Search after Trwh

141

minds become. The reason is that their brain traces arc confused with each other,
because there arc so many of them, and reason has not arranged them in order.
This prevents the mind from imagining and from representing clearly to itselfthe
things it needs. When the mind wants to open certain traces but encounters other
more familiar ones crossing them, it is misled. The brain's capacity not being
infinite, it is nearly impossible for so many traces, formed without order, to
avoid becoming mixed up and bringing confusion into the ideas. It is for this
same reason that persons of great memory arc not normally capable of judging
things well where it is necessary to bring much attention to bear.
But what must be especially noted is that the knowledge acquired by those who
read without meditating, who read only to retain the opinions of others (in a
word, all the knowledge that depends upon memory) is properly knowledge that
''puffs up' •• because it glitters and gives much vanity to those who possess it.
Hence, those learned in this way, usually being filled with pride and presumption, pretend to have the right to judge everything, although their ability is very
meager. And this leads them into a great many enors.
But this false knowledge produces a still greater evil. For these persons do not
fall into enor all by themselves; they take along the minds of nearly all the
common people, and very many young people who believe all their decisions as
articles of faith. These false scholars, having often overwhelmed them with the
weight of their profound erudition, and stuMed them as much by their extraordinary opinions as by the names of the ancient and unknown authors they quote,
have acquired such a powerful authority over their minds that they respect and
admire as oracles everything that comes out of their mouths, and blindly join in
all their opinions. Even much more spiritual and judicious persons, who had
never known them and knew nothing else about what they arc, seeing them speak
in such a decisive manner, with such a haughty air, so imperious and so grave,
would have some difficulty witholding respect and esteem for what they say,
because it is very difficult not to give any to their air and manners. For just as it
often happens that a proud and bold man mistreats others who arc stronger but
more judicious and restrained than he, so also those who uphold opinions that arc
neither true nor even probable, often overcome the words of their adversaries by
speaking to them in an imperious, haughty, or grave manner that deceives them.
Now, those of whom we speak have so much self-esteem and so much contempt for others as to be fortified in a certain air of pride, mixed with gravity and
a false modesty, that preoccupies and wins those who listen to them.
For it must be noted that all the different airs of persons in different conditions
arc nothing but the natural consequences of the esteem each has for himself
relative to others, as is easily recognized upon a little reflection. So the haughty
and brutal air is that of a man who esteems himself very much, and correspondingly lacks esteem for others. The modest air is that of a man who esteems
himself but little, and highly esteems others. The grave air is that of a man who
greatly esteems himself and who wants very much to be esteemed, and the simple
air is that of a man who hardly concerns himself with either his own esteem or
• ""Sc:ientia in Hat."· I Cor. 8: I.

142

Nicolas Malebranche

that of others. Thus, all the different airs, which are nearly infmite, are only
effects that various degrees of self-esteem and esteem for others with whom
one converses produce narurally on our face, and on all the exterior parts of our
bodies. We have already spoken in Chapter IV about this correspondence between the nerves that excite passions inside us and those that indicate them
externally by the countenance they impress upon the face.

BOOK TWO: PART TWO
Chapter Five

.

That studious persons are usually so taken with some author that their principal
end is to know what he be/ie1•ed. without caring about what must be belie1·ed.
There is yet another defect of very great consequence into which studious persons
commonly fall, which is that they become completely taken with some author. If
there is anything true and good in a book, they are immediately thrown into
excess; it is all true, it is all good. it is all admirable. They are pleased to admire
even what they do not understand. and they want everyone to admire it with
them. They draw their glory from the praises they give these obscure authors
because they thereby persuade others that they understand them perfectly, and
this is a soun:e of pride to them. They esteem themselves above other men
because they think they understand an absurdity of an ancient author, or of a man
who perhaps did not understand himself. How many savants have labored to
clarify the obscure passages of the philosophers and even of cenain poets of
antiquity, and how many wits are there who still delight in the critique of an
author's word or opinion? But it is appropriate to furnish some proof of what I
say.
The question of the immonality of the soul is without doubt a very important
question. It is hardly necessary to repeat that philosophers have exerted every
effon to resolve it; and although they have written huge volumes to prove, in a
rather weak way, a truth one can demonstrate in a few words or a few pages,
nonetheless they are excusable. But they are silly indeed to go to great pains to
decide what Aristotle believed about it. It seems to me quite useless to those now
living to know whether there ever was a man called Aristotle, whether this man
wrote the books bearing his name, whether he meant such thing or another in
such a passage of his works; this cannot make a man either wiser or happier. But
it is very important to know if what he said is true or false in itself.
Therefore, it is useless to know that Aristotle believed in the immonality ofthe
soul, though it is very useful to know that the soul is immonal. However, I do not
hesitate to assure you that there are many savants who take more trouble to
understand the opinions of Anistotle on this subject than the truth of the thing in
itself. For there are those who have written works expressly for explaining what

143

144

Nicolas Malebranche

this philosopher believed about it, and they have not done so much to know what
must be believed about it.
But though many people have overworked their minds to resolve what Aristotle's opinion was, they have been uselessly exhausted, for there is still no
agreement on this ridiculous question. Which shows that Aristotle's votaries are
indeed unfortunate in having such an abstruse man to enlighten them, one who
even affects obscurity, as he attests in a lener to Alexander.
At various times, then, Aristotle's opinion on the immortality of the soul has
been a very great and serious question among the learned. But lest it be imagined
that I speak wildly and baselessly. I am obliged to relate here a rather long and
tedious passage from La Cerda. in which this author has collected various authorities on this subject, as on a really important question. Here are his words on
the second chapter of Tertullian's De ressurectione carnis:
Quaestio haec in scholis utrimque validis suspicionibus agitatur, num animam
immortalem, mortalemve fecerit Aristoteles. Et quidem Philosophi haud ignobiles
asseveraverunt Aristotelem P.Osuisse nostros animos ab interitu alienos. Hi sunt
Graecis &. Latinis interpreubus Ammonius uterque, Olympiodorus. Philoponus,
Simplicius. Avicenna, uti memorat Mirandula I. 4 de examine vanitatis Cap. 9.
Theodorus, Metochytes. Themistius. S. Thomas 2. contra gentes cap. 79. &. Phys.
lect. 12. &. praeterca 12. Metap. lect. 3 &. quodlib. 10. qu. 5. an. I. Albertus, tract.
2. de anima cap. 20. &. tract. 3. cap. 13. Aegidius lib. 3. de anima ad cap. 4.
Durandus in 2. dist. 18. qu. 3. Ferrarius loco citato contra gentes, &.late Eugubinus
I. 9. de percnni philosophia cap. 18. &. quod pluris est. discipulus Aristotelis
Theophrastus, magistri mentem &. ore &. calamo novisse penitus qui poterat.
In contrariam factionem abiere nonnulli Patres, nee infirmi Philosophi; Justin ius
in sua Paroenesi, Origines in 1/l'Aoaof/lov,UVQI &. ut fertur Nazianz. in disp. contra
Eunom. &. Nyssenus p. 2. de anima cap. 4. Theodoretus de curandis Graecorum
affectibus I. 3. Galenus in historia philosophica, Pomponatius I. de immortalitate
animae, Simon Portius I. de mente humana. Caietanus 3. de anima cap. 2. In eum
sensum, ut caducum animum nostram putaret Aristoteles, sunt partim adducti ab
Alexandro Aphodis auditore, qui sic solitus erat interpretari Aristotelicam mentem;
quamvis Eugubinus cap. 21. &. 22. eum excuset. Et quidem unde collegisse videtur
Alexander mortalitatem. nempe e11. 12. Metaph. inde S. Thomas, Theodorus,
Metochytes immortalitalem collegerunt.
Porro Tertullianum neutram hanc opinionem amplexum credo; sed putasse in hac
parte ambiguum Aristotelem; ltaque ita cital ilium pro utraque. Nam cum hie
adscribat Aristoteli mortalitatem animae. tamen I. de anima c. 6. pro contraria
opinione immortalitatis citat. Eadem mente fuit Plutarchus, pro utraque opinione
advocans eundem philosophum in I. 5. de placitis philosop. Nam cap. I. mortalitatem tribuit, &. cap. 25. immortalitatem. Ex Scolasticis etiam, qui in neutram
partem Aristotelem constantem judicant, sed dubium &. ancipitem, sunt Scotus in
4. dist. 43. qu. 2. an. 2. Harveus quodlib. qu. II.&. I. senten. dist. I. qu. I. Niphus
in Opusculo de immortalitale an1mae cap. I. &. recentes alii interpretes: quam
mediam existimationem credo veriorcm, sed scholii lex vetat, ut autoritatum pondere librato illud suadeam.

e

All these citations are represented as genuine on the word of this commentator,
because it would be a waste of time to verify them, and because one does not
have all the beautiful books from which they arc taken. No new ones arc added to
them, because one does not envy him the glory of having collected them, and
because it would be a waste of still more time if one wanted to do it, and one
would only be leafing through the catalog of those who have commented upon
Aristotle.

The Search after Truth

145

One sees, then, in this passage from La Cerda that persons of learning who
pass for experts have taken much trouble to understand what Aristotle believed
on the immortality of the soul, and there are those who have been capable of
doing books expressly on this subject, such as Pomponazzi. For the principal aim
of this author in his book is to show that Aristotle believed the soul was mortal.
And perhaps there are people who not only took the trouble to know what
Aristotle believed about the subject but even considered it very important to
know whether, for example, Tertullian and Plutarch or others thought it was
Aristotle's opinion that the soul was mortal, as there is good reason to think, even
from La Cerda, if one reflects on the last part of the passage just cited, Porro
Tertullianum, and the rest.
If it is not very useful to know what Aristotle believed about the immortality of
the soul, nor what Tertullian and Plutarch thought Aristotle believed about it, the
basis of the question, the immortality of the soul, is at least one truth that needs to
be known. But there are infinitely many things quite useless to know, and about
which it is consequently even more useless to know what the ancients thought
and yet we put ourselves to great trouble to divine the opinions of philosophers
on similar subjects. One finds books full of these ridiculous studies, and it is
these trifles which have excited so many wars of erudition. These vain and
irrelevant questions, these ridiculous genealogies of useless opinions, are important subjects of criticism to the savants. They think they have the right to despise
those who despise these stupidities, and to treat as ignoramuses those who take
pride in being ignorant of them. They think themselves completely possessed of
the genealogical history of substantial fonns, and the age is ungrateful if it does
not recognize their merit. These things show the weakness and vanity of man's
mind: that when studies are not governed by reason, not only do the studies not
perfect reason, they even obscure, corrupt, and completely pervert it.
It is appropriate to remark here that in questions of faith it is not a mistake to
find out what was believed by, for example, Saint Augustine or any other Father
of the Church, nor even to find out whether Saint Augustine believed what his
predecessors believed, because matters of faith are learned only through tradition, and reason cannot discover them. The oldest belief being the truest, we
must try to kn!JW what that of the ancients was, and this can be done only by
examining the opinion of many persons who came after them at different times.
But things depending upon reason are quite otherwise, and it is not necessary to
go to the trouble of finding out what the ancients believed about them in order to
know what we should believe about them. Yet I do not know by what inversion
of reason certain men are shocked if in philosophy we speak differently from
Aristotle, but not troubled if we speak differently from the Gospel, the Fathers,
and the Councils in theology. It seems to me that it is ordinarily those who cry the
loudest against innovations in philosopohy that should be esteemed, and who favor
and defend with even more obstinacy certain theological novelties that ought to be
detested. For it is not their language we do not approve: completely unknown as
it was to antiquity, common usage authorizes it; it is the errors they spread and
support under the guise of this equivocal and confused language.

146

Nicolas Ma/ebranche

In maners of theology we should love antiquity, because we should love the
truth and the truth is found in antiquity. It is necessary for all curiosity to cease
once we have grasped the truth. But in maners of philosophy, on the contrary, we
ought to love novelty for the same reason that we must always love truth, search
after it, and have an incessant curiosity for it. If we believed Aristotle and Plato
were infallible, perhaps nothing more would be necessary than to apply oneself
to studying them; but reason does not allow us to believe this. On the contrary,
reason requires that we judge them more ignorant than the new philosophers,
since in our time the world is older by two thousand years, and has more
experience than in the ages of Aristotle and Plato, as has already been said. And
the new philosophers can know all the truths the ancients have left us, while still
discovering many others. Nonetheless, reason no more requires that we believe
these new philosophers merely upon their word than the ancients. It requires, on
the contrary, that we carefully examine their thoughts, and not agree with them
except when we can no longer doubt them without being ridiculously prejudiced
against their great knowledge or other qualities of their mind.

BOOK TWO: PART TWO
Chapter Six

The prejudice of commentDlors.

This excess of prejudice seems much more extreme in those who comment on
some author, because those who undertake this work, which in itself seems of
little worth to a man of intelligence, imagine that their authors deserve universal
admiration. They regard them as making a single person with themselves, and
from this point of view, self-love admirably plays its role. They adroitly and
profusely praise their authors, they surround them with halos and light, they fill
them with glory, knowing full well that this glory reflects on themselves. This
idea of greatness not only elevates Aristotle and Plato, in the mind of many
people, it also communicates a respect for all those who have commented on
them; and the commentator would not have wrought this apotheosis of his author
had he not imagined himself enveloped in the same glory.
I nevertheless do not pretend that all commentators praise their authors out of
hope for a return; many would be horrified at this thought if they reflected upon
it. They praise them sincerely, guilelessly, without thinking about it. But selflove thinks about it for them, without their being aware of it. Men do not feel the
heat in their hearts, although it gives life and movement to all the other parts of
their bodies. They must touch and feel themselves to be convinced of it, because
this heat is natural. The same is true of vanity; it is so natural to man that he does
not feel it, and although it gives, so to speak, life and movement to most of his
thoughts and plans, it often does so in a way imperceptible to him. It must be felt,
touched, and sounded in himself to know that he is vain. Rather, it is not known
that it is vanity which impels him to most of his actions, and although self-love
knows it, it knows it only in order to disguise it from the rest of the man.
Therefore, a commentator having some relation and a certain bond with the
author on whom he comments, his self-love never fails to discover for him
subjects for great praise in this author, in order to profit himself from this praise.
And that is done in such an adroit, subtle, and delicate way that it is not
perceived. But this is not the place to expose the versatility of self-love.
Commentators praise their authors not only because they are predisposed to
esteem them, and because of the honor they bring themselves by praising them,

147

148

Nicolas

Mal~branch~

but also because it is the custom, and thus it seems to them that it must be done.
There are persons who do not have much esteem for certain sciences or certain
authors, but do not refrain from commenting upon these authors and these sciences because their position, chance, or even their caprice has involved them in
this work. And these people consider themselves obliged to praise the sciences
and the authors upon whom they work in a hyperbolic way although the authors
be im:levant and the sciences very lowly and useless.
In fact, it would be quite ridiculous for a man to undertake to comment upon
an author he thought to be irrelevant and to apply himself seriously to writing
about a matter he thought to be useless. It must be necessary then to preserve his
reputation to praise his author and the subject of his book when both are despicable, and that the mistake made in undertaking a mischievous work be repaired by
still another mistake. This is what makes learned persons, who comment on
various authors, often say contradictory things.
This is also why nearly all their prefaces are not at all in conformity with the
truth or common sense. If one comments on Aristotle, he is the genius of nature.
If one writes on Plato, he is the dMne Plato. They hardly ever comment on the
works of ordinary men: it is always on the works of quite divine men, on men
who had been the admiration of their age, who had received quite special inspirations from God. The same is true of the matter they treat: it is always the most
beautiful, the most elevated, what must be known.
But so that you do not take me simply at my word, here is how one commen·
tator famous among the savants speaks of the author on whom he comments. It is
Averroes speaking of Aristotle. He says in his preface on the Physics of this
philosopher that he was the inventor of logic, moral philosophy, and
metaphysics, and that he developed them to perfection. "Complevit," he says,
''quia nullus eorum, qui sec uti sunt eum usque ad hoc tempus, quod est mille et
quingentorum annorum, quidquam addidit, nee invenies in ejus verbis errorem
alicujus quantitatis, et talem esse virtutem in individuo uno miraculosum et
extraneum existit, et haec dispositio cum in uno homine reperitur, dignus est esse
divinus magis quam humanus.''
Elsewhere he gives him even more pompous and magnificent praise, such as:
"1. de generatione animalium. Laudemus Deum qui separavit hunc virum ab
aliis in perfectione, appropriavitque ei ultiman dignitatem humanam, quam non
omnis homo potest in quacumque aetate attingere. ''The same person also says in
book 1. Destruct. disp. 3: "Aristotelis doctrina est SUMMA VERITAS, quoniam
ejus intellectus fuit finis humani intellectus: quare bene dicitur de illo, quod ipse
fuit creatus, et datus nobis divina providentia, ut non ignoremus possibilia sciri.''
In truth, must he not be mad to speak thus? And must not the prejudice of this
author have degenerated into extravagance and folly? ''The doctrine of Aristotle
is the sovEREIGN TRUTH. No one can equal or even approach his science. It is he
whom God has given to us in order to teach us everything that can be known. It is
he who renders all men wise, and the better they enter into his thought, the more
they know," as he says in another place. "Aristoteles fuit Princeps, per quem
perficiuntur omnes sapientes, qui fuerunt post eum: licet differant inter se in

The Search after Truth

149

inteUigendo verba ejus, et in eo quod sequitur ex cis." Nevenheless, the works
of this commentator have spread throughout Europe and even more distant countries. They have been translated from Arabic into Hebrew, and from Hebrew into
Latin, and perhaps even into many other languages, which sufficiently shows
how the savants have esteemed them. So one can hardly give a more obvious
example than this of the prejudice of persons of learning. For it shows that not
only do they often become prejudiced about some author but their prejudice is
also communicated to others in proponion to the esteem they have in the world.
And so the false praises the commentators give to an author often cause persons
of limited intelligence, devoted to reading him, to become preoccupied and fall
into an infinity of enors. Here is another example.
An illusbious person among the savants, who founded chairs of geomeb)' and
asbOnomy at Oxford University, begins a book that he was advised to write upon
the first eight propositions of Euclid with these words: "Consilium meum,•
auditores, si vires et valetudo suffecerint, explicare definitiones, petitiones,
communes sententias et octo priores propositiones primi libri Elementorum,
caetera post me venientibus relinquere." And he finishes it with these: "Exsolvi
per Dei gratiam, domini auditores, promissum, liberavi fidem meam, explicavi
pro modulo meo definitiones, petitiones, communes sententias et octo priores
propositiones Elementorum Euclidis. Hie annis fessus cyclos anemque repono.
Succedent in hoc munus alii fonasse magis vegeto corpore, vivido ingenio," and
so on. It would not take a mediocre mind an hour to learn by himself, or with the
help of the least geometer there is, the definitions, postulates, axioms, and the
first eight propositions of Euclid. They hardly need any explanation, and yet here
is an author who speaks of this undenaking as if it were exceedingly grand and
very difficult. He fears his strength is insufficient, "si vires et valetudo suffccerint"; he leaves the pursuit of these things to his successors, "caetera post me
vcnientibus relinquere"; he thanks God that, through a panicular grace, he has
executed what he promised, "Exsolvi per Dei gratiam promissum, liberavi fidem
meam, explicavi pro modulo meo." What? The squaring of the circle? The
duplication of the cube? This great man has explained ''pro modulo suo'' the
defmitions, postulates, axioms, and the first eight propositions of the first book
of Euclid's Elements. Perhaps among those who succeed him there will be those
of better health and more strength than he to continue this great work. "Succedent in hoc munus alii FORTASSE m11gis vegeto corpore, vivido ingcnio"; but for
him, it is time to rest, "Hie annis fessus cyclos anemquc repono."
Euclid never considered being so obscure, or saying extraordinary things when
he composed his clements as would require the writing of a book of nearly three
hundred pagesb to explain his definitions, axioms, postulates, and his first eight
propositions. But this learned Englishman knew well how to inflate the science
of Euclid; and if age had permitted him and had he continued with the same
vigor, we should presently have had twelve or fifteen thick volumes on the
•PI'IIelectiones 13 in Principium Elementorum Euclidis.
bJn quano.

150

Nicolas Malebranche

elements of geometry alone, which would be quite useful to all those who wish to
learn this science, and which would bring great honor to Euclid.
Here then are the bizarre designs of which false erudition makes us capable.
This man knew Greek, for we are obligated to him for having provided us a
Greek edition of the works of Saint Chrysostom. He may have read the ancient
geometers; he knew the historical development of their propositions as well as
their genealogy; he had all the respect for antiquity that one should have for truth.
And what does this disposition of mind produce? A commentary on the defmitions of terms, postulates, axioms, and the first eight propositions of Euclid, very
much more difficult to understand and retain, I do not say, than these propositions on which he comments, but than everything that Euclid ever wrote about
geometry.
There are many men whom vanity prompts to speak in Greek, and even
sometimes in a language they do not understand. For dictionaries, as well as
indexes and commonplaces are of great help to some authors. But there are very
few people who persist in their Greek in a subject where it is so inappropriate to
use it, and it is this which causes me to believe that it is prejudice and an
inordinate esteem for Euclid that formed the plan for this book in the imagination
of its author.
If this man had used his reason as much as his memory in a matter where
reason alone ought to be employed, or if he had had as much respect and love for
truth as he had veneration for the author upon whom he commented, it is likely
that having spent so much time on such a small subject, he would have agreed
that the definitions Euclid gives of a plane angle and parallel lines are defective,
that they do not sufficiently explain their nature, and that the second proposition
is absurd, since it cannot be proved except by using the third postulate, which
one ought not to accept as quickly as one does the second proposition, since by
agreeing with the third postulate, which is that from any point a circle can be
described of whatever diameter one wishes, one not only agrees that one can
draw a line equal to another line from a single point (which Euclid accomplished
in a very roundabout manner in this second proposition) but one also agrees that
one can draw infinitely many lines of whatever length from any point.
The intention of the majority of commentators is not to clarify their authors
and to search for truth. It is to show off their own erudition and to defend blindly
even the faults of those upon whom they comment. They do not speak so much in
order to understand their author or to make him understood, as to make him
admired and themselves along with him. If the author of whom we are speaking
had not filled his book with Greek passages, with many names of obscure and
little-known authors, and with similar remarks all quite useless for understanding
the common notions, definitions of terms, and postulates of geometry, who
would have read his book? Who would have admired it? And who would have
given its author the title of a learned man and a man of intelligence?
I do not believe that it can be doubted after what has been said that the
undiscerning reading of authors often prejudices the mind. Now as soon as a
mind is prejudiced, it immediately loses what we call common sense. It can no

The Search after Truth

151

longer judge sanely about anything having any relation to the subject of its
prejudice. Everything it thinks is infected with this prejudice. It can hardly apply
itself even to those subjects completely removed from those with which it is
preoccupied. Hence a man biased toward Aristotle cannot stomach anything but
Aristotle; he wants to judge everything in relation to Aristotle; what is contrary to
this philosopher appears false- to him; he will always be ready to quote some
passage from Aristotle; he will cite them on all sorts of occasions and about all
kinds of subjects in order to prove obscure things no one can conceive, and also
to prove very clear things even children could not doubt, because Aristotle is to
him what reason and clarity are to others.
Likewise, if a man is biased in favor of Euclid and geometry, he will want to
relate everything said to him to the lines and propositions of his author. He will
not speak to you except in relation to his science-the whole is bigger than its
part only because Euclid said so-and he will shamelessly quote him to prove it,
as I have sometimes noted. But this is even more common in those who follow
authors other than those in the field of geometry, and one very frequently finds in
their books long passages in Greek, Hebrew, and Arabic, used to prove completely obvious things.
All this happens to them because the traces the objects oftheir prejudices have
imprinted in their brain fibers are so deep they always remain partially open, and
the animal spirits, continually passing through them, keep them that way without
pennitting them to close. Hence, since the soul is continually constrained to have
the thoughts tied to these traces, it becomes, as it were, enslaved to them, and is
constandy troubled and disturbed even when, knowing its error, it wishes to try
to correct it. Thus, the soul is continuously in danger of falling into a very great
number of errors unless it always remains on guard and finnly resolves to
observe the rule of which we spoke a1 the beginning of this work, i.e., never to
give complete consent except to those things that are completely clear.
I am not speaking here of the wrong choice the majority make about the kind
of study to which they apply themselves. This should be treated in moral philosophy, although it can also be related to what has just been said about prejudice.
For when a man throws himself beyond retrieval into the reading of the Rabbis
and books in all sorts of the most unknown and consequently the most useless
tongues, and consumes his whole life with this, he doubtless does so because of
prejudice, and on the basis or an imaginary hope that he will become learned,
even though by this means he can never acquire any true science. But because
this application to useless study does not so much throw us into error as waste our
time, the most precious or our goods, simply to fill us with a stupid vanity, we
shall not speak here of those who take it into their head to become learned in all
these kinds of base or useless sciences, of which there are very many, usually
studied with too much passion.

BOOK TWO: PART TWO

Chapter Seven

I. The inventors of new systems. II. The final error of studious persons.
<1. The inventors of new systems. >

We have just shown the state of the imagination of studious persons who entrust
everything to the authority of certain authors. There are still others who are
completely opposite to them. These people never respect any authors, no matter
what their esteem among the learned. If they once esteemed them, they have
completely changed. They set themselves up as authors. They wish to be the
inventors of some novel opinion to acquire some reputation in the world by this
means, and they assure themselves that by saying something not said before they
will not lack admirers.
These sorts of people usually have a very strong imagination. Their brain
fibers are such that they can preserve the traces imprinted on them for a long
time. Thus, when they have once imagined a system with a certain probability,
one cannot disabuse them of it. They jealously retain and preserve everything
that can serve in any way to confirm the system; and, on the contrary. they can
hardly perceive any objections brought against it, or else they overcome them
with some frivolous distinction. They are inwardly pleased with the sight of their
work and with the esteem they hope to receive from it. They apply themselves
only to the consideration of the image of the truth that their probable opinions
imply; they keep this image fixed before their eyes, but they never regard the
other aspects of their opinions from an objective viewpoint, for this would
uncover their falsity.
One must have great qualities to discover some true system, for it is not
enough to have great vivacity and penetration. In addition, there must be a
certain comprehensiveness and scope of mind that can envisage a great number
of things at the same time. Petty minds with all their quickness and delicacy are
too shortsighted to see all that is necessary for the establishment of a system.
They are stopped by small difficulties that dishearten them, or certain flashes
dazzle them; they do not have a sufficiently broad view to see the entire body of a
large subject all at once.
152

The Search after Truth

IS3

But however broad and however penetrating a mind is, if it is not also free
from passion and prejudice, there is nothing to be hoped for from it. Prejudices
occupy one part of the mind and infect all the rest of it. Passions confuse all its
ideas in a thousand ways and nearly always cause us to see in an object whal we
desire to find there. Even the passion we have for truth sometimes causes us to be
mistaken when it is too ardent. But what prevents us most of all from acquiring a
true science is the desire to seem learned.
There is nothing so rare then as finding persons capable of inventing new
systems, whereas, on the other hand, it is not very rare to fmd people who have
formed some system according to their own fantasy. We see but very few who
study a grelll deal and reason according to common notions. There is always
some irregularity in their ideas, sufficient to show thal they have some private
system with which we are unacquainted. It is true thlll not all the books they write
do demonstrate it; for when it is a question of writing for the public eye, one is
careful about what one says, and often just being attentive is sufficient for
avoiding deception. Nonetheless, from time to time we see cenain books that
bear wibless to what I have just said; for there are even people who take pride in
noting at the beginning of their books that they have invented some new system.
The number of inventors of new systems is also very much increased by those
who have become preoccupied by s~me particular author. For it often happens that
not having encountered any thing true or solid in the opinions of the authors they
have read, they first of all develop a great distaste and contempt for all kinds of
books, and then they imagine a probable opinion they embrace with all their
heart, fortifying themselves in it in the way just explained.
But when this great ardor they have had for their own opinion has abated, or
when the intention to demonstrate it before the public has obliged them to
examine it with a more precise and serious attention, they discover its falsity and
abandon it, but on condition thal they will never take up any other opinion and
will absolutely condemn all those who pretend to have discovered some truth.
1/. An important error of studious persons.

As a result, the final and most dangerous error into which many studious
persons or scholars fall is that they pretend that nothing can be known. They have
relld many ancient and modem books in which they have found no truth: they
have had many beautiful thoughts that, after having carefully examined them,
they found to be false. From this they conclude that all men are like them, and
that if those who think they have discovered cenain truths had given them serious
reflection, they would have found themselves to be mistaken just as they have.
This is sufficient for them to condemn all others without undenaking a more
careful examinalion ofwhal they say; because if they did not condemn them, this
would be in some way to agree thal they are more intelligent than they, and this
does not seem very likely to them.
They therefore regard as biased all those who affirm something as cenain, and
they do not wish anyone to speak of the sciences as clear truths that one cannot
reasonably doubt, but only as opinions of which it is good not to be ignorant. Yet

154

Nicolas Malebranche

these people should consider that although they have read a vecy large number of
books, nonetheless they have not read all of them, or have not read them with all
the attention necessal}' for understanding them well. And they should also consider that even if they have had many beautiful thoughts they have later found to
be false, nonetheless they have not had all possible thoughts, so it might well be
that others will realize them rather than they. And it is not necessal}', absolutely
speaking, that these others have more intelligence than they, if this shocks them,
for it suffices that they have been more fortunate. They are not wronged if we say
we know clearly what they are ignorant of, since we also say that many ages have
been ignorant of the same truths, not for lack of intelligent minds but because
these good minds were not lucky enough to realize them.
Let them not be upset then if someone sees clearly, and speaks as he sees. Let
them apply themselves to what is said to them, if their mind is still capable of
application after all their errors, and let them judge afterward-they are permitted to do so. But let them be silent if they will not examine anything. Let them
reflect a little whether the answer they normally give to most of the things we ask
them, "no one knows that, no one knows how that happens," is not unwise. For
in order to answer in this way they must of necessity believe they know evecything all men know or can know. For if they did not think of themselves in this
way, their answer would be even more absurd. And why should they find it so
difficult to say they know nothing about something, when in some situations they
readily acknowledge they know nothing? And why is it necessal}' to conclude
that all men are ignorant because they arc inwardly convinced that they themselves are ignorant?
There are, then, three types of persons who apply themselves to study. The
first are those who are inappropriately biased with regard to some author or some
useless or false science. The second are preoccupied with their own fantasies.
Finally, the last, who normally come from the two other types, are those who
fancy they know evecything that can be known, and who, persuaded that they
know nothing with certainty, conclude generally that no one can know anything
with certainty and look upon evecything that is said to them as a matter of simple
opinion.
It is easy to see that all the faults of these three types of persons depend upon
the properties of the imagination I have explained in the preceding chapters, and
that all this happens to them only through prejudice, which closes their minds and
does not permit them to perceive any objects other than those of their preoccupation. Their prejudices might be said to do to their minds what the ministers of
princes do with respect to their masters. For just as these people do evecything
they can to ensure that only those who do so in their interest, or who cannot
dispossess them of their master's favor, speak to their masters, so the prejudices
of the three types of persons of whom I have spoken do not allow their mind to
fix its attention on pure and unmixed ideas of objects. Instead they disguise them
and cover them in their own garments and, once they arc so hidden, present them
to their minds, so that it is quite difficult for the mind to be corrected and to
recognize its errors.

BOOK TWO: PART TWO

Chapter Eight

t

I. Effeminate minds. II. Superficial minds. Ill. Persons of authority. IV. Thou
who perform experiments.

It seems to me that what has just been said enables us generally to recognize the
defects of the imagination of studious persons and the enors to which they are
most subject. As there are hardly any besides these people who take the trouble to
search for truth, and indeed evecyone relies upon them in this respect, it seems
that we could finish the second pan here. However, it is appropriate to say
something about the enors of other men, bec::ause it will be useful to be aware of
them.
I. Effeminate minds.

Whatever flatters the senses greatly affects us, and we notic::e whatever affects
us in proportion to its effec::t. Therefore, those who abandon themselves to all
kinds of quite sensible and quite pleasant diversions are incapable of penetrating
any truth containing any significant difficulty. This is because the fmite capac::ity
of their minds is completely or at least largely filled with their pleasures.
Most of the nobility, courtiers, rich people, the young, and those called fine
minds, being constantly engaged in amusements and studying nothing but the art
of pleasure through whatever flatters concupisc::ence and the senses, gradually
ac::quire such a delicacy in these matters, or such a softness, that they can very
often be said to be of an effeminate slate of mind rather than fine minds, as they
pretend to be. For there is a great differenc::e between true finesse of mind and
softness, although the two are usually confused.
Fine minds are those who notice the slightest differences among things through
the use of their reason alone. They predict effects that depend upon hidden,
unusual, and invisible causes; in short, they are those who penetrate farthest inco
the subjec::t they are considering. But soft minds have only a false delicacy; they
are neither quick nor perceptive; they do not see the effec::ts of even the crudest
and most palpable causes. In short they cannot either understand or penetrate
anything, but they are extremely sensitive about manners and style. An illspoken phrase, a provincial ac::cent, a small grimac::e irritates them infinitely more

ISS

156

Nicolas Malebranche

than a confused mass of bad arguments. They cannot recognize a mistake in an
argument, but they are perfectly well aware of a false step or an ungainly gesture.
In a word, they have a perfect intelligence so far as sensible things are concerned,
because they have made continual use of their senses; but they do not have true
intelligence about things depending upon reason, because they have almost never
used their own.
Nevertheless, these are the sorts of people who have the most esteem in the
world, and who most easily acquire the reputation of having a fine mind. For
when a man speaks with a free and easy air, when his expressions are pure and
well chosen, when he uses figures of speech that flatter the senses and excite the
passions in an imperceptible manner, even if he utters nothing but stupidities and
though there be nothing good or true behind his beautiful words, he is acting
according to the common notion of a fine, good, and agile mind. We do not
perceive that this is only a soft and effeminate mind, merely glittering with false
lights that never illuminate anything, which persuade only because we have ears
and eyes. not because we have reason.
Furthermore, I do not deny that all men feel the effect of this weakness I have
just noted in some of them. There is no one whose mind is not affected by the
impression of his senses and passions and, consequently, who is not somewhat
constrained by manners. All men differ in this respect only by degree. But the
explanation of why I attribute this fault to some men in particular is that some see
clearly that it is a fault and try to correct it, whereas those of whom I have just
spoken regard it as a very advantageous quality. So far are they from recognizing
that this false delicacy is an effect of effeminate softness, and the source of an
infinite number of maladies of the mind, that they imagine it to be an effect and a
mark of the beauty of their genius.
fl. Superficial minds.

We can add to those of whom we have just spoken a very large number of
superficial minds who never penetrate deeply into anything, and who only confusedly perceive the differences between things. This is not their fault, as it is
with those whom we have just discussed, for in this case it is not sensible
diversion that makes their minds narrow; rather, they are naturally so. This
narrowness of mind does not arise from the nature of the soul, as one might
imagine. It is sometimes caused by a great deficiency or slowness of the animal
spirits, sometimes by the inflexibility of the brain fibers, and sometimes also by
an overabundance of spirits and blood, or by some other cause that need not be
known.
There are, then, two sort of minds. The one easily notes the differences among
things, and these are good minds. The other imagines and assumes a resemblance
among things, and these are superficial minds. The first has a brain fit to receive
clear and distinct traces from the object it considers; and because it is very
attentive to the ideas of these traces, it sees these objects in detail and nothing
escapes it. But superficial minds receive only weak and confused traces from
objects. They see them only in passing, as it were, from far away and very

157

The Search after Truth

confusedly. Hence, these objects appear similar to them, as do the faces of those
one sees from afar, because the mind always assumes resemblance and equality,
unless it is obliged to recognize difference and inequality, for reasons I shall give
in the third book.
Most public speakers, all those we call great orators, and even many who
express themselves with much case, though they may speak but seldom, are of
this kind. For it is extremely rare for those who meditate seriously to be able to
explain well the things upon which they have meditated. Ordinarily they hesitate
when undertaking to speak of these things, because they have scruples about
using terms that raise a false idea in others. Being ashamed to speak simply for
the sake of speaking, as many people do who speak cavalierly about all things,
they have great difficulty in finding words to express unusual thoughts well.

Ill. Persons of authority.
Although I have infinite respect for persons of piety, theologi~ms, the aged.
and generally for all those who have justly acquired great authority over other
men, nevertheless I think myself obliged to say that they often believe themselves infallible because the world listens to them with respect, that they make
but little use of their minds to discover speculative troths, and that they too freely
condemn everything it pleases them to condemn, without having given it sufficient attention. Not that we blame them for not having applied themselves sufficiently to sciences that are not very necessary -it is permissible not to study
them, and even to despise them. But they ought not to judge them on the basis of
fantasy and ill-founded suspicions. For they should consider that the gravity with
which they speak, the authority they have acquired over the minds of others, and
their practice of confirming what they say with some passage from Sacred Scripture, will surely throw those who listen to them with respect into error, because
not being capable of examining things thoroughly, they are victimized by manners and appearances.
When error wears the livery of troth, it is often more respected than troth itself,
and this false respect has very dangerous consequences.• "Pessima res est errorum apotheosis, et pro peste intellectus habenda est, si vanus accedat veneratio." Hence, when certain people, either through a false zeal, or a love for
their own thoughts, have used Sacred Scripture to establish a false principle of
physics or metaphysics, they have often been listened to as though they were
oracles by people who have believed them on the basis of their word, because of
the respect they owe to holy authority. But it has also happened that some evil
minds have used it as a basis for condemning religion. So that through a complete
perversion, Sacred Scripture has been the cause of error in some, and truth has
been the motive and the source of impiety for others. Great care must be taken,
then, as the author just cited says, not to search for dead things among the living,
and not to pretend by the efforts of our own minds to discover in Sacred Scripture
what the Holy Spirit did not wish to declare in it. "Ex divinorum & humanorum
"Chancellor &.:on.

ISS

Nicolas Malebranche

malesana admixtione," he continues, ''non so tum educitur Philosophia phantastica, sed etiam Religio haeretica. ltaque salutare admodum est si mente sobria
fidei tantum dentur, quae fidei sunt." Therefore, all persons who have authority
over others should make decisions only after having given them a great deal more
thought, to the extent that their decisions are more likely to be followed. And
theologicans in particular must take care not to cause condemnation of religion
through a false zeal, either for making themselves famous or for making their
opinions popular. But because it is not up to me to tell them what they ought to
do, let them listen to Saint Thomas, their master,• who, being questioned by his
superior in order to ascertain his views on some points, responded to him with
Saint Augustine in these terms:
It is very dangerous to speak decisively on matter.; that are not questions of faith, as
if they were. Saint Augustine teaches us this in the fifth book of his Conf~ssions.
When I see, he says, a Christian who does not know the opinion of the philosopher.;
concerning the heavens. the stars, and the movement of the sun and moon, and who
confuses one thing with another, I leave him with his opinions and his doubts: for I
do not see that ignorance about the position of bodies and the different arrangements of matter can harm him, provided he does not have unworthy views about
you 0 Lord, who have creared us all. But he is mistaken if he is penuaded that
these matter.; affect religion, and if he is bold enough to be opinionated about what
he does not know. The same saint explained himself still more clearly on this
subject in the first book on the literal explanation of Genesis, in these terms: A
Christian must take great care not to speak of these things as if they were from
Sacred Scripture. For an infidel, who hean him utter these extravagances having no
appearance of truth, would be unable to prevent himself from laughing at them.
Hence, the Christian would receive nothing but confusion from them, and the
infidel would be given bad example. Yet what gives rise to the most trouble in these
instances is not that we see that a man is mistaken: it is that the infidels we are
trying to convert falsely imagine, to their inevitable detriment, that our authors
have such extravagant opinions, and consequently they condemn them and despise
them as ignorant men. It seems to me much more appropriate, then, not to affirm as
dogmas of the faith the commonly received and accepted opinions of philosophers,
which are not contrary to our faith, although one can sometimes use their authority
to have these dogmas accepted. Nor is it necessary to reject these opinions as
contrary to our faith, lest occasion be given to the wise men of this world for
condemning the holy truths of the Christian religion.

The majority of men are so careless and unreasonable that they make no
distinction between the word of God and that of man when they are joined
'Opusc. 9: "Muhum aurcm noc:et talia qUK ad pietatis doc:trinam non spectant, vel asserere vel
nepre, quui peninentia ad sacram doc:trinam. Dicit enim Aug. in S. Confess. cum audio Christianum llliquem fralrem ista, qUK Philosophi de c~~elo, aut srcllis, & de solis & IUDIIC motibus
dixerunt, nescientem, & aliud pro alio !ICntienrcm, patienrcr intueor opinanll:m hominem; nee illi
obes!IC video, cum de te, Domine Creator omnium nostrum, non credat indigna, si forrc situs, &
habitus creaturiiC corporalis ignoret. Obest aurcm, si haec ad ipsam doc:trinam pietatis peninere
arbitretur, & peninacius affinnare audeat quod ignorat. Quod autem obsit. manifestat Aug. in I.
super Genes, ad lirrcram. Turpe est, inquit, nimis, & pemic:iosum, ac maxime cavendum ut Christianum de his rebus quui secundum cbristianas literas loquenrcm, ita delirare quilibet infidelis
audiats, ut quemadmodum dictitur 1010 caelo errare conspiciens, risum 11:nere vix possit. Et non
wnen mole11um est, quod errans homo videatur: !led quod Autores Dostri ab eis qui foris sun!, talia
sensisse creduntur, & cum magno eorum exitio, de quorum salull: falagimus, tanquam indoc:ti
reprebenduntur alque respuunlur. Uncle mihi videtur tutius esse, ut haec quae PhiiO&Ophi communes
senserunt, & nostrae fidei non repugnant, neque esse sic assen:nda, ut dogmata fidei, lic:et aliquando
sub nomine Pbilosophorum introducantur, neque sic es!IC negandatanquam fidei conbaria, ne sapientibus hujus mundi conrcmnendi doctrinam fidei occasio praebeatur."

The Search after Truth

IS9

together; as a result, they fall into error by approving them together, or into
impiety by indiscriminately condemning them. It is very easy to see the cause of
these latter errors, and to see that they depend upon the connection between ideas
explained in chapter five, and it is not necessary to stop here to explain them
further.

IV. Those who perform experiments.
It seems appropriate to say something here about chemists and generally about
all those who spend their time performing experiments. These are men who
search after truth; one normally accepts their opinions without examining them.
Therefore, their erron are that much more dangerous, because they communicate
them to othen with greater ease.
It is doubtless better to study nature than to study books; visible and sensible
experiments certainly prove much more than the reasonings of men. And one can
find no cause to blame those in their position engaged in the study of physics,
tJying to become practiced in it through continual experiments, provided they
apply themselves most in those sciences most necessary to them. Therefore, do
not blame experimental philosophy, nor those who cultivate it, but only their
defects.
The tint is that it is normally not the light of reason that determines the order
of their experiments but merely chance. This is why they become hardly more
enlightened or wiser from them after having spent a great deal of their time and
resources.
The second is that they are preoccupied with curious and unusual experiments
rather than with more common ones. Yet it is clear that, the most common being
the simplest, we must begin with them before going on to apply ounelves to
more complex ones, which depend upon a greater number of causes.
The third is that they search with ardor and carefully seek experiments that
profit them, and neglect those serving only to enlighten the mind.
The fourth is that they do not take sufficient care to note all the particular
circumstances such as time, place, and the quality of the drugs they use, even
though the least of these circumstances is sometimes capable of preventing the
desired effect. For it must be observed that all the terms physicists use are
equivocal; the word wine, for example, signifies as many different things as there
are different soils, seasons, and ways of making and preserving wine. As a result
we might even say in general that no two casks of wine are completely alike; thus
when a physicist says, in order to perform this experiment, take wine, we know
what he wants only in a very confused way. This is why we must be very
cautious in experiments, and not descend to more complex ones without completely undentanding the explanation of the simpler and more ordinary ones.
The fifth defect is that from a single experiment they draw too many conclusions. On the contrary, many experiments are nearly always necessary to draw a
single conclusion, even though a single experiment can help in deriving many
conclusions.
Finally, most physicists and chemists consider only the particular effects of
nature. They never ascend to the primary notions of things that compose bodies.

160

Nicolas Makbranche

But it is indubitable that we cannot clearly and distinctly know the particular
things of physics without the more general, and without ascending even to the
level of metaphysics. Finally, they often lack courll8e and endurance, and give
up because of fatigue and expense. There are still many other defects in the
persons of whom we speak, but we do not pretend to cover them all here.
The causes of the defects I have noted are: (1) insufficient application, (2) the
properties of the imagination explained in chapter five of the first part of this
book, and in the second chapter of this part, and (3) above all that we judge the
differences among bodies and the changes that happen to them only on the basis
of the sensations we have of them, as I have explained in the first book.

BOOK TWO: PART THREE
THE CONTAGIOUS COMMUNICATIONS

OF STRONG IMAGINATIONS

Chapter One

I. Our disposition to imitate others in all things, which is the source of the
communication of errors depending on the power of the imagination. /1. Two
major causes that strengthen this disposition. Ill. What a strong imagination is.
IV. There are many kinds of strong imaginations. Fools and those who have a
strong imagination in the sense intended here. V. Two important defects in those
with strong imaginations. VI. The power they hal•e of persuading others and of
imposing upon them.
After having explained the nature of the imagination, the defects to which it is
subject, and how our own imagination throws us into error, all that remains to be
discussed in the second book is the contagious communication of strong imaginations, i.e., the force certain minds have over others for involving them in their
errors.

<I. Our disposition to imitate others in all things, which is the source
of the communication of errors depending on the power of the
imagination.>
Strong imaginations are extremely contagious; they dominate weaker ones,
gradually giving them their own orientation, and imprinting their own characteristics on them. Therefore, since those who have a strong and vigorous imagination are completely unreasonable, there are very few more general causes of
men's errors than this dangerous communication of the imagination.
To understand what this contagion is, and how it is transmitted from one
person to another, it is necessary to know that men need one another, and that
they were created that they might form several bodies, all of whose parts have a
mutual correspondence. To maintain this union God has commanded us to have
charity for one another. But because self-love can gradually destJOy charity, and
break the bond of civil society, it was appropriate for God to preserve it by also
uniting men through natural tics, which subsisted without charity and appealed to
self-love.
These natural ties we share with beasts consist in a certain disposition of the
brain all men have to imitate those with whom they converse, to form the same
judgments they make, and to share the same passions by which they are moved.
161

Nicolas Malebranche

162

And this disposition normally ties men to one another much more closely than
charity founded upon reason, because such charity is very rare.
When a man does not have this disposition of the brain enabling him to enter
into our sensations and passions, he is by his nature incapable of binding himself
to us, and of making up the same body with us. He resembles those irregular
stones for which there is no place in a building because they cannot be joined to
the others.
Odcrunt hilarem tristes, tristemque jocosi.
Sedatum cleres. agilem gnavumque remissi.

More virtue than might be thought is necessary to maintain relations with those
who have no regard for our passions and who have feelings contrary to ours. And
this is not completely without reason; for when a man has reason to be a state of
sadness or joy, it is to a certain extent an insult to him not to share his feelings. If
he is sad, we should not present ourselves before him with a gay and mirthful air,
which signifies joy and forcefully impresses the impulses thereof in his imagination. For this is to wish to drive him from the state most suitable and agreeable to
him, sadness itself being the most agreeable of all passions to a man suffering
from some misery.

II. Two principal causes that strengthen our disposition to imitate
others.
All men then have a certain disposition of the brain that naturally inclines them
to behave in the same way as some of those with whom they live. Now, this
disposition has two principal causes that support and strengthen it. One is in the
soul, the other in the body. The first consists principally in the inclination all men
have for grandeur and high position, and for obtaining an honorable place in
others' minds. For it is this inclination that secretly excites us to speak, walk,
dress, and comport ourselves with the air of people of quality. This is the source
of new styles, the instability of living languages, and even of certain general
corruptions of mores. In short, this is the principal source of all the extravagant
and bizarre novelties founded not upon reason, but only upon men's fantasies.
The other cause that strengthens our disposition for imitating others. of which
we must especially speak here, consists in a certain impression made by persons
of strong imagination upon weak minds, and upon tender and delicate brains.
Ill. What a strong imagination is.
By a strong and vigorous imagination I mean that constitution of the brain
which renders it capable of having very deep vestiges and traces that so occupy
the soul's capacity that they prevent it from focusing its attention on things other
than those represented by these images.

IV. There are two kinds of strong imaginations.
There are two kinds of people who have a strong imagination in this sense. The
first receive these deep traces from an involuntary and disordered impression of

The Search after Truth

163

the animal spirits. And the others. of which I principally wish to speak, receive
them from the disposition found in their brain substance.
It is clear that the first son are completely insane, since they are forced by the
natural union between their ideas and these brain traces to think of things not
thought of by others with whom they converse. This makes them incapable of
speaking to the point and correctly answering questions put Ill them.
Of these there are an infinity of kinds differing only in degree, and it can be
said that all those agitated by some violent passion are among their number since,
during the period of their emotion, the animal spirits impress the traces and
images of their passion with so much strength that they are incapable of thinking
about anything else.
But it should be noted that all these kinds of people are incapable of corrupting
the imagination of even the feeblest minds, or of the softest and most tender
brains, for two main reasons. First, being unable to conform their answers to the
ideas of others, they cannot persuade them of anything. Second, the disorder of
their mind is so obvious that everyone holds their opinions in contempt.
It is true, however, that impassioned people raise passion in us, and that they
cause impressions in our imagination that resemble those by which they are
affected. But because their distraction is so obvious, we resist these impressions
and usually rid ourselves of them within a shon time. They fade away by
themselves when no longer maintained by the cause that produced them, that is,
when these deranged people are no longer in our presence, and when our visible
impression of the characteristic passion formed in their faces no longer produces
any change in our brain fibers or any agitation in our animal spirits.
Here I wish Ill examine only that kind of strong and vigorous imagination
consisting in a disposition of the brain for receiving very deep traces from the
weakest and least active objects.
It is not a defect to have a brain that can imagine things strongly, and that
receives very distinct and vivid images from the least imponant objects, provided
that the soul always remains the master of the imagination and that these images
are imprinted at the direction of the soul and erased when it wishes. On the
conlnlry, this is the origin of subtlety and strength of mind. But when the
imagination dominates the soul, and when without attention Ill the direction of
will these traces are formed because of the disposition of the brain and by the
action of objects and the animal spirits, it is clear that this is a very bad quality
and a son of madness. U:t us try to understand the character of those who have
such imaginations.
To do this it is necessary to remember that the capacity of the mind is very
limited, that there is nothing which so quickly occupies its capacity as the
sensations of the soul, and in general all our perceptions of objects that strongly
affect us, and that the deep traces of the brain are always accompanied by
sensations or by these other perceptions that strongly affect us. In view of this, it
is easy to understand the true characteristics of the mind of those who have strong
imaginations.

164

Nicolas Malebranche
V. Two important defects in those with strong imaginations.

The first such characteristic is that these persons are incapable of malting
sound judgments about even slightly difficult and intricate things, because their
mind's capacity is occupied with ideas tied by nature to these very deep traces in
the brain, and therefore they are not free to think of many things at once. Now, in
complex questions, the mind must be able to survey the ideas of very many
things with a quick and sudden movement, and <it must> recognize all the
relations and connections needed to resolve these questions with a direct awareness.
Everyone knows from his own experience that we are incapable of applying
ourselves to some truth while we are agitated by passion, or while we are feeling
rather severe pain, because the deep traces imprinted on the brain then occupy the
capacity of the mind. Hence, since those of whom we are speaking have deeper
traces of the same objects than others, as we suppose, they cannot have as much
scope of mind or comprehend as many things as they do. Thus, the first defect of
these people is that they have a small mind, and it is smaller to the extent that
their brain receives deeper traces from the least important objects.
The second defect is that they are visionaries, but in a delicate way that is
rather difficult to recognize. Ordinary men do not think of them as visionaries,
and only men of enlightened and accurate mind are aware of their visions and the
derangement of their imagination.
In order to understand the origin of this defect, we must again recall what was
said at the beginning of this second book, namely, that in regard to what happens
in the brain, the senses and the imagination differ only by degree, and it is the
breadth and depth of the brain traces that cause the soul to sense objects. These
traces enable the soul to judge objects as present and capable of affecting it, and
finally as sufficiently near to cause it to sense pain and pleasure. For when the
traces of an object are slight, the soul only imagines the object, it does not judge
it as present or regard it as of significant size and importance. But to the extent
that these traces become larger and deeper, the soul judges the object as larger
and more important, as drawing closer to us, and finally as being capable of
affecting and hurting us.
The visionaries of whom I speak are not so insane as to believe that they see
absent objects before their eyes. Their brain b'aces are not yet that deep-they
are only half mad. And if they were completely insane we should not have to
speak ofthem here, because everyone would perceive their derangement, and we
could not be lead into error by it. They are not visionaries of the senses but only
of the imagination. Madmen are visionaries of the senses, because they do not
see things as they are, and because they often see things that are not. But those of
whom I speak here are visionaries of the imagination, because they imagine
things to be quite different than they are, and because they even imagine some
things that do not exist. Nevertheless, it is clear that the visionaries of sense and
of the imagination differ only by degree, and that they often pass from one state
to the other. For this reason we should represent the mental illness of the latter by

Th~ S~arch aft~r

165

Truth

comparison to that of the former, which is more sensible and causes a greater
impression on the mind, because in things that differ only by degree we should
always explain the less sensible by the more sensible.
The second defect of those who have a strong and vigorous imagination is,
therefore, that they are visionaries of the imagination, or simply visionaries, for
one calls those who are visionaries of the senses by the term madmen. Here,
then, are the bad qualities of visionary minds.
These minds are excessive in all instances; they raise up what is low; they
exaggerate what is small; they bring near what is remote. Nothing appears to
them as it is. They wonder at everything, they exclaim about everything without
judgment or discernment. If they are disposed to fear by their natural constitution, I mean if their brain fibers are extremely delicate, their animal spirits are in
shon supply, without strength and without agitation, with the result that they
cannot communicate the necessary movements to the rest of the body, and they
are frightened by the slightest thing and tremble at the fall of a leaf. But if they
have an abundance of spirits and blood, which is more normal, they feed themselves with vain hopes and, abandoning themselves to their imagination, fecund
with ideas, they build castles in Spain, as the saying goes, with great satisfaction
and joy. They are vehement in their passions, biased in their opinions, and
always conceited and very self-satisfied. When they get it into their heads to pass
for fine wits and set themselves up as authors (for there are authors of all kinds,
visionaries and others), then what extravagances, wanderings, and irregular
movements we see! They never imitate nature; everything is affected, forced.
and exaggerated. They do not walk, they bound; they walk only in cadence, and
everything is in metaphors and hyperbole. When they wish to become pious, and
to arrive there by their fantasies, they enter completely into the spirit of the Jew
and Pharisee. They ordinarily stop at the surface of things, and are completely
occupied with visible ceremonies and rituals of linle imponance. They become
scrupulous, timid, and superstitious. Everything becomes a matter of faith, everything is essential to them, except what is truly a maner of faith and what is
really essential; for quite often they neglect what is most imponant in the
gospel-justice, mercy and faith-because their mind is occupied with less
essential duties. But there would be too many things to say about this. It is
sufficient, in order to be persuaded of their defects, and to note many other things
about them to reflect but a linle on what happens in ordinary conversations.
People with strong and vigorous imaginations have still other qualities requiring a full explanation. Until now we have spoken only of their defects; it is only
fair to speak now about their advantages. They have one advantage among others
that is especially relevant to our subject, because it is through this advantage that
they dominate ordinary minds, make them share their own ideas, and communicate to them all the false impressions by which they are affected.

VI.

Thatthos~

of strong imagination

ar~ ~·ery

persuasive.

This advantage consists in a facility for expressing themselves in a strong and
vivid, though unnatural, manner. Those who imagine things strongly express

166

Nicolas Malebranche

them strongly, and all those whom they persuade are convinced by their air and
through sensible impression, rather than by the strength of arguments; for the
brain of those with a strong imagination receives, as I have said, deep traces from
the subjects they imagine, and these traces are naturlly followed by a great
turbulence of the spirits, readying their whole body to express their thoughts in a
quick and lively manner. Hence, their facial expression, their tone of voice, and
the tum of their words that animates their expression prepare those listening to
them and looking at them to be attentive, and to mechanically receive the impression of the image agitating them. For, in short, a man penetrated by what he says
usually impresses others, as an impassioned man always arouses the emotions of
others. Even though his rhetoric is often irregular, it is nonetheless very persuasive, because his presence and manner make themselves felt, and thus act upon
the imagination of men more vividly than the strongest discourses coldly delivered, because these discourses do not flatter their senses and do not strike their
imagination.
Persons of imagination therefore have the advantage of being able to please,
affect, and persuade, because they form very vivid and sensible images of their
thoughts. But there are still other causes that contribute to their facility in winning over minds. For they usually speak only about simple subjects within the
capacity of ordinary minds. They use only expressions and terms that arouse the
confused notions of sense, always very strong and affective. They treat of great
and difficult matters only in a vague way and in commonplaces, without taking
the risk of entering into detail and without committing themselves to principles,
either because they do not understand these matters or because they fear that
being at a loss for words they will become confusing and tire the minds of those
not capable of close attention.
It is now easy to judge from what has just been said that disorders of the
imagination are extremely contagious, and that they insinuate and spread themselves in the majority of minds with great ease. But because those who have a
strong imagination are usually the enemies of reason and common sense, because
of the pettiness of their minds and the visions to which they are subject, we can
also recognize that there are very few more general causes of our errors than the
contagious communication of the disorders and ills of the imagination. But it is
still necessary to prove these truths through examples and experiences known to
everyone.

BOOK TWO: PART THREE
Chapter Two

.

General examples of the strength of the imagination.
Very common examples of this communication of the imagination are found in
children with regard to their fathers (and still more in daughters with regard to
their mothers), servants to their masters, maids to their mistresses, students to
their teachers, courtiers to kings, and generally all inferiors with regard to their
superiors, provided, however, that the fathers, masters, and other superiors have
some strength of imagination. For without it, the children and servants might
receive no significant impression from the weak imagination of their fathers or
masters.
The effects of this communication may likewise be found in people of equal
position. But this is not so common, because among them one does not encounter
that particular respect which disposes minds to receive the impressions of strong
imaginations without question. Finally, we even find these defects created in
superior people by their inferiors, for the latter sometimes have such a vivid and
dominating imagination that they twist the minds of their masters and superiors
as they please.
It will not be difficult to understand how fathers and mothers cause very strong
impressions on their children's imaginations if we consider that these natural
dispositions of our brain inclining us to imitate those with whom we live and to
share their feelings and passions are stronger in children with regard to their
parents than in all other people. Many reasons can be given for this. First, they
share the same blood. For just as parents very often transmit to their children
dispositions to certain hereditary illnesses, such as gout, gallstones, madness,
and generally all those that they do not contract by accident, or that were not
caused solely and uniquely by some unusual fennentation of the humors, such as
fevers and certain others (for it is obvious that these cannot be hereditary), so
they imprint the dispositions of their brain in their children and give a certain tum
to their imaginations that makes them completely susceptible to the same feelings.
The second reason is that nonnally children have very little to do with the rest
of men, who might sometimes trace different impressions in their brain and to
167

168

Nicolas Malebranche

some extent disrupt the constant force of the paternal impression. For just as a
man who has never left his country usually imagines that the mores and customs
of foreigners are completely contrary to reason because they are contrary to the
custom of his city, by which he allows himself to be guided, so a child who has
never left the paternal house imagines that the feelings and manners of his parents
are the universal rule; or rather it never occurs to him that there could be other
principles of reason or virture besides the imitation of them. He therefore believes everything he hears them say, and he does everything he sees them do.
But this parental impression is so strong that it acts not only on the imagination
of children but even on the other parts of their bodies. A young boy walks, talks,
and makes the same gestures as his father. A little girl dresses like her mother,
walks like her, and speaks as she does; if the mother lisps, so does the daughter;
if the mother has some unusual motion of the head, the daughter adopts it. In
short, children imitate their parents in everything, in their defects and their
affectations as well as in their errors and vices.
There are yet many other causes that increase the effect of this impression. The
main ones are the authority of the parents, the dependence of children upon them,
and the mutual love they have for each other. But these causes are common to
courtiers, servants, and generally to all inferiors, as well as to children. We shall
explain them with the example of courtiers.
There are men who judge of what is not apparent by what is, of the grandeur,
strength, and capacity of mind hidden from them, through the gallantry. titles,
and riches known to them. They often measure the one by the other. And the
dependence men have on the great, the desire to share in their greatness, and the
perceptible glamour surrounding them, often causes men to render divine honors
to mere mortals, if I might so speak. For if God gives authority to princes, men
give them infallibility, but an infallibility not limited to certain subjects, nor to
certain occasions, and not attached to certain ceremonies. The great know everything by nature; they are always right, even if they decide questions about which
they know nothing. To examine what they propose is not to know how to live, to
doubt them is to lack respect, to condemn them is to rebel, or at least to exhibit
oneself as foolish, extravagant, and ridiculous.
But when the great do us the honor of liking us, it is no longer simply
obstinancy, conceit, or rebellion; it is now ingratitude and perfidy not to surrender blindly to all their opinions. It is an irreparable fault that makes us forever
unworthy of being in their good graces. This is why courtiers, and as a necessary
consequence nearly all people, subscribe without thought to all the opinions of
their ruler, even to the point of frequently yielding to their caprices and whims
concerning the truths of religion.
England and Germany furnish us with only too many examples of these inordinate submissions of peoples to the impious wills of their princes. The histories
of recent times are full of them; and we have sometimes seen even aged person
change their religion four or five times because of the various changes of their
princes.

The Search after Truth

169

The kings and even the queens of England have the "right of governing over
all the states of their realms, whether ecclesiastical or civil, in all causes. "•
They approve the liturgies, the calendar of feasts, and the way in which one:
must administer and receive the sacraments. They ordain, for example, that one
does not adore Jesus Christ when one receives communion, akhough one must
still receive the sacrament on one's knees according to the ancient custom. In a
word, they change everything in their liturgies to make them conform to the new
articles of their faith, and they also have the right to judge these articles with their
parliament, as the pope does with the council, as one can see from the statutes of
England and Ireland, drawn up at the beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
Finally, it can be said that the kings of England have even more power over the
spiritual than the temporal lives of their subjects, because these miserable
peoples, these children of the earth, are concerned less with preserving the faith
than with the preservation of their own goods, and therefore they easily adopt all
the opinions of their princes provided their temporal and material interests are not
contrary to them.
The religious revolutions that have occurred in Sweden and Denmark could
again serve to prove to us the power some minds have over others, but all these
revolutions have also had many other quite significant causes. These surprising
changes are indeed proof of the contagious communication of the imagination,
but they are proofs too vast and sweeping. They astonish and confuse the mind
more than they enlighten it, because there are too many causes that concur in the
production of these great events.
If courtiers and all other men often abandon certain truths, essential truths,
truths necessary to uphold or be lost for eternity, it is obvious they will not risk
defending abstract truths of but little certainty and utility. If the religion of the
prince is the religion of his subjects, the reason of the prince will also be the
reason of his subjects. And so the views of the prince will always be the fashion,
his pleasures, passions, games, words, habits, and generally all his actions will
set the style. For if the prince himself is the essential fashion, it will almost never
happen that he does something which does not become fashionable. And since all
irregularities of style are always pleasant and beautiful, we need not be surprised
if princes so strongly affect the imagination of other men.
If Alexander tosses his head, his courtiers toss theirs. If Dionysius the Tyrant
applies himself to geometry upon the arrival of Plato in Syracuse, geometry then
becomes fashionable, and the palace of this king, says Plutan:h, is immediately
filled with dust by so many people tracing figures. But as soon as Plato becomes
angry with the tyrant, and this prince tires of study and abandons himself anew to
his pleasures, his courtiers immediately do the same thing. It seems, continues
this author,b that they are enchanted, and that a Circe transforms them into
different men. They pass from an inclination toward philosophy to one for
"An. 37 of lhc Religion of lhc Anslicu church.
'Moral wOIII:s. How one cu diatinpish lhc flaaerer from a friend.

170

Nicolas Malebranche

debauchery, and from a horror of debauchery to one of philosophy. Thus can
princes change vices into virtues, and virtues into vices, and a single word from
them is capable of completely changing their ideas. A single word, a gesture, or a
movement of his eyes or his lips is all that is needed to construe science and
wisdom as base pedantry, or temerity, brutality, and cruelty as great courage, or
impiety and free thought as strength and freedom of mind.
But this, as well as alii have just said, presumes that these princes have a strong
and lively imagination; for if it is feeble and languid, they could not animate their
discourse, nor give it that peculiar tum and strength that subdues and invincibly
defeats feeble minds.
If the strength of the imagination alone and without any help from reason can
produce such surprising effects, there is nothing so bizzare or extravagant of
which it cannot persuade people when supported by some probable arguments.
Here are some proofs of this.
An ancient author- reports that in Ethiopia the courtiers crippled and deformed
themselves, amputated limbs, and even killed themselves to make themselves
like their princes. It was as shameful to appear with two eyes and to walk erect in
the train of a blind and crippled king as it would be now if one dared to present
himself at court in ruffles and a cap, or with white leggings and golden spurs.
This fashion of the Ethiopians was extremely bizarre and disagreeable, but
nonetheless it was the fashion. They followed it with joy, and did not think as
much about the pain that the fashion made it necessary to suffer as about the
honor they brought on themselves by appearing to be full of generosity and
affection for their king. In short, this extravagant fashion, being supported by a
false explanation of friendship, passed into the custom and law that has long been
observed.
The stories of travelers in the Levant teach us that this custom, as well as
others contrary to common sense and reason, is observed in many countries. But
it is not necessary to cross two borders to see unreasonable laws and customs
religiously observed, or to find men who follow disagreeable and bizarre fashions; one need not leave France for that. Wherever there are men susceptible to
the passions, and wherever the imagination is mistress of reason, there we shall
find the bizarre, indeed, the incomprehensibly bizarre. If one suffers less pain
from baring one's breast during the rude chill of winter, and from lacing up the
body during the excessive heat of summer, than from plucking out an eye or
cutting off an arm, one should suffer more shame. The pain is not so great, but
the reason for enduring it is less clear, so they are at least equally bizarre. An
Ethiopian can say it is because of generosity that he plucks out an eye, but what
can a Christian lady say who exposes what natural prudence and religion oblige
her to conceal? That it is the fashion, and nothing more. But this fashion is
bizarre, disagreeable, unseemly, and unworthy in every way. It has no other
source than a manifest corruption of the heart; one cannot follow it without
scandal and without overtly taking the side of the imagination's disorders against
"Diodorus of Sicily Bibl. hisr. I. 3 [7].

Th~ S~arch aft~r

Truth

171

reason, of impurity against purity, of the mind of the world against the mind of
God-in a word, to follow this fashion is to violate the cause of reason and the
Gospel. But that does not matter, it is the fashion, i.e., a law more holy and more
inviolable than that God wrote with His hand on the tablet of Moses, and
engraved with His spirit in the heart of Christians.
In truth, I do not know whether the French are completely right to mock the
Ethiopians and the savages. It is true that upon first seeing a blind and crippled
king with only blind and crippled people in his train, one would have trouble
preventing oneself from laughing. But in time one would no longer laugh, one
might have more admiration for the magnitude of their courage and friendship
and not ridicule the weakness of their mind. It is not the same with fashions in
France. Their extravagance is not supported by any apparent reason, and if they
have the advantage of not being as distressing, they do not always have the
advantage of being as reasonable. In brief, they bear the character of an age still
more corrupted, in which nothing is strong enough to control the disorder of the
imagination.
What I have just said of courtiers should also be understood of most servants
with regard to their masters, maids with regard to their mistresses, and (in order
to avoid useless enumeration) all inferiors with regard to their superiors. But
especially of children with regard to their parents; because children are in a
unique relationship of dependence with regard to their parents, their parents have
a love and tenderness for them not encountered in the others, and finally because
reason inclines children to submission and respect, which it does not always
control.
In order to act on the imagination of others, it is not absolutely necessary that
we have authority over them, or that they be in some way dependent upon us.
Often force of imagination alone is sufficient for this. II sometimes happens that
unknown people, who have no reputation, and for whom we were not biased by
any esteem, have such strength of imagination and as a result such vivid and
affective expressions that they persuade us without our knowing either why or
even precisely of what we are persuaded. It is true that this seems quite extra>rdinary, but nonetheless there is nothing more common.
Now. this imaginary persuasion can come only from the force of a visionary
mind that speaks vividly without understanding what it says, thereby causing the
minds of those who hear what it says to believe strongly without understanding
what they believe. For most men allow themselves to be led by the force of
sensible impression, which distracts and confuses them and impels them to judge
what they conceive only confusedly through passion. I beg those who read this
work to think about this, to notice examples of it in conversation in which they
find themselves, and to reflect upon what takes place in their own minds on these
occasions. This will be much more useful to them than they can possibly imagine.
It must be carefully noted that there are two things that marvelously contribute
to the force of the imagination of others on us. The first is an air of piety and
gravity, the other is one of skepticism and pride. For according to our disposition

172

Nicolas Malebranche

toward piety or skepticism, persons who speak with a grave and pious air, or with
a proud and skeptical air, affect us quite differently.
It is true that the one is much more dangerous than the other, but we must
never let ourselves be persuaded by the manners of either, but only by the force
of their reasons. One can utter stupidities in a grave and modest way, and
impieties and blasphemy in a devout manner. Therefore, we should examine, in
accordance with the advice of Saint John,• whether the minds are of God, and
not place our trust in all kinds of minds. Demons are sometimes transformed into
angels of light, and one finds people to whom the air of piety is almost natural,
whose reputation therefore is usually well established, who dispense men from
their essential obligations, even from that of loving God and their neighbor, in
order to enslave them to some Pharisaical ceremony or practice.
But the strong imaginations whose impression and contagion we must most
carefully avoid are those of certain minds of the world who put on the air of
freethinkers, which is not difficult for them to alquire. For all we need do at
present is to deny original sin and the immortality ofthe soul, or to ridicule some
accepted opinion in the church, and to do so with a certain air, in orderto acquire
among ordinary men the rare quality of being a freethinker.
These petty minds usually have a great deal of fire, and a certain free and
proud air that dominates and disposes weak imaginations so that they become
susceptible to lively and specious words, which signify nothing to attentive
minds. They are completely at home in expression, but very ill at ease with
argument. But because men, however reasonable they may be, much preferto be
affected by the sensible pleasure of manner and expression than to be fatigued in
the examination of arguments, it is clear that these minds must triumph over
others, and hence communicate their errors and their malignity through their
power over the imagination of other men.

•Episde. chap. 4. [vv. 1-3).

BOOK TWO: PART THREE
Chapter Three

t

/, The strength of imagination of certain authors. II. Terlllllian.
<1. The strength of imagination of certain authors.>
One of the greatest and most remarkable proofs of the power that some imaginations have over others is the power some authors have of persuading without
arguments. For example, the tum that Tertullian, Seneca, Montaigne, and certain
others give to their words has so much charm and flair that it dazzles the minds of
most people, though their speech is but a weak picture, a shadow, as it were, of
the imaginations of these authors. Their words, dead though they be, have more
vigor than the arguments of certain other people. They enter, they penetrate, they
dominate the soul in a manner so imperious that they are obeyed without being
understood, and we yield to their orders without knowing them. We wish to
believe, but know not what to believe; for when we wish to know precisely what
we believe or want to believe, when we approach, so to speak, these phantoms in
order to scrutinize them, they often vanish in smoke with all their display and
luster.
Although the books of the authors I have just named are excellent for learning
about the power some imaginations have over others, and although I propose
them as examples of this, I nevertheless do not intend to condemn them in all
respects. I cannot prevent myself from respecting certain beauties to be found
there, and deferring to the universal approbation they have had for centuries.• I
declare, finally, that I have a great deal of respect for some works of Tertullian,
especially his apology against the gentiles and his book of prescriptions against
the heretics, as well as for some portions of Seneca's books, although I do not
have very much esteem for Montaigne's book.

II.

T~rtullian.

Tertullian was in truth a man of profound erudition, but he had more memory
than judgment, more penetration and scope of imagination than penetration and
scope of mind. Finally one cannot doubt that he was a visionary in the sense I
"See 1be EIUC"idatiortS (9J.

173

174

Nicolas Malebranche

have hitheno explained, and that he had nearly all the qualities I have attributed
to visionary minds. His respect for the visions of Montanus and his prophetesses
is an incontestable proof of his bad judgment. This zeal, these ecstasies, these
enthusiasms over unimponant subjects perceptibly mark the disorder of his imagination. Such irregular movements in his hyperboles and in his figures! Such
pompous and magnificent arguments, which prove only by their perceptible
luster and persuade only by dizzying and fascinating the mind.
Why, for example, does this author, who wishes to justify having assumed the
mantle of a philosopher, say that this mantle had formerly been fashionable in the
city of Carthage? Is it now permitted to take up cap and leggings because our
fathers used them? And can women wear hoods and fanhingales, except at
carnival time, when they wish to disguise themselves?
What can he conclude from these pompous and magnificent descriptions of
changes that occur in the world? And what can they contribute to his justification? The moon is different in its phases, the year in its seasons, the countryside
changes its face from winter to summer. Floods occur that drown entire provinces, and eanhquakes that swallow them up. New cities are built, new colonies
established, we have seen inundations of peoples who have ravished entire countries; in shon, all of nature is subject to change. Therefore, he had reason to doff
the robe in order to take up the mantle! What relation is there between what he
must prove on the one hand and all these changes and many more on the other,
which he researches with great care, describing them with forced, obscure, and
strained expression? The peacock• changes its colors with each step it takes, the
serpent entering a narrow hole leaves its very skin and is renewed; therefore, he
is right to change his dress? Can anyone in cold blood and in possession of his
senses draw such conclusions? And could anyone see them drawn without laughing, unless this author had dizzied and confused the minds of those who read
him?
Nearly all the rest of this little book De pallio is full of arguments as far
removed from his subject as these, which certainly prove only by dazzling those
capable of being dazzled. But it would be useless to spend more time on it. It is
sufficient to say here that if precision of mind, as well as clarity and distinctness
in discourse, should always appear in everything one writes (since one ought to
write only to make known the truth), then it is impossible to excuse this author,
who, even according to Salmasius,b the greatest critic of our times, has exened
all his effons toward making himself obscure, and who has succeeded so well in
his plan that this commentator was led to swear that no one ever understood him
perfectly. But even if the genius of the nation, the whim of the fashion which
"Ch. 2 and 3. De pa/lio.
0 ""Multos etiam vidi postquam bene aestuassent ut eum assequerentur. nihil praerer sudorem &
inanem animi fatigationem lucratos. ab ejus lectione discessisse. Sic qui Sc01inus haberi viderique
dignus, qui hoc cognomentum haberet. voluit, adeo quod voluit a semetipso impetravit. & efficere id
quod optabat valuit. utliquido jurare ausim neminem ad hoc tempus extitisse. qui possit jurare hunc
libellum a capite ad calcum usque totum a se non minus bene intellectum quam lectum. •· Salm. in
epist. ded. Comm. in Tt'TI.

The Search after Truth

175

reigned at that time, and finally the nature of satire or humor were capable of
justifying to some degree this remarkable plan of making himself obscure and
incomprehensible, it would not excuse the worthless arguments and ramblings of
an author who, in many other works besides those considered here, says anything
that comes into his mind, provided it be some extraordinaty thought and that he
have some bold expression through which he might hope to parade the strength,
or better the derangement, of his imagination.

BOOK TWO: PART THREE
Chapter Four

t

The imagination of Seneca.
Seneca's imagination is sometimes no better controlled than Tertullian's. His
impetuous impulses often cany him into unknown territory where he nevertheless walks with the same assurance as if he knew where he was and where he was
going. As long as he makes great strides, designed strides, in a precise cadence,
he imagines he has made great progress, but in truth he is like a dancer who
always ends up where he begins.
It is necessary to distinguish the power and beauty of words from the power
and evidence of arguments. There is doubtless great power and some beauty in
the words of Seneca, but there is very little power or evidence in his arguments.
He gives a cenain tum to his words through the force of his imagination that
affects, agitates, and persuades through impression, but he does not give them
that clarity and pure light that illuminates and persuades through evidence. He
convinces because he arouses the emotions and because he pleases, but I do not
believe he can persuade those who can read him calmly, who are prepared
against surprise, and who are accustomed to yield only to the clarity and evidence
of arguments. In a word, although he speaks and speaks well, he is careless about
what he says-as if one could speak well without knowing what one says-and
hence he often persuades without our knowing either what we are persuaded of or
how we are persuaded-as if one should ever permit oneself to be persuaded of
something without conceiving it distinctly, and examining the proofs that demonstrate it.
What is more magnificent and pompous than the idea he gives us of his wise
man? But at bottom what is more vain and imaginary? The portrait he draws of
Cato is too noble to be natural; it is but varnish and plaster, meaning nothing
except in the view of those who neither study nor know anything of nature. Cato
was a man subject to the misery of men, he was not at all invulnerable-this is
but a myth; those who struck him, hun him. He had neither the hardness of a
diamond unbreakable by iron nor the solidity of rocks immovable by floods, as
Seneca pretends. In a word, he was not insensible, and the same Seneca finds
176

The Search after Truth

177

himself obliged to agree with this when his imagination has cooled a liule and he
reflects more on what he says.
ltaque non n:fert, quam muha in ilium tela conjiciantur, cum sit nulli penetrabilis. Quomodo quorumdam lapidum inexpugnabilis feno duritia est, nee secari
adamas, aut caedi vel teri poltest, sed in curn:ntia uhro n:tundit: quemadmodum
projecti in altum sc:opuli man: frangunt, nee ipsi ulla saevitiae vestigia lOt verberati
saeculis ostcntlnt. It sapientis animus solidus est, & id roboris collcgit, ut l8l'll tutis
sit ab injuria quam ilia quae extulli.
Sen. ch. 5. tract. Quod in sapientem non cadit injuria.
But why then will he not grant that his wise man can become miserable, since
he agrees that he is not insensible to pain? By no means, pain does not affect his
wise man; the fear of pain does not upset him. His wise man is above the fortune
and malice of men; they are incapable of disturbing him.
There are no walls and no towers in the sbOngest places that battering rams and
other engines of war cannot shake and eventually topple. But there are no
machines sufficiently powerful to disturb the mind of his wise man. Do not
compare him to the walls of Babylon breached by Alexander, nor to those of
Carthage and Numantia, breached by a single army, nor finally to the capitol and
the citadel that even today bear signs that enemies once overcame them. Anows
shot at the sun cannot reach it. The sacrileges committed in overthrowing temples
and breaking their images do not disturb divinity. The gods themselves can be
buried beneath the ruins of their temples, but his wise man will not be buried by
them; or if he is, he cannot be hurt by them.
Adsum hoc vobis probaturus: sub isiO tot civitatum everson: munimcnta incunu
arietis labefieri, & turrium altitudinem cuniculis ac latentibus fossis n:pente n:siden:, & aequaturum editissimas an:es aggen:m crescen:. At nulla machinamenta
posse n:periri, quae bene fundatum animum agitent. And further below: Non
Babylonis Muros illi contuleris, quod Alexander intravit; non Cartaginis, aut
Numantiae moenia una manu capta; non Capitolium arcemve: Habent ista hostile
vertigium. Ch. 6. p. (547].
Quid tu putas cum s10lidus ille Rex multitudine telorum diem obscurasset, ullam
sagittam in solem incidisse. Ut celestia humanas manus effugiunt, & ab his qui
templa diruunt, aut simulachra c:onflant, nihil divinitati nocetur, ita q_uidq_uid fit in
sapientem, proterve, petulanter, superbe, frustra tentatur. Ch. 4. p. [545)
Inter fragon:m templorum super Deos suos cadentium uni homini pax fuit. Ch. 5.
p. (546]

But do not believe, says Seneca, that this wise man I depict for you cannot be
found. This is not some fiction for foolishly exalting the mind of man. This is no
grand idea without reality or truth; Cato may even surpass this idea.
"Non est ut dicas ita ut soles, hunc sapientem nostrum nusquam inveniri. Non
fingimus istud humani ingenii vanum decus, nee ingentem imaginem rei falsae
concipimus: sed qualem conformamus, exhibuimus, & exbibebimus. Caeterum
hie ipse M. Cato vereor ne supra nostrum exemplar sit." Ch. 7 [p. 547].
But it seems to me, he continues, that I perceive your mind is agitated and
heated. Perhaps you wish to say that to promise things no one can either believe
or hope for is to make oneself contemptible, and that the Stoics only change the
name of things in order to utter the same truths in a more grand and magnificent

178

Nicolas Malebranche

manner. But you are wrong; I do not pretend to extol the wise man through these
magnificent and brilliant words; I maintain only that he is in an inaccessible place
where he cannot be hurt.
"Videor mihi intueri ani mum tuum incensum. & effervescentem: paras acclamare. Haec sunt, quae auctoritatem praeceptis vestris detrahant. Magna promittitis, & quae ne optari quidem, nedum credi possunt." And later on: "Ita
sublato alte supercilia in eadem, quae caeteri, descenditis mutatis rerum
nominimus; tale itaque aliquid & in hoc esse suspicor, quod prima specie pulchrum atque magnificum est, nee injuriam, nee contumeliam accepturum esse
sapientem." And further: "Ego vero sapientem non imaginario honore verborum
exomare constitui, sed eo loco ponere, quo nulla perveniat injuria" (ch. 3, p.
543].
This is the extent to which Seneca's feeble reason is carried away by his
vigorous imagination. But can he cause men who continually feel their miseries
and weaknesses to fall under the spell of such proud and vain opinions? Can a
reasonable man ever be persuaded that his pain does not affect and hurt him? And
as wise and as strong as he was, could Cato suffer without some uneasiness or at
least some distraction-) do not say the atrocious injuries of an enraged people
who dragged him, stripped him, and beat him-but even the strings of a simple fly?
What is more feeble against the strong and convincing proofs of our own experience than this pretty argument of Seneca's, which is nonetheless one of his
principal proofs?
What injures, he says, must be stronger than he who is injured. Vice is not
stronger than virtue, therefore the wise man cannot be injured by it. For we need
only reply either that all men are sinners, and therefore deserving of the misery
they suffer, as religion teaches us, or that if vice is not stronger than virtue,
vicious men can sometimes have more power than good people, as experience
shows us.
"Validius debet esse quod laedit, eo quod laeditur. Non est autem fortior
requitia virtute. Non potest ergo laedi sapiens. Injuria, in bonos non tentatur nisi
a malls, bonis inter se pax est. Quod si laedi nisi infirmior non potest, malus
autem bono infirmior est, nee injuria bonis nisi a dispari verenda est, injuria in
sapientem virum non cadit." Ch. 7 [p. 548].
Epicurus• was right in saying that offenses were bearable by a wise man. But
Seneca is wrong to say that wise men cannot e~·en be offended. The virtue of the
Stoics could not render them invulnerable, since true virtue does not prevent one
from being miserable and worthy of compassion when one suffers some evil.
Saint Paul and the first Christians had more virtue than Cato and the Stoics. They
nevertheless admit that they were wretched because of the pain they endured,
although they were made happy by the hope of eternal reward. "Si tantum in hac
vita sperantes sumus, miserabiliores sumus omnibus hominibus," says Saint
Paul.
"Epicurus ail injurias tolerabilit esse sapienti. nos injurias non esse." Ch. IS (p. SSSJ.

The Search after Truth

179

As only God can give us a true and solid virtue through His grace, only He can
cause us to enjoy a solid and genuine happiness; but He neither promises nor
gives it in this life. It is in the other that we must hope for His justice as the
reward for the miseries we suffered for love of Him. We do not now possess this
peace and repose that nothing can disturb. Even the grace of Jesus Christ does not
give us an invincible strength. II normally leaves us to sense our own weakness in
order to make us understand that there is nothing in the world that cannot wound
us, and to make us endure all the insults we receive with a humble and modest
patience rather than with a proud, conceited patience like the constancy of the
lofty Cato.
When Cato was sttuck in the face, he was not angered;• he did not avenge
himself, neither did he pardon the offense, but he proudly denied that anyone had
done him injury. He wanted everyone to consider him infinitely above those who
had struck him. His patience was only blindness and pride. It was shocking and
insulting to those who had mistreated him, and Cato signified, by this Stoical
patience, that he regarded his enemies as beasts against whom it was shameful to
be angry. It is this contempt for his enemies and great esteem for himself that
Seneca calls the greatness of courage. '' Majori animo,'' says he, speaking of the
injury that had been done to Cato, "non agnovit quam ignovisset." How extravagant it is to confuse the greatness of courage with pride, and to separate
patience from humility to join it with insufferable pride. But how agreeably these
excesses flaner the vanity of man, who never wishes to lower himself. and how
dangerous it is, especially to Christians. to instruct themselves in morality from
an author so injudicious as Seneca, whose imagination is so strong, so lively, and
so imperious that it dazzles, distracts, and carries away those with but little
firmness of mind and much sensibility for all that flatters the concupiscence of
pride.
Rather, let Christians learn from their Master that the impious are capable of
hurting them, and that good men are sometimes subjected to these impious ones
by the order of Providence. When one of the officers of the High Priest sttuck
Jesus Christ, this wise man of the Christians. infinitely wise, and even as powerful as He is wise, confessed that this servant was capable of wounding Him. He is
not angered, He is not vengeful like Cato, He pardons. as having been truly
wronged. He could have been vengeful and destroyed His enemies, but He
suffered with a humble and modest patience injurious to no one, not even to this
servant who had wronged him. Cato, on the contrary, unable or not daring to
exact a real vengeance against the wrong he had received, tries to exact an
imaginary one, which flatters his vanity and conceit. 1n spirit he exalts himself to
the clouds; from there he sees men here below as small as flies, and holds them in
contempt as though they were insects incapable of having offended him and
deserved his anger. This vision is a thought worthy of the wise Cato. This gives
him the greatness of soul and this firmness of courage that make him like the
"Seneca. ch. 14 of 1111: same book.

lp. SS4).

180

Nicolas Malebranche

gods. This makes him invulnerable, because it is this vision that places him
above all the influence, power, and malignity of other men. Poor Cauo! You
imagine your virtue raises you above all things; your wisdom is but folly and
your grandeur but an abomination before God, whatever the wise men of the
world think of them.•
There are many kinds of visionaries: some imagine themselves transformed
into cocks and hens, others believe they have become kings or emperors, still
others are persuaded they are independent and like the gods. But if men always
regard those who are sure they have become cocks and hens as fools, they do not
always think those who say that their virtue renders them independent and equal
to God are truly visionaries. The reason for this is that to be judged a fool it is not
sufficient to have foolish thoughts. Beside this, other men must take the thoughts
you have as visionary and foolish. For fools do not pass for what they are among
fools like themselves but only among reasonable men, just as wise men do not
pass for what they are among fools. Therefore, men recognize as fools those who
imagine they have become cocks or kings, because everyone has reason for not
believing that one can so easily become a cock or a king. But there is nothing
new about men believing they can become gods, they have always believed it and
perhaps more than they do now. Vanity has always made this thought rather
probable to them. They get it from their first parents, who doubtless shared this
view when they obeyed the demon, who tempted them with the promise that they
would become like God; "Eritis sicut Dii." (Gen. 3:5.] Even the purest and most
enlightened intelligences were so completely blinded by their own pride that they
desired and perhaps believed themselves capable of becoming independent, and
they even planned to assume the throne of God. Consequently, we need not be
surprised if men who have neither the purity nor the light of the angels abandon
themselves to the impulses of their vanity, which blind and seduce them.
If the temptation to grandeur and independence is the strongest of all, this is
because it appears to us, as to our first parents, to conform to our reason as well
as our inclination, because we are not always aware of all our dependence. If the
serpent had threatened our first parents by saying to them, if you eat of the fruit
that God has forbidden you to eat, you will be transformed, you into a cock and
you into a hen, I have no fear in assuring you that they would have laughed at a
temptation so crude, for we would laugh at it ourselves. But the demon, judging
others by himself. well knew that the desire for independence was the weakness
through which they had to be taken. Moreover, as God has created us in His
image and likeness and as our happiness consists in being like God, one can say
that the magnificent and enticing promise of the demon is the same as what
religion proposes to us, and that it will be accomplished in us, not, as the lying
and arrogant tempter says, by disobeying God but by following His commands
exactly.b
•··Sapientia hujus mundi stultitia est apud Deum'' (Paul, I Cor. 3:19).
''Quod hominibus altum est, abominatio ante Deum.'' Luke 16 ( 16:15).
"Ep. of St. John. ch. 3 (2).

The Search after Truth

181

The second reason that makes us regard those who believe they have become
cocks or kings as fools when we do not think the same of those who assure us that
no one can hurt them because they are above pain, is that hypocondriacs are
obviously mistaken, and we need only open our eyes to have sensible proofs of
their enor. But when Cato asserts that those who struck him did not hurt him at
all, and that he is above all injuries that anyone could cause him, he asserts it, or
may assert it, with such pride and gravity that we cannot tell if inside he really is
as he appears to be. One is even led to believe that his soul is not shaken since his
body remains immobile, because the outward appearance of our body is a natural
sign of what takes place in the innermost recesses of our soul. Hence, when a
bold liar lies with great assurance, he often causes the most unbelievable things
to be believed, for the assurance with which he speaks is a proof that affects the
senses, and consequently is exceedingly strong and quite persuasive to most
men. Thus, few people regard the Stoics as visionaries or bold liars, for we have
no sensible proof of what happens in the depths of their hearts, and because their
facial expression is a sensible proof that easily convinces. Besides, their vanity
inclines them to believe that man's mind is capable of that greatness and independence of which he boasts.
All this shows that few enors are more dangerous, or more easily communicable, than those with which Seneca's books are filled. For these enors are refined,
suited to man's nature, and similar to that in which the demon engaged our first
parents. They are clad in these books with pompous and splendid ornaments,
which gain entry for them into most minds. They enter, grasp, stun, and blind
them. But they blind them with a proud blindness, a dazzling blindness, a
blindness accompanied by glimmering lights, not a humiliating blindness full of
shadows that make one aware that one is blind and force one to admit it to others.
When one is struck by this proud blindness, one places oneself among the noble
and powerful minds. Even others include us in this class and admire us. Thus,
nothing is more contagious than this blindness, because the vanity and sensibility
of men, the corruption of their senses and passions, dispose them to search after
it, to be struck by it, and excite them to impress others with it.
I do not believe then that one can find an author more appropriate than Seneca
for exemplifying the nature of this contagion of an infinity of men whom we call
noble and powerful minds, and for showing how strong and vigorous imaginations dominate weak and unenlightened minds-not by the strength or evidence

of arguments, which are products of the mind -but by the tum and vivid manner
of expression, which depend on strength of imagination.
I am well aware that this author is greatly admired by many, and that my
characterization of him as a very fanciful and injudicious man will be taken by
many as a sort of temerity. But it is principally because of this esteem that I have
undertaken to speak of him here, not because of any kind of envy or humor but
because the esteem one has for him will more deeply affect the mind of the reader
and cause it to pay greater attention to the enor I have attacked. For it is essential
as far as possible to use illustrious examples of what one says when they are
important, and sometimes to criticize a book is to bring honor to it. But in the end

182

Nicolas Malebranche

I am not the only one to find fault with the writings of Seneca, for without
speaking of some illustrious critics of this age, nearly 1,600 years ago a very
judicious author remarked that there was but littte• exactitude in his philosophy,b
little discernment and precision in his elocution,c and that his reputation was a
result of the fervor and indiscrete inclinations of youth rather than the consent of
wise and perspicacious people.
It is useless to combat crude errors by public writings, because they are not
contagious. It is ridiculous to wam men that hypochondriacs are deceived, for
they know this well enough. But if those they hold in high esteem are mistaken, it
is always useful to warn men of it, lest they follow in the errors of those they
esteem. Now it is clear that the spirit of Seneca is a spirit of pride and vanity.
Therefore, since pride, according to the Scriptures, is the source of sin, "lnitium
peccati superbia" (Eccles. 10: 15], the spirit of Seneca cannot be the spirit of the
Gospel, nor can his morality be allied with the morality of Jesus Christ, which
alone is sound and true.
It is true that not all the thoughts of Seneca are false and dangerous. This
author can be read with profit by those who see things correctly and know the
foundation of Christian morality. Great men have used him well, and I do not
care to condemn those who, in order to accommodate themselves to the weakness
of other men who have too much esteem for him, have drawn from the works of
this author to defend the morality of Jesus Christ, thereby fighting the enemies of
the Gospel with their own weapons.
There are good things in the Koran, and one finds genuine prophecies in the
annals of Nostradamus; the Koran can be used to combat the religion of the
Turks, and the prophecies of Nostradamus can be used to convince certain
bizarre and visionary minds. But what is good in the Koran does not make it a
good book, and some genuine explanations in the annals of Nostradamus will
never allow Nostradamus to pass for a prophet; and those who use these authors
cannot be said to approve them, or really to esteem them.
You should not claim to oppose what I have advanced against Seneca by
relating many passages from this author containing nothing but sound truths
conforming to the Gospel; I agree there are some, but there are also some in the
Koran and other evil books. Likewise, you would be wrong to deluge me with
the authority of an infinity of people who have used Seneca, for one can sometimes use a book one believes to be absurd, provided those to whom we speak do
not have the same opinion of it as we.
To destroy the Stoic wisdom completely, one need know but one thing, which
is sufficiently proved through experience and by what has already been said, that
we are tied to our body. to our parents, to our friends, to our prince, to our
country, by bonds we cannot break, and would even be ashamed to try to break.
• .. In Philosopbia parum diligens. ••
''''Velles cum suo ingenio dixisse alieno judicio.'·
''''Si aliqua conlempsissel. & consensu polius eruditorium quam puerorum amore comprobaretur. •·
Quintilian. bk. 10. ch. I.

The Search after Truth

183

Our soul is joined to our body, and through our body to all visible things by a
hand so powerful that it is impossible to loosen them by ourselves. It is impossible for our body to be pricked without our being pricked and hurt, because in our
present state this correspondence between us and our bodies is absolutely necessary. Likewise, no one can despise us and say injurious things about us without
our feeling grieved by it, because God, having made us in order to live in a
society with other men, gave us an inclination toward everything capable of
binding us to them, which inclination we cannot overcome by ourselves. It is
illusory to say that pain does not hurt us, or that words of contempt are incapable
of offending us, because we are above all of that. One is never above nature,
unless through grace, and a Stoic will never hold the glory and esteem of men in
contempt simply through the strength of his mind.
Men can indeed oven:ome their passions through contrary passions; they can
conquer fear or pain through vanity; I mean merely that they can choose not to
flee or complain when, feeling themselves under the gaze of the mob, the desire
for glory sustains them and stops the movement in their bodies that urges them
toward flight. They can conquer their passions in this way, but this is not really to
conquer them, this is not really to be delivered from their servitude; it is.
perhaps, to exchange masters for a while, or rather it is to extend one's slavery. It
is to become wise, happy, and free only in appearance, while in reality suffering
a hard and cruel servitude. We can resist our natural union with our body by our
union with other men, because we can resist nature through the fon:es of nature;
we can resist God through the fon:es God gives us. But we cannot resist Him
solely through the strength of our mind; we cannot completely conquer nature but
through grace, because we can (if I may be permitted to speak in this way) only
oven:ome God with the particular help of God.
Hence, this magnificent division of all things not dependent upon us and upon
which we ought not to depend is a division that seems consistent with reason, but
that is inconsistent with the disordered state to which sin has reduced us. We are
united to all creatures by God's order, and we depend upon them absolutely
because of the disorder of sin.
As a result, since we cannot be happy in a state of pain or anxiety, we should
not hope to be happy in this life, imagining we are independent of all those things
to which we are naturally enslaved. We cannot be happy except through a living
faith and a strong hope that enables us to enjoy future goods in advance, and we
cannot live according to the rules of virtue, oven:oming nature, unless we are
sustained by the grace Jesus Christ has merited for us.

BOOK TWO: PART THREE
Chapter Five

Montaigne's book.
The essays of Montaigne can also be used to show the effect of imaginations
upon one another, for this author has a certain free air, he gives such a natural
and vivid tum to his thoughts, that it is difficult to read him without becoming
engrossed in him. The diffidence he affects becomes him well and makes him
amiable to most people without making them hold him in contempt. And his
pride is the pride of an honest man, if one may so speak, which makes one
respect him without hating him. His well-bred and gallant air, supported by some
erudition, has such a prodigious effect on the mind that men often admire him,
nearly always agreeing with what he decides without daring to examine it, and
sometimes even without understanding it. It is not at all his arguments that
persuade us; he hanily ever uses any in support of the things he advances, or at
least he hanily ever puts forth arguments with any foundation. Indeed, he does
not have principles on the basis of which he founds his reasoning, and he has no
order for making deductions from his principles. A touch of history is no proof, a
short fairy tale does not demonstrate, a couple of verses from Horace, an
apothegm from Cleomenes or Caesar should not persuade reasonable men: yet
these essays are nothing but a tissue of historical references, short fairy tales,
well-turned phrases, couplets, and apothegms.
It is true that one should not regard Montaigne in his essays as a man who is
reasoning, but rather as a man who is amusing himself, trying to please without
concern for teaching; and if those who read them were merely amused, we would
have to agree that Montaigne would not be such mischievous reading for them.
But it is nearly impossible not to like what is pleasing and not to be nourished by
victuals agreeable to the taste. The mind cannot be pleased by reading an author
without adopting his opinions, or at least without receiving some coloring from
them which, mixed with its own ideas, makes them confused and obscure.
It is not only dangerous to read Montaigne for diversion, because the pleasure
we take in him insensibly engages us in his views, it is also dangerous because
this pleasure is more criminal than we might think. For this pleasure surely arises
principally from concupiscence, and supports and strengthens only our passions,
184

The SetUch after Truth

185

since lhe author's style is agreeable only because it affects us and imperceptibly
arouses our passions.
It would be useless to prove this in detail, and to demonstrate generally that all
the various styles ordinarily please us only because of the secret corruption of our
heart; but here is not the place for this, and it would carry us too far afield.
Nevertheless, if we wish to reflect upon the connection of the ideas and passions
of which I have spoken before,• and upon what happens in ourselves when we
are reading some well-written piece, we shall be able to recognize to some extent
that if we like the sublime style, the noble and fn:e air of certain authors, it is
because we are vain, loving grandeur and independence. We would also find that
this relish we take in the delicacies of effeminate discourse has no other source
than a secret inclination for softness and voluptuousness. In a word, it is a certain
attraction to what affects the senses, not an awareness of the truth, that causes us
to be charmed by certain authors and to be carried away by them almost in spite
of ourselves. But to return to Montaigne.
It seems to me that his greatest admirers praise him because of a certain
judiciousness of character, removed from pedantry, as in one who has perfectly
understood the nature and weaknesses of the human mind. If therefore I show
that Montaigne, gentleman though he is, was as pedantic as many others, and
that he had but a very mediocre understanding of the human mind, I shall have
shown that those who admire him most were not persuaded by clear reasons, but
won over by the force of his imagination.
This term pedant is very equivocal, but common usage, it seems to me, and
even reason would have it that we call those people pedants who, in order to
parade their false science, quote all sorts of authors, whether right or wrong, who
speak simply in order to be heard, and to be admired by fools who, without
judgment or discernment, amass apothegms and historical references to prove, or
seem to prove, things that can only be proved by arguments.
<The word> pedant is opposed to <the word> reasonable, and what makes
pedants odious to people of intelligence is that they are not reasonable; for,
because people of intelligence naturally like to reason, they cannot suffer the
conversation of those who do not reason. Pedants cannot reason because they
have narrow minds, or else their minds are filled with false learning; and they do
not wish to reason, because they see that certain people respect and admire them
more when they quote some unknown author and some sentence from one of the
ancients than when they pretend to reason. Therefore, since their vanity is satisfied by the prospect of the respect brought to them, they apply themselves to the
study of all those extraordinary sciences that attract the admiration of ordinary
men.
Pedants are therefore vain and proud, of large memory and small judgment,
happy and strong with citations, unhappy and weak in reason, with a vigorous
and extensive but uncertain and disorderly imagination, unable to express itself
with precision.
•Lasa cJ.pccr or the fii'SI .,.n or this book.

186

Nicolas Malebranche

It will not be very difficult now to prove that Montaigne was as much a pedant
as were many others, according to this concept of the word, which seems to be
the one most in accord with reason and common use, for I do not speak here of
the pedant in the long robe-a long robe cannot make a pedant. Montaigne, so
averse to pedantry, may never have worn a long robe, but he could not in this
way divest himself of his own faults. He worked hard to give himself the air of a
gentleman, but he did not work to give himself a precise mind, or at least he did
not succeed in doing so. And so he became a gentlemanly pedant of quite
singular species, rather than a reasonable, judicious, and honest man.
Montaigne's book contains such obvious proofs of the vanity and pride of its
author that it might seem useless to note them here, for one must be quite
conceited in order to imagine, as he does, that people would wish to read such a
thick book to have some acquaintance with our humors. He must necessarily set
himself apart from the common man and regard himself as a quite extraordinary
person.
All creatures have an essential obligation to tum the minds of those who wish
to adore them toward that one which alone merits adoration. And religion teaches
us that we should never permit the mind and heart of man, made only for God, to
be occupied with the admiration and love of ourselves. When Saint John prostrated himself before the angel of the Lord, this angel prohibited him from
worshiping him; "I am a servant," he said to him, "as are you and your
brothers; adore God .... Only devils, and participants in the rites of devils, are
pleased by being worshiped, and to wish that other men be preoccupied with us is
to wish to be worshiped not from an exterior and visible adoration but from an
interior and true one; it is to wish to be adored as God wishes to be adored, i.e .•
in spirit and in truth.
Montaigne wrote his book only to picture and represent his own humors and
inclinations. He admits this himself in the foreword to the reader, included in all
the editions: "It is myself whom I portray,'' he says. "I myself am the subject of
my book. ''(I :4)<See translators' note below.> This is clear enough to those who
read it; for there are few chapters in which he does not digress to speak of himself,
and there are entire chapters in which he speaks of nothing else. But if he composed
his book to portray himself in it, he had it printed to be read. Thus, he wanted men
to consider and be occupied by his person, although he says, ''it is not right for one
to use his leisure upon such a frivolous and vain subject. '' These words only
condemn him, for if he believed it was wrong for us to use our time to read his
book, he himself acted contrary to common sense in having it printed. And so we
are obliged to believe either that he did not say what he thought, or that he did not
do what he should.
It is again but a pleasant excuse for his conceit to say that he only wrote for his
friends and relati1·es; for if this had been so, why did he produce three printings
of the book? A single one did not suffice for his relatives and friends? Why again
"Apoc. 19.10 ""Conservus tuus sum."" etc. ''Deum adora."
<Rodis-Lewis used the edition of P. Villey. Paris. 193~31, 3 vols.>

The Search after Truth

187

did he add to his book in the last printing, and why did he never remove anything
from it, if not because fortune favored his intensions? "I add," he says,• "but I
do not correct, because it seems to me that he who offers his work to the world no
longer has the right to do so. Let him do better in another work if he can, and not
corrupt the works he has sold. From such people it is not necessary to buy
anything until they are dead: Let them think well before producing anything.
Why the haste? My book is always the same," etc. [3:359] He therefore wanted
to produce and offer his book to the world as well as to his relatives and friends.
But his vanity would have been criminal enough had he only turned and arrested
the minds and hearts of his relatives and friends toward his portrait for as long as
it takes to read his book.
If it is a defect to speak of oneself often, it is an affront, or rather a kind of
stupidity, to praise oneself all the time as Montaigne does, for this is not only a
sin against Christian humility but also an insult to reason.
Men are made to live together, to form civil bodies and societies. But it must
be remarked that not all the individuals composing these societies wish themselves to be regarded as the least part of the body to which they belong. Hence
those who, by praising themselves and placing themselves above others, show
that they regard them as the least parts of their society, and consider themselves
the principal and most honorable parts, necessarily render themselves odious to
everyone rather than causing themselves to be loved and esteemed.
It is therefore vain, indeed tactlessly and ridiculously vain, for Montaigne to
speak favorably of himself all the time; but it is still more extravagantly vain for
this author to describe his faults, for if one looks at them seriously, one will see
that he reveals only those faults glorified in the world because of the corruption
of the age, that he freely attributes to himself those faults that might enable him
to pass as a sound mind or that give him the air of a gentleman, and that his
intention in this fraudulently honest confession of his disorders is to make us
believe him more willingly when he speaks to his advantage. He is right in
sayingb that "both prizing and despising oneself are often born of the same
arrogant attitude."
It is always a sure sign that one is full of oneself; and Montaigne seems to me
even more proud and vain when he censures than when he praises himself,
because it is an unbearable conceit to take pride in his defects instead of being
humiliated by them. I would prefer a man who hides his crimes with shame than
one who makes them public with effrontery, and in my opinion we should look
with horror upon the cavalier and unchristian way in which Montaigne represents
his defects. But let us examine the other qualities of his mind.
If we take Montaigne at his word, we shall be persuaded that he was a mM of
rro retention;c that he had rro storehouse;d that he had no memory at all; but that
he was not lacking in sense and judgment. Nevertheless, if we believe the portrait
"Ch. 9.
bBk. 3.
•Bk. 2.
dBk. I.

bk.
c:h.
c:h.
c:b.

3.
13 (3:571).
10 (2: 152).
24 (2:63'(.

188

Nicolas Malebranche

that he has drawn of his own mind, i.e., his own book, we shall not completely
share his views. "I would not know how to take an order without notebooks." he
says, "and when I have to give a speech, if it is lengthy I am reduced to the vile
and miserable necessity of learning what I am to say by heart, word for word;
otherwise I would have neither presence nor assurance, being fearful that my
memory would do me an evil tum." [2:635.] Does a man who can team a
long-winded discourse word for word to have some presence and assurance lack
memory rather than judgment? And can one believe Montaigne when he says of
himself: "It is necessary for me to call people who serve me by the name oftheir
functions or their countries. For it is very difficult for me to retain names, and if I
should live a long time I believe I shall forget my own name." [2:638.] Has a
simple gentleman, who can remember long-winded discourses by heart, and
word for word. with assurance, such a great number of servants that he cannot
remember their names? "A man who was born and suckled in the fields,• among
the furrows, a man of affairs with a household," who says "that to give no
importance to what is at our feet, to what we have in our hands, to what most
concerns practical life, is something far removed from his principles" [Ibid.] Can
he forget the French names of his domestics? Can he not know, as he says,
''most of our coins, the difference between one grain and another in the earth and
the granary, unless it is quite obvious, the most obvious principles of agriculture,
which even children know, such as the use of yeast in making bread, and why it
is that to make wine it must be put in vats," [ibid.] and at the same time have a
mind full of the names of the ancient philosophers and their principles, ''of the
ideas of Plato,b the atoms of Epicurus, of the plenum and vacuum of Leucippus
and of Democritus, Thales' water, Anaximander on the infinity of nature,
Diogenes' air, the numbers and symmetry of Pythagoras, Parmenides' infinity,
the one of Museus, the fire and water of Apollodorus, the like particles of
Anaxagoras, the discord and love of Empedocles, Heraclitus' fire, etc.?'' A man
who, in three of four pages of his book, relates more than fifty names of different
authors together with their opinions, who has tilled all his work with historical
references and entangled apothegms without order, who says that history and
poetryc are his meat in the matter of books, who constantly contradicts himself,
even in the same chapter, and even when speaking of things he pretends to know
best, when he speaks ofthe qualities of his own mind, should this man brag about
having more judgment than memory?
We affirm then that Montaigne was "excellent in forgetfulness" [2:639], since
Montaigne assures us of it, and wishes that we have this opinion of him, and
finally because it is not completely contrary to the truth. But let us not be
persuaded by his word, or by the compliments he gives himself, that this was a
man of great sense and quite extraordinary penetration of mind. This would be to
plunge ourselves into error. and to give too much credit to the false and danger"Bk. 2, ch. 17(2:641).
bBk. 2, ch. 12(2:412).
•&k. I, ch. 25(1:277).

The Search after Truth

189

ous opinions he details with an arrogant and domineering confidence, which only
blinds and confuses feeble minds.
The other compliment given to Montaigne is that he has a perfect knowledge
of the human spirit, that he penetrates its depths, its nature, and its properties,
that he knows the strong and the weak of it, in a word, everything that can be
known about it. Let us see if he really deserves these compliments, and how it
happens that people are so liberal in praising him.
Those who have read Montaigne well know that this author affects the air of a
Pyrrbonist,• and takes pride in doubting everything. "The persuasion of certainty,'' he says, ''is a sure sign of folly and extreme uncertainty; and there is no
more foolish sort of man, nor less philosophical, than the philodoxes of Plato."
On the contrary, in the same chapter!' he so praises the Pyrrbonists that he must
have been a member of this sect. To pass for an intelligent gentleman it was
necessary in his time to doubt everything. And the quality of intellectual strength
to which he aspired confirmed him still further in these opinions. Thus, by
supposing him to be an Academic one could immediately recognize him as the
most ignorant of all men, not only in what concerns the nature of the mind, but in
all other things as well. For since there is an essential difference between knowing and doubting, if the Academics say what they believe 'Jhen they assure us
that they know nothing, we can say they are the most_ignorant of all men.
Not only are they the most ignorant of all men, -~Y are also the defenders of
the least reasonable opinions. For not only do they reject everything that is most
certain and most universally received, to pass themselves off as independent
minds, by the same twist of the imagination they are pleased to speak decisively
about the most uncertain and least probable matters. Montaigne is visibly
afflicted with this illness of the mind; and it must necessarily be said that not only
was he ignorant of the nature of the human mind but even that he was in grievous
error about the subject, assuming he told us what he thought of it, as he should
have done.
For what can one say about a man who confuses mind with matter, who relates
the most extravagant opinions of philosophers about the nature of the soul [2:417]
without holding them in contempt, even giving these opinions in a way that
makes it rather obvious that he most approves those opinions most opposed to
reason; a man who did not see the necessity of the immortality of our souls: who
thought that human reason could not recognize it [2:437] and who regarded the
proofs given of it as dreams the desire for it caused to be born in us: ''Somnia non
docentis, sed optantis:" who finds fault with "men who separate themselves
from the throng of other creatures, and distinguish themselves from the beasts,"
whom he calls "our fellow brethren and our companions" [2:239], and whom he
believes speak, understand one another, and mock us, just as we speak, understand each other, and mock them; who posits a greater difference between one
man and another than between man and beast; who anributes even to spiders the
"Bk. I. ch. 12 (bk. 2, vo1. 2, pp. 338-46 and 356-49).
bSomewhat above (bk. 2. ch. 12, vo1. 2, p. 414J.

190

Nicolas Malebranche

ability to "deliberate, think, and draw conclusions" [2:245]. and who, after
having supported the opinion that man's soul has no superiority over that of
beasts, willingly accepts this opinion: that "it is not because of reason,
discourse, and our souls that we are superior to the beasts, but by our beauty, our
fine comple~tions, and the beautiful disposition of the parts of our bodies, for
which we must abandon our intelligence, our prudence, and all the rest, etc?"
[2:305) Can one say that a man who uses the most bizarre opinions in order to
conclude "that it is not through true discourse, but through our pride and stubbornness that we value ourselves overthe other animals" [2:306), can one say of
this man that he has a very precise knowledge of the human mind, and can one
believe that others will be persuaded of this?
But we must do justice to everyone, and in good faith say what kind of mind
Montaigne had. He had but little memory, still less judgment, this is true; but
these two qualities together do not constitute what the world usually calls beauty
of mind. It is the beauty, vivacity, and breadth of the imagination that seem to be
a fine mind. Men generally esteem the brilliant and not the solid mind, because
they love what affects the senses more than what instructs reason. Hence, if one
takes beauty of imagination for beauty of mind, one can say that Montaigne had a
fine, indeed e~ttraordinary, mind. His ideas are false but beautiful; his e~t­
pressions irregular or bold but agreeable; his discourse is badly reasoned but
imaginative. One sees throughout his book an infinitely pleasing originality:
completely pedestrian as he is, he is not seen as such; his strong and bold
imagination always gives an original tum to the things he copies. In short, he has
everything necessary to please and command respect, and I think I have sufficiently demonstrated that it is not by convincing their reason that he makes so
many people admire him, but rather because he turns the mind to his own
advantage by the all-conquering vivacity of his imagination.

BOOK TWO: PART THREE
Chapter Six

I. People who imagine tlremsel\·es to be sorcerers and werewol\·es. II. Conclusion of tire first two books.
I. People wlro imagine tlremsell·es to be sorcerers and werewol\·es.

The most extreme effect of the force of the imagination is the unreasonable fear
of the apparition of ghosts, spells, characters, charms, lycanthropes, or
werewolves, and generally of everything we imagine to depend upon the power
of the devil.
There is nothing more terrible nor anything that frightens the mind more, nor
that produces deeper impressions in the brain, than the idea of an invisible power
intent upon doing us harm, and to which we can offer no resistance. All conversations that raise this subject are always attended with fear and fascination. Men,
attached to everything extraordinary, take bizarre pleasure in recounting these
astonishing and prodigious stories about the power and malice of sorcerers to
frighten themselves and others. Hence, we should not be surprised that sorcerers
are so common in certain countries where the belief in the witches' sabbath is so
deeply rooted, where all the most extravagent tales of witchcraft are taken as
authentic histories, and where fools and visionaries whose imagination has been
deranged at least as much by listening to these tales as by the corruption of their
hearts are burned as true witches.
I well know that certain persons will criticize me for attributing most tales of
witchcraft to the strength of the imagination, because I understand that men love
what frightens them, that they are angered by those who wish to disillusion them,
that they are like those hypochondriacs who listen with respect, and faithfully
execute the orders of doctors who make dire prognostications for them. Superstitions are not easily destroyed, and one does not attack them without encountering
many of their defenders; and this inclination to believe all the dreams of demonographers is blindly produced and upheld by the same cause that makes the
superstitious stubborn, as is easy to prove. Nevertheless, this should not prevent
me from describing in a few words how I believe that such opinions become
established.
191

192

Nicolas Malebranche

A shepherd in his hut after supper tells his wife and children the adventures of
the witches' sabbath. As his imagination is moderately heated by the vapors of
wine, and as he believes that he has attended several times this imaginary assembly, he is sure to speak in a strong and lively manner. His natural eloquence,
joined to the disposition of his family to listen attentively to a subject so novel
and terrible, doubtless produces strange impressions in weak imaginations, and it
is naturally impossible that his wife and children should not be quite frightened,
impressed, and convinced by what he has told them. He is after all a husband, he
is a father talking about what he has seen, of what he has done; they love and
respect him; why would they not believe him'? This shepherd repeats his tale on
different days. The imagination of the mother and children gradually receive
more profound impressions of it; they become accustomed to it, fears pass, and
conviction remains; and finally curiosity brings them to the witches' sabbath.
They annoint themselves with the particular drug prescribed in the story; they go
to bed. This disposition of their hearts warms their imaginations still more, and
the traces the shepherd has formed in their brains open sufficiently for them to
judge in their sleep that all the movements of the ceremony whose description has
been given to them are present. They wake up, they speak with one another and
tell what they have seen. In this way they fortify the traces of their visions in
themselves, and the one who has the strongest imagination, being more persuasive than the rest, is sure to take charge of the imaginary history of the witches'
sabbath in a few nights time. Here then are the accomplished sorcerers the
shepherd has produced, and they themselves will one day make many others if,
having strong and vivid imaginations. fear does not prevent them from recounting such stories.
Occasionally, sorcerers of such conviction have been found that they freely
admit to everyone that they go to the witches' sabbath, and they are so persuaded
of this that although several persons watched them and assured them that they
never left their beds, they could not accept their testimony.
Everyone knows that when we tell ghost stories to children, they are almost
always frightened and cannot stay alone without lights and company. This is
because when their brains do not receive any traces from some present object,
those the story has formed there are reopened, often with such force as to
represent the ghosts that have been depicted for them as though they were before
their eyes. Nonetheless, these stories were not told to them as if they were true.
They were not addressed with the same air with which we say something of
which we are convinced, and sometimes they are told in a dispassionate and
offhand way. We therefore should not be surprised that a man who believes
himself actually to have been at the witches' sabbath, and consequently speaks of
it in a firm voice with an assured countenance, easily persuades those who
respectfully listen to him of the circumstances he describes, and transmits traces
similar to those that have deceived him into their imaginations.
When men speak to us, they engrave traces in our brain similar to those they
have. When they have deep traces, they speak in a way that causes deep traces in
us, for they cannot speak without making us similar to themselves in some way.

The Search after Truth

193

Infants in their mothers' womb see only whal their mothers see; and even when
they have come into the world, they imagine few things of which their parents arc
not the cause, for even the wisest of men guide themselves by the imagination of
others, i.e., by opinion and custom rather than by the rules of reason. And so in
places where sorcerers arc burned, we find many of them, because in these places
it is truly believed that they arc burned for what they arc, and this belief is
strengthened by discussions of them. If they were to cease punishing them and
treat them as mad people, in a little while they would no longer be sorcerers,
because those who arc sorcerers only because of imagination (which certainly
constitutes the greatest number of them) would revert to the normal stale of men.
It is indubitable that true sorcerers deserve death, and that even those who arc
sorcerers only through imagination should not be considered completely innocent, because normally they have convinced themselves that they are sorcerers
only because they have a disposition to go to the witches' sabbath, and because
they have annointcd themselves with some drug in order to bring about their evil
designs. But by punishing all these criminals indifferently, the common persuasion is strengthened, imaginary sorcerers arc multiplied, and thus an infinity of
people arc lost and damned. Thus, it is with reason that many courts do not
punish sorcerers, for fewer of them arc found in their jurisdictions, and the envy,
the hatred, and the malice of the wicked cannot use this pretext in order to
destroy the innocent.
The belief in werewolves, or in men transformed into wolves, is yet another
foolish vision. A man, through a deranged effort of his imagination, falls into
this madness when he believes he becomes a wolf every night. This disorder of
his mind disposes him to perform all the actions of wolves, or those he has heard
they do. Thus, he leaves his house at midnight, he stalks the streets, throws
himself upon some child he encounters there, bites and mauls him; and stupid
and superstitious people imagine thai this fanatic has really become a wolf,
because the wretch believes it himself and has secretly told some people who arc
unable to conceal it.
If it were as easy to form the impressions in the brain thai persuade men thai
they have become wolves as it is to go to the witches' sabbath in one's bed
without waking up, and if one could roam the streets and commit the ravages
these miserable wolfmen do without having one's brain entirely overturned,
these beautiful stories of the transformation of men into wolves would be sure to
produce their effect just as the tales of the witches' sabbath have, and we would
have as many werewolves as we have sorcerers. But the conviction thai one has
been transformed into a wolf supposes an upsetting of the brain much more
difficult 10 produce than thai of a man who merely believes thai he goes to the
witches' sabbath, i.e., a man who thinks he sees things in the night that arc not
there and who, upon awakening, cannot distinguish these dreams from the
thoughts he has had during the day.
It is fairly common for certain people to have dreams at night vivid enough to
be exactly recalled when they awake, even though the subject of their dream is
not in itself very terrible. And so it is not difficult for people to persuade

194

Nicolas Malebranche

themselves that they have been to the witches' sabbath, for it is sufficient for this
that their brain preserve the traces caused there during their sleep.
The chief cause that prevents us from taking our dreams for reality is that we
cannot connect our dreams with the things we have done while awake, for this is
how we recognize that they are only dreams. Now imaginary witches cannot
recognize by this means that their witches' sabbath is a dream, for they go to the
witches' sabbath only during the night, and what happens at the sabbath cannot
be connected to other actions during the daytime. Hence, it is morally impossible
to disabuse them in this way. Nor need the things these pretended witches think
they have seen at the sabbath have a natural order among them, for they appear to
be more real to the degree that their sequence is more extravagant and confused.
It is therefore sufficient to deceive them that the ideas of the sabbath rites be vivid
and frightening, which they cannot fail to be, if one considers that they represent
novel and extraordinary things.
But for a man to imagine himself as a cock, goat, wolf, or bull, such a great
disorder of the imagination is required that this is not a common occurrence,
although these confusions of the mind do occasionally happen, either through
divine punishment, as Sacred Scripture repons in the case of Nebuchadnezzar, or
by a natural transpon of melacholy to the brain, as in the examples we find in the
works of medical authors.
Although I am persuaded that true sorcerers are very rare, that the witches'
sabbath is nothing but a dream, and that courts that ovenum accusations of
witchcraft are the most equitable, nevenheless I do not doubt that there can be
sorcerers, charms, spells, and so on, and that the devil sometimes exercises his
malice on men with the special permission of a superior power. But Sacred
Scripture teaches us that the kingdom of Satan is destroyed, that the angel of
heaven has enchained the devil and closed him in the abyss, whence he shall
never escape until the end of the world, that Jesus Christ has disarmed this
mighty army, and that the time has come when the Prince of the world is driven
from the world.
He had reigned until the advent of the Savior, and he reigns still, if you will,
in places where the Savior is unknown; but he no longer has any right or power
over those who are reborn in Jesus Christ; he cannot even tempt them, unless
God permits it; and if God does permit it, it is because they can overcome him. It
is therefore honoring the devil too much to tell stories as signs of his power, such
as cenain new demonographers do, because these stories render the devil formidible to weak minds.
We must despise devils as we despise executioners, for we ought to tremble
before God alone. His is the only power that must be feared. We must learn His
judgments and His anger, and not irritate Him through contempt for His laws and
His Gospel. We should listen with respect when He speaks, or when men speak
of Him. But when men speak to us of the power of the devil, it is foolish
weakness to be frightened and troubled. Our being troubled only honors our
enemy. He wants us to respect and fear him, and his pride is flattered when our
minds are prostrated before him.

Th~ s~arch aft~r

Truth

195

II. Conclusion of the first two books.
It is time to complete this second book and to take note of the fact, through the
things that have been said in this and the preceding book, that all the thoughts the
soul has through the body, or through dependence upon the body. are all for the
sake of the body; that they are all false or obscure; that they serve only to unite us
to sensible goods and to everything that can procure them for us; and that this
union involves us in infinite errors and very great miseries, although we do not
always feel these miseries, just as we are not aware of the errors that cause them.
Here is a most remarkable example.
The union we have had with our mothers in their womb, which is the closest
we can have with men, has caused us the two greatest evils, namely, sin and
concupiscence, which are the source of all our miseries. However, in order that
our bodies be fonned, it was necessary that this union be as close as it was.
Another union succeeded this first one, which was broken at our birth, and in
this second union children tie themselves to their parents and their nurses. This
second union was not as close as the first one, thus, it did us less harm; it only
influenced us to believe our parents and nurses and to wish to imitate them in
everything. It is obvious that this second union was also necessary not, as was the
first, for the formation of our bodies but for their preservation, to know all the
things that can be useful to it, and to dispose the body toward the movements
necessary for acquiring them.
Finally, the union we still presently have with all men nevertheless causes us
very much harm, even though it is not so close, because it is less necessary for
the preservation of our bodies; for it is because of this union that we live by
opinions, that we esteem and love everything that is loved and esteemed in the
world, despite the remorse of our conscience and the true ideas we have of
things. I am not speaking here of the union we have with the mind of other men,
for from that union one can say that we receive some instruction. I speak only of
the sensible union between our imagination and the air and manner of those who
speak to us.
This is how all the thoughts we have as a result of our dependence upon our
bodies are completely false, and the more dangerous for our soul as they are
useful to our bodies.
Therefore, let us try to deliver ourselves gradually from the illusions of our
senses, from the visions of our imasinations, and from the impressions that the
imaginations of other men make upon our minds. Let us carefully reject all the
confused ideas we have as a result of our dependence upon our bodies, and only
admit the clear and evident ideas the mind receives through the union it necessarily has with the divine Word, or with eternal truth and wisdom, as we shall
explain in the following book, concerning the understanding or the pure mind.

BOOK

THREE

(PART ONE:) THE UNDERSTANDING, OR PuRE MIND

Chapter One

I. Thought alone is es.fential to the mind. Percei\·ing and imagining are only
modifications of it. II. We do not know all the modifications ofwllicll our soul is
capable. Ill. Our sensations and e1·en our passions are different from our
knowledge and our l01•e, and they are not always consequences of them.
The subject for this third treatise is rather dry and uninspiring. Here the mind is
examined in itself and without any relation to the body, in order to discover the
weaknesses and errors peculiar to it. The imagination and the senses are fertile
and inexhaustible sources of enors and illusions, but the mind acting by itself is
not so liable to err. Finishing the last two treatises was difficult; the difficulty
with this one is in beginning. It is not that we cannot say enough about the mind's
properties, but rather that its weaknesses more than its properties are sought after
here. It should not be surprising, then, if this treatise is not as thick or if not as
many enors are unearthed in it as in the preceding ones. Nor should there be any
complaint if it is a bit dry, abstract, and trying. Our discourse cannot always stir
people's senses and imagination, and we should not even always try to do so.
When a subject is abstract, it can hardly be made perceptible to the senses
without obfuscation; rendering it intelligible is enough. Nothing is more unfair
than the common complaints of those who want to know everything and who are
willing to apply themselves to nothing. They become annoyed when asked to
become attentive; they want their senses and passions 10 be acted upon constantly. But what matter? We realize we cannot satisfy them. Writers of novels
and comedies are called upon to please and entertain. We are satisfied if we can
instruct those who themselves expend the effort to become attentive.
The enors of the senses and of the imagination stem from the constitution and
nature of the body and are revealed by considering the soul's dependence on it;
but the enors of the pure understanding can be uncovered only by considering the
mind itself and the ideas necessary 10 it for knowing objects. Thus, in order to
reach the causes of the pure understanding's enors, we shall have to pause here
in this third book to consider first the nature of the mind and then of intellectual
ideas.
197

198

Nicolas Malebranche

We shall first discuss the mind as it is in itself and without any relation to the
body to which it is joined. Accordingly. what will be said about it could be said
as well about pure intelligences and a fortiori about what we have here called
pure understanding, for by the expression pure understanding, nothing is meant
but the mind's faculty of knowing external objects without forming corporeal
images of them in the brain to represent them. We shall then deal with intellectual ideas, by means of which the pure understanding is aware of external
objects.

I. Thought alone is essential to the mind. Sensing and imagining are
only modifications of it.
I do not think that. after some serious thought on the matter, it can be doubted
that the mind's essence• consists only in thought, just as the essence of matter
consists only in extension. Nor can it be doubted that, depending on the various
modifications of thought, the mind now wills. now imagines, and has many other
particular forms. just as matter, depending on the various modifications of extension, is now water, now fire, now wood, and has an infinity of other particular
forms.
I warn only that by the word thought, I do not mean the soul's particular
modifications, i.e., this or that thought, but rather substantial thought, thought
capable of all sorts of modifications or thoughts, just as extension does not mean
this or that extension, such as a circle or a square, but extension capable of all
sorts of modifications or figures. This comparison will be uncomfortable only
because we have no clear idea of thought as we do of extension, for thought is
known only through inner sensation or consciousness, as I shall explain below.
I think, further, that no mind can be conceived of that does not think, though it
is quite easy to conceive of one that does not sense or imagine, and that does not
even will, just as unextended matter cannot be conceived of, though it is possible
to conceive of matter that is neither earth nor metal, neither square nor round,
and that even has no motion. From this it must be concluded that as there can be
matter that is neither earth nor metal, neither square nor round, nor even in
motion, there can also be a mind that perceives neither hot nor cold, neither joy
nor sadness, imagines nothing and even wills nothing; consequently, such modifications are not essential to it. Thought alone, then, is the essence of mind, just
as extension alone is the essence of matter.
But as matter or extension without motion would be useless and could not
assume the forms for which it was created. and as an intelligent being could not
conceivably have willed to produce such a thing, so a mind or thought without
volition would clearly be altogether useless. since the mind would never be led
toward the objects of its perceptions and would not love the good for which it was
created. Consequently, an intelligent being could not conceivably have willed to
produce the mind in this state. Nonetheless, as motion is not the essence of
•By the essence of a lhing. I mean what is first conceived in the lhing. on which all the modifications noticed in it depend.

Th~ S~arch aft~r

Truth

199

matter since it presupposes extension, so willing is not the essence of mind since
willing presupposes perception.
Thought alone, then, is what properly constitutes the essence of mind. and the
different modes of thinking, such as sensing and imagining, are but the modifications of which it is capable and by which it need not always be modified. But
willing is a property that always accompanies it, whether joined to, or separated
from, the body, but that is not essential to it, since volition presupposes thought
and since like a body without motion, a mind without volition is conceivable.
Nevertheless, the power of volition, though it is not essential to it, is inseparable from mind-as mobility, though not essential to it, is inseparable from
matter. For just as immovable matter is inconceivable, so a mind incapable of
willing or of some natural inclination is inconceivable. But again, as matter can
conceivably exist without any motion, likewise can the mind conceivably be
without any impression of the Author of nature, leading it toward the good; and
consequently it can be without any volition, for the will is nothing but the
impression of the Author of nature that leads us toward the good in general, as
has been explained at length in the first chapter of this worlt.

II.

w~

do not know all

th~

modifications of which our soul is

capabl~.

What we have said in this treatise concerning the senses, as well as what we
have just said about the nature of the mind, does not presuppose that we know all
the modifications of which it is capable. We make no such assumption. On the
contrary, we believe the mind has a capacity for receiving, one after another, an
infinity of different modifications previously unknown to it.
The least part of matter can receive a figure of three, six, ten, or ten thousand
sides, or finally a circular or eliptical shape that may be viewed as a figure of an
infinite number of sides and angles. There is an infinite number of different kinds
of each of its figures-an infinite number of different kinds of triangles, and
even more different figures of four, six, ten, and ten thousand sides, or of infinite
polygons, for the cilde, the ellipse, and generally evel}' figure (regularly or
ilregularly curvilinear) can be considered as an infinite polygon. The ellipse, for
example, can be considered as an infinite polygon whose angles forming its sides
are unequal, being greater toward the small diameter than toward the large, and
so on for other more complex and more ilregular infmite polygons.
A silnple piece of wax is therefore capable of an infinite number, or rather, of
an infinitely infinite number of modifications that no mind can comprehendwhy believe, then, that the soul, which is much nobler than the body, is capable
only of the modifications it has already received?
If we had never felt pleasure or pain, if we had never seen color or light, in a
word, if we were with regard to evel}'thing as the blind and the deaf are to colors
and sounds, we would be right to conclude that we were incapable of all the
sensations we have of objects. Yet these are but modifications of our soul, as we
have proved in our treatment of the senses.

200

Nicolas Malebranche

It must be agreed, then, that the soul's capacity for receiving different modifications is as great as its capacity for conceiving, i.e., as the mind cannot exhaust
or comprehend all the figures of which matter is capable, so it cannot comprehend all the various modifications the mighty hand of God can produce in the
soul. even if it were true (as it is not, for the reasons I shall give in chapter seven
of the second part of this book) that the mind knew the soul's capacity as
distinctly as it knows matter's.
If our soul in its present state receives but few modifications, it is because the
soul is joined to a body and depends on it. All its sensations are related to its
body, and as it is not possessed of God, it has none of the modifications that
possession must produce. The matter of which our body is composed is capable
of but few modifications during our lifetime. This matter cannot be broken down
into earth and moisture until after our death. Right now it cannot become air,
fire, diamond, or metal, it cannot become round, square, or triangular; it has to
be flesh, brain, nerves, and the rest of a man's body so that the soul may be
joined to it. The same is true of our soul; it must have sensations of heat, cold,
color, light, sounds, odors, tastes, and several other modifications in order to
remain joined to its body. All its sensations direct the soul to the preservation of
its machine. They agitate the soul and frighten it as soon as the least spring is
unwound or broken, and as a result the soul must be subject to the body as long as
the body is subject to corruption. But it is reasonable to believe that when the
body is clothed with immortality, and we no longer fear the dissolution of its
parts, our soul will no longer be affected by the unpleasant sensations we feel
against our wishes. Instead, it will be affected by an infinity of completely
different sensations of which we now have no idea, and which will be beyond all
sensation and will be worthy of the goodness and grandeur of the God we shall
possess.
There is no justification for imagining such insight into the soul's nature as to
allow us to assert that it is capable only of knowledge and love. This might be
maintained by those who attribute their sensations to external objects or to their
own bodies, and who hold that their passions are in their hearts; for indeed, if its
passions and sensations are taken away from the soul, all that remains is but a
consequence of knowledge and love. But I cannot conceive how those who have
been delivered from the illusions of our senses can be convinced that all our
sensations and passions are but knowledge and love, i.e., kinds of confused
judgments the soul passes on objects in relation to the body it animates. I do not
understand how light. colors, odors, and such, can be said to be judgments of the
soul, for I seem to be distinctly aware to the contrary that light, colors, odors,
and the rest of the sensations are modifications completely different from judgments.
Ill. Our sensations are differem from 011r knowledge and /o1'e. and
tlrey are not tire consequences of tlrem.

But let us pick out the livelier sensations that occupy the soul more. Let us take
a look at what these people say about pleasure and pain. Following several very

The Search after Truth

201

imponant authors,• they would have these sensations be but the consequences of
our faculty of knowing and willing, and pain, for example, be but the regret,
opposition, and aversion the will has for things it knows to be injurious to the
body it loves. But it seems to me evident that pain is confused here with sorrow,
and that far from being a consequence of the mind's knowledge and the will's
action, pain rather precedes both of these.
If, for example, a burning coal were placed in the hand of a man who is sleeping
or who is warming his hands behind his back, I do not think any plausibility can
be given to the claims (a) that this man would first know that motion contrary to
the well-being of his body was taking place in his hand; (b) that his will would
then oppose this motion; and (c) that his pain would be a consequence of his
mind's knowledge and his will's opposition. It seems to me, on the contrary, that
pain undoubtedly would be the first thing this man would be aware of when the
coal touched his hand, and that the mind's knowledge and will's opposition are
but consequences of pain, though they are indeed the cause of the sadness
following the pain.
Yet there is a big difference between this pain and the sadness it produces. The
pain is the first thing the soul feels; it is not preceded by any knowledge. and it
can never be pleasant by itself. The sadness, on the other hand, is the last thing
the soul feels; it is always preceded by some knowledge and is always quite
pleasant by itself. This is clear enough from the pleasure accompanying the
sadness felt at viewing baleful events in theater plays, for this pleasure increases
with the sadness, whereas pleasure never increases with pain. Playwrights who
study the an of pleasing people know well that the theater must not be bathed in
blood, because the sight of a murder, though pretended, would be too terrible to
be pleasant. But they have no worries about causing too much sadness in their
audiences, because when there is occasion to be affected by it, sadness is indeed
pleasant. There is, then, an essential difference between sadness and pain, and
we cannot say that pain is nothing other than the mind's knowledge in conjunction with the will's opposition.
As for the other sensations, such as odors, tastes, sounds, and colors, most
men do not think that they are modifications of their soul. On the contrary, they
judge that they are spread over objects, or at least that they are in the soul only as
is the idea of a square or circle, i.e., that they are joined to the soul, but not as
modifications of it. They make this son of judgment because these sensations do
not affect them much, as I showed while explaining the errors of the senses.
I think it must be agreed that not all the modifications of which the soul is
capable are known, and that besides those it has through the sense organs, it may
have an infinity of others it has not experienced and will experience only after it
has been delivered from the captivity of its body.
Yet it must be admitted that just as matter is capable of an infmity of different
configurations only because of its extension, so the soul is capable of different
modifications only because of thought; for it is clear that the soul could not have

•sc. Aupsline, bk. 6,!H miLricG;

DeKutes, in his MGn. de.

202

Nicolas Ma/ebranche

the modifications of pleasure or pain, or even those that are indifferent to it, were
it incapable of perception or thought.
It is enough that we know that thought is the principle of all these modifications. Even if you would have something in the soul preceding thought, I have no
wish to disagree. But as I am certain that no one has any knowledge of his soul
except through thought, or through the inner sensation of all that takes place in
his mind, I am convinced as well that if someone wishes to consider the nature of
the soul, he need only consult this inner sensation, which continually represents
to him what he is, and he should not fancy, contrary to his own consciousness,
that the soul is an invisible fire, or subtle air, or a hannony, or some other such
thing.

BOOK THREE: PART ONE
Chapter Two

I. Being limited, the mind cannot understand what involves the infinite. II. Its
limitation is the source of many e"ors. Ill. And especially ofheresies.JV. The
mind must be subordinated to faith.
I. Being limited, the mind cannot understand what involves the
infinite.
What we immediately find in man's thought, then, is that it is very limited, from
which two very important consequences follow. The first is that the soul cannot
perfectly know the infinite. The second is that it cannot even know distinctly
several things simultaneously. Just as a piece of wax is incapable of having an
infmity of different figures simultaneously, so the soul is incapable of knowing
an infmity of objects simultaneously. Further, just as a piece of wax cannot be
both square and round at the same time, but only half round and half square, and
as the more different figures it has, the less perfect and distinct it will be, so the
soul cannot perceive several things at the same time, and its thoughts are the
more confused as they are more numerous.
In shon, just as a piece of wax having a thousand sides with a different figure
for each side would be neither square, nor round, nor oval, and as we could not
say what figure it had, so it sometimes happens that we have so many differenl
thoughts that we believe we are thinking about nothing at all. This is seen in the
case of people who fall into a swoon. The animal spirits, swirling irregularly in
their brain, stir up so many traces that no one of them is opened sufficiently to
excite a particular sensation or distinct idea in the mind. As a result of this, these
people perceive so many things simultaneously that they perceive nothing
distinct-which leads them to think they have perceived nothing.
Not that we do not sometimes fall into a swoon for want of animal spirits; bul
what happens then is that the soul has thoughts only of pure intellection, which
leave no traces in the brain. and so we do not remember them after coming
to -which leads us to believe we thought of nothing at all. I mention this ill
passing to show that we wrongly believe that the soul does not always think
because we sometimes fancy that the soul is thinking of nothing at all.
203

Nicolas Malebranche

204

II. The mind's limitation is the source of many errors.
Anyone who reflects a little on his own thoughts has enough experience to
know that the mind cannot attend to several things at the same time and, a
fortiori, that it cannot penetrate the infmite. Yet I do not know through what
caprice people ignorant of this busy themselves with meditating more on infmite
objects and on questions demanding the capacity of an infinite mind than on
others more suited to their mind, and why there are still so many others who,
wishing to know everything, apply themselves to so many sciences at the same
time that they confuse the mind and render it incapable of any true science.
How many people are there who want to understand the infinite divisibility of
matter aDd how a tiny grain of sand can contain as many parts, though proportionately smaller, as the entire earth? How many questions are formed, which
will never be resolved with regard to this and many other subjects involving the
infinite,• whose solution they seek in their own minds? They worry and sweat
over it, and all they gain in the end is to become obstinate about some error or
absurdity.
Is it not a ludicrous thing to see people deny the infinite divisibility of matter
just because they cannot understand it (although they may understand quite well
the demonstrations proving it), and at the same time admit verbally that the
human mind cannot comprehend the infinite. The proofs of the infinite divisibility of matter are conclusive, if ever there were any, and when carefully considered, they are acknowledged as much. Nonetheless, when these people are
presented with objections they cannot resolve, their mind turns away from the
evidence they have just seen and they begin to doubt. They occupy themselves a
great deal over an objection they cannot resolve, they invent some frivolous
distinction against the demonstrations of the infinite divisibility of matter, and
they fmally conclude that they were, and everyone else now is, mistaken about
the matter. They then embrace the opposite position. They defend it with the
bombast and absurdity the imagination can always supply. Now, they fall into
these errors only because they are not inwardly convinced that the human mind is
fmite and because, in order to be convinced of the infmite divisibility of matter,
the mind need not understand it, because all the objections that can be resolved
only by understanding it are objections that cannot be resolved. Indeed, extension, duration, and speed are such that their commensurable relations can be
known exactly. because these relations are finite magnitudes expressed by finite
ideas. But no finite mind can comprehend these magnitudes in themselves and
taken absolutely.
If men spent time only with such questions, there would not be cause for great
concern; because although some of them may be involved in certain errors, these
errors are of little consequence. As for the others, they have not entirely wasted
their time in thinking about things they cannot understand, because they have at
least convinced themselves of their mind's weakness. It is a good thing. a wise
"Such as time, speed. and whatever varies quantitatively.

The Search after Truth

205

author- has said, to exhaust the mind with these subtleties in order to tame its
presumption and eliminate its audacity ever to oppose its feeble lights against the
truths offered it by the Church under pretext that it cannot understand them. For,
given that all the power of a man's mind is constrained to succumb to the smallest
ak>m of matter, and to acknowledge that it clearly sees this atom to be infmitely
divisible without being able to understand how it can be, is it not an obvious sin
against reason to refuse to believe the wonderful effects of God's omnipotence
(itself incomprehensible) because our mind cannot comprehend them?
The most dangerous result of ignorance, or rather of inadvertance to the
weakness and limitation of the human mind, and consequently to its inability to
understand what belongs to the infmite, is heresy. More now than at any other
time, it seems to me, there are many people who create their own theology, based
on nothing but their own mind and the natural weakness of reason, because even
in subjects not under the jurisdiction of reason, they wish to believe only what
they can understand.
The Socinians can understand the mysteries neither of the Trinity nor of the
Incarnation. This fact is enough for them to refuse belief and even to say with
haughty scorn of those who do believe that they are born to slavery. A Calvinist
cannot conceive how it can be that the body of Jesus Christ is really present in the
sacrament of the altar at the same time it is in heaven. From this he thinks himself
right to conclude that it cannot be, as if he understood perfectly the limits of
God's power.
If a man, even one who is convinced he is free, exercises himself trying to
reconcile God's knowledge and decrees with freedom, he might fall into the error
of those who do not believe that men are free. For, on the one hand unable to
conceive how the Divine Providence can subsist with human freedom, and on the
other hand prohibited by his respect for religion from denying Providence, he
will feel compelled to strip man of his freedom. Failing to reflect sufficiently on
his mind's weakness, he will fancy himself capable of penetrating the means God
has for reconciling His decrees with our freedom.
But heretics are not the only ones who lack attention in considering their
mind's weakness and who allow their mind too much freedom in judging things
not under its jurisdiction -practically all men have this fault especially certain
theologians in recent times. For it might be said that some of them 50 often
employ human arguments to prove or explain mysteries beyond reason (though
they may do 50 with good intent and to defend religion against heretics) that they
often give occasion to these same heretics to cling obstinately to their errors
while treating the mysteries of faith as human opinions.
Agitation of mind and the subtleties of the School are not conducive to making
men aware of their weakness or to instilling in them the spirit of submission so
necessary for accepting the Church's decisions with humility. Rather, all these
subtle, human arguments can rouse in them their secret pride; they lead them to
misuse their mind by framing a religion suitable to its capability. Furthermore,
"Tilt! An of Thinlr.ing (pc. 4, ch. 1).

206

Nicolas Malebranche

we never see heretics either yielding to philosophical arguments or realizing and
condemning their errors as a result of reading purely Scholastic books. On the
contrary, we see them daily seize upon the weakness of certain Scholastics'
arguments to ridicule the most sacred mysteries of our religion, which in fact is
established not on these human arguments and explanations but solely on the
authority of the word of God, written or unwrinen, i.e., wrinen or carried down
to us by tradition.
Indeed, human reason does not inform us that there are three persons in one
God, that the body of Jesus Christ is really in the Eucharist, or how it is that man
may be free but God knows from all eternity what he will do. The reasons
adduced to prove or explain these things ordinarily do so only for those willing to
admit them without examination, but often seem foolish to those who are willing
to resist them and who are not in fundamental agreement with those mysteries. It
might be said, rather, that the objections raised against the main articles of our
faith, especially against the mystery of the Trinity, are so strong that they cannot
be given solutions that are clear and convincing and that do not in any way shock
our feeble reason, for these mysteries are indeed incomprehensible.
The best way of converting heretics, then, is not to accustom them to using
their minds by supplying them only with unsound arguments drawn from philosophy, because the truths in which we wish to instruct them are not under the
jurisdiction of reason. It is not even always proper to use these arguments with
truths that can be proved by both reason and tradition (such as the immortality of
the soul, original sin, the necessity of grace, the corruption of nature, and several
others) for fear that their mind, having once tasted the evidence of arguments in
these questions, would be unwilling to submit to those that can be proved only
from tradition. Rather, they should be made to distrust their own mind by having
its weakness, limitation, and disproportion with our mysteries made plain to
them; and when their mind's pride has been conquered, it will then be easier to
introduce them into the views of the church by putting it to them that infallibility
is included in the idea of every divine society8 and by explaining to them, if they
are capable of it, the tradition of the ages.
But if men continually disregard the weakness and limitation of their mind,
their courage will be swelled by an indiscrete presumption, they will be dazzled
by a false light, and love of glory will blind them. Thus, heretics will always be
heretics, and philosophers unyielding and perverse; and dispute about all things
disputable will continue as long as dispute is found pleasing.

"See the thineenth of the Dialogun on M<'taphy.tic.t and

R~ligio11.

BOOK THREE: PART ONE

Chapter Three

t

I. Philosophers dissipate the mind by applying it to subjects that contain too
many relations and that depend on too many things without following any order
in their studies. II. An example drawn from Aristotle. /11. That geometers, on the
other hand, proceed properly in the search after truth, particularly those who
make use of algebra and analysis. IV. That their method increases the mind's
strength, whereas Aristotle's logic diminishes it. V. Another defect of learned
men.
I. That philosophers lack order in their studies.
Men fall into a great number of errors not only because they concern their fmite
minds with questions involving the infinite but also because they concern their
minds, which have little scope, with questions whose scope is quite vast.
We have already said that as a piece of wax is incapable of simultaneously
receiving several perfect and distinct figures, so the mind is incapable of receiving several distinct ideas, i.e., it is incapable of perceiving several things very
clearly at the same time. From this it is easy 10 conclude that attention should not
fust be given 10 the search after hidden truths the knowledge of which involves
the knowledge of too many things, some of which are not known at all or are not
familiar enough to us; for study should proceed in an orderly fashion by employing what is known distinctly in order to apprehend what is not known at all or
only confusedly. Yet the greater part of those engaged in study do not proceed in
this way at all. They never determine their own strength or consider the range of
their mind. A secret vanity and an inordinate desire for knowledge-not
reason -reigns over their studies. Without consulting reason, they undertake the
discovery of the most hidden and impenetrable truths as well as the resolution of
questions that depend on so many relations that the quickest and most penetrating
minds were able to discover their truth only after many centuries and an almost
infmite number of experiments.
In medicine and in morals there are a great number of questions of this sort.
All the sciences dealing in detail with bodies such as animals, plants, metals, and
their qualities, are sciences that can never be sufficiently clear or certain-

207

Nicolas Malebranche

208

particularly if we cultivate them only as we have until now and if we do not begin
with the simplest and least complex sciences on which they depend. But learned
men are unwilling to take pains about orderly philosophizing -they do not agree
about the certainty of the principles of physics, they themselves agree that they
are ignorant of the nature both of body in general and of its qualities. Yet they
fancy themselves able to explain why, for example, the hair of old people turns
white and their teeth black, and other such questions depending on so many
causes that no certain explanation of them can be given. For that it is necessary to
know what the whiteness of each hair consists in, the humon on which it feeds,
the body's filten through which these humon pass, the structure of the hair's
roots or the skin through which they pass, and the difference in all these things
between an old man and a young man -all of which is absolutely impossible, or
at least very difficult, to know.

II. An example of the lack of order in Aristotle.
Aristotle pretended, for example, not to be ignorant of the cause of whiteness
in the hair of old people; he gave several explanations of it at various places in his
worlts. But as a genius in natural things, he did not rest content with that; he went
further. He discovered that the cause which made old people's hair white was the
same cause that made some people, and even some horses, have one eye blue and
the other of another color. Here are his own words: 'ETep<)yAavKot 8e IJ.aAwTa
yii'OI'TQt ICai. OL Oti'IJPfiJ11'0t ICai. oi. i11'11'0t 8ta njl' cWnjl' QtTial' 8i. T,111rt:p 0
IJ.il' owflpw1r0<; poAwiiTat p.Ovov. a This is rather surprising, but then nothing
was hidden from that great man. In practically all his worlts on physics, he
accounted for so many things the most enlightened among us find impenetrable
that it is truly said of him that he was given to us by God that we be ignorant of
nothing that can be known. "Aristotelis doctrina est SUMMA VERITAS, quoniam
ejus intellectus fuit finis humani intellectus. Quare bene dicitur de illo, quod ipse
fuit creatus & datus nobis divina providentia, ut non ignoremus possibilia sciri."
Avenues should even have said that Divine Providence has given us Aristotle to
teach us what cannot be known. For truly, this philosopher teaches us not only
things that can be known but also things that cannot be known, since he must be
taken at his WOrd and his doctrine is the SUMMA VERITAS, the SOVEREIGN TRUTH.
Certainly faith is needed to believe Aristotle in this way when he only gives us
reasons from logic, and when he explains natural effects only with the confused
notions of the senses, especially when he boldly decides on questions we do not
see as within man's ability ever to resolve. Aristotle himself warns therefore that
he should not be believed on his word alone; it is an incontrovertible axiom with
this author that the disciple is to believe 8ei 1rWTevew ro11 IJ.al'fJai'OI'Ta.
Disciples are indeed sometimes obliged to believe their master, but their faith
need extend only to facts and matten of experience. For if they really want to
become philosophen, they must examine their master's explanations and not
accept them until they have seen the clarity of them with their own light. But to
"De gt'n. an. bk. S. ch. I.

209

The Search after Truth

be a Peripatetic philosopher, only belief and memory are required; this philosophy should be read with the same attitude of mind with which one reads history.
For if one takes the liberty of using one's mind and reason, one should not hope
to become a great philosopher; 8ei -yap 1T&O'Teve"' ro11 p.avfJa11011Ta.
But the reason why Aristotle as well as a great number of other philosophers
have pretended to know what can never be known is that they have not clearly
understood the difference between kinds of knowing, between having certain
knowledge and having only probability. And the reason why they have not made
this distinction is that with the subjects of their attention always being of greater
scope than their minds, they have generally seen only part of their subjects
without being able to embrace the whole. This suffices for discovering a few
probabilities, but not for discovering the truth with evidence. Besides which,
since they seek after science only because of vanity, and since probabilities
(because they are more suited to the scope of ordinary minds) are better adapted
thm truth itself to winning the esteem of men, they have neglected to seek the
means necessary to increase the mind's capacity and extend its present scope. As
a result, they have been unable to get to the bonom of truths that are at all hidden.

Ill. Geometers proceed properly in the search after truth.
Only geometers have recognized the limited scope of the mind -at least they
conduct their studies in such fashion as to indicate they comprehend it
perfectly-especially those who avail themselves of the algebra and analysis
revived and perfected by Viete and Descartes in this century. This is apparent
from their never trying to resolve very complex and difficult things until the
simpler matters on which they depend have been clearly known. They do not
begin to consider curved lines, such as conic sections, until they have mastered
simple geometry. But the unique thing about the practitioners of analysis is that
because they see their mind incapable of attending to several figures simultaneously, or even of imagining solids having more than three dimensions (though it
is often necessary to conceive them as having many more dimensions), they avail
themselves of ordinary letters, which are perfectly familiar to us, in order to
express and simplify their ideas. With the mind neither hampered nor occupied
with having to represent a great many figures and an infinite number of lines, it
em thus perceive at a single glance what it could not otherwise see, because the
mind can penetrate further and embrBCe more things when its capacity is used
economically.

IV. The method of geometers increases the mind's capacity,
whereas Aristotle's diminishes it.
As a result of this, the whole art of making the mind more extensive and more
penetrating consists, as we shall explain elsewhere,• in using its powers and its
capacity sparingly, and not using it inappropriately on matters unnecessary for
the discovery of the truth it is seeking-and this is a point that should be well
•Book 6, in the first

part

on melhod.

Nicolas Malebranche

210

noted. This alone shows that the ordinary sons of logic are more suited for
diminishing rather than increasing the mind's capacity. because clearly. if in the
search after a given truth one wishes to use the rules these logics give us, the
mind's capacity will be so divided up that it will have less capacity for carefully
understanding the full extent of the subject under examination.
From what has just been said, it seems clear enough that most men have hardly
reflected at all about the nature of the mind when they have tried to employ it in
the search after truth. They have never been thoroughly convinced of its limited
scope and of the necessity of using it economically and even of increasing it. This
is one of the greatest causes of their errors and of the fact that they have such poor
success in their studies.
I do not maintain however, that there have been people ignorant of the fact that
their mind was limited, and that it had little scope and capacity. Undoubtedly,
everyone has known this and everyone admits it, but most people know it only in
a confused way and acknowledge it only verbally. The conduct of their studies
belies their own confession, since they act as if they really believe the mind has
no limits, and they wish to delve into things depending on a great number of
causes, none of which usually is known to them.
V. Another defect of learned men.
There is still another defect found frequently enough among learned men, viz,
that they apply themselves to too many sciences at the same time, and if they
study six hours daily, they sometimes study six different things. This fault clearly
proceeds from the same cause as the others just discussed, for it is highly
probable that if they who studied in this fashion only knew clearly that their
method is not suited to their mind's capacity and is more conducive to filling it
with confusion and error than with true science, they would not give in to the
inordinate impulses of their passions and vanity. Indeed, this is not the way to
satisfy vanity, for it is precisely the way to know nothing.

BOOK THREE: PART ONE
Chapter Four

t

I. The mind cannot long dwell on objects that hal't! no relation to it, or that do
not in some way im"Oil•e the infinite. II. Inconstancy of will is the cause of this
laclc of attention and, consequently, of error. Ill. We are occupied more with
our sensations than with the mind's pure ideas. IV. From this S/Jrings tire
corruption of morals. V. As well as the ignorance of the ordinary man.
<J. The mind cannot long dwell on objects that have no relation to it,
or that do not in some way involve the infinite. >
The mind of man is liable to error not only because it is not infinite and has less
scope than the objects it considers, as we have just explained in the two preceding chapters, but also because it is inconstant, lacks resoluteness in its action, and
cannot keep its perception fixed on a subject long enough to examine it completely.
To understand the cause of this inconstancy and weakness on the part of the
human mind, it should be noted that the will directs its action, thai the will
applies it to the objects it loves, and that the will itself is continually anxious and
inconstant. The cause of this is as follows.
It cannot be doubted that God is the author of all things. thai He created them
for Himself, and thai through an invincible natural impression that He continuously impresses in it, He inclines the heart of man toward Himself. God cannot
will that there be a will that does not love Him or that loves Him less than some
other good (if there could be any other good), because He cannot will that a will
not love what is supremely worthy of love or love what is less worthy of love.
Thus, natural love necessarily leads us toward God, since it comes from God and
nothing can arrest its impulse but God Himself who impresses it. There is, then,
no will that can fail to follow the impulse of this love. The just, the impious, the
blessed, and the damned all love God with this love. Given that this natural love
we have for God is the same thing as our natural inclination toward the good in
general, toward the infinite good. toward the sovereign good, it is clear that all
minds love God with this love because only He is the universal good, the infinite
good, the sovereign good. For. ultimately, all minds. and even demons, fer211

212

Nicolas Mal~branch~

vently desire to be happy and to possess the sovereign good, and they desire it
without choice, deliberation, or freedom, but by the necessity of their nature.
Since we are made for God, then, for an infinite good, for a good that includes all
goods within itself, the natural impulse of our heart will cease only with the
possession of this good.

II. Inconstancy of will is the cause of th~ mind's lack of attention
and, consequently, of error.
Thus, with the will always parched by a burning thirst, always driven by
anxieties and desires for the good it does not possess, it cannot comfortably allow
the mind to dwell for any time over abstract truths that do not affect it and that it
judges incapable of making it happy. Thus, it continuously urges the mind to
consider other objects, and when in the course of being driven by the will the
mind encounters an object bearing the mark of goodness, i.e., an object whose
presence makes the soul feel a calm interior satisfaction, the heart's thirst is then
renewed, these desires and longings are rekindled, and the mind, required to
obey them, attends only to the object causing them, or appearing to cause them,
in order to bring it near the soul. which then tastes and feeds on it for awhile. But
since the emptiness of created things cannot fill the infmite capacity of man's
heart, these trifling pleasures, instead of quenching its thirst, only aggravate it
and give the soul the vain and foolish hope of being satisfied by the multiplicity
of terrestrial pleasures. This leads to a further inconstancy and inconceivable
weakness on the part of the mind whose duty it is to find these goods for the soul.
It is true that when by chance the mind encounters an object involving the
infmite, or containing something of great magnitude, its inconstancy and agitation temporarily cease. For, realizing that the object bears the mark of what is
desired by the soul, it pauses and attends to it for awhile. But this attachment, or
rather, obstinancy on the part of the mind in examining objects that are infinite or
too vast, does it no more good than the weakness with which it considers objects
suited to its capacity. The mind is too weak to complete such a difficult undertaking, and only in vain does it try to do so. What must make the soul happy is not,
as it were, the comprehension of an infinite object-of this it is incapable-but
the love and possession of an infinite good, which the will is capable of through
the impulse of love continually impressed on it by God.
Given all this, men's ignorance and blindness should not be surprising-since
their mind, subjected to the inconstancy and weakness of their heart, which make
it incapable of seriously considering anything. can penetrate nothing involving
any significant difficulty. For, in a word, the mind's attention stands to its
objects as the eyes' steady gaze stands to the objects of vision. And just as a man
incapable of fixing his eyes on the bodies surrounding him cannot see them
clearly enough to distinguish the differences in their tiniest particles, or to recognize all the relations these particles have among themselves-so a man incapable
of fixing his mind's perception on the things he wishes to know cannot know
them well enough to distinguish their parts or to know all the relations they can
have among themselves or with other subjects.

The Search after Truth

213

Yet it is certain that all knowledge consists only in the clear perception of the
relations objects have with each other. Consequently, when it happens. as in
difficult questions, that the mind must see at a glance a great many relations
between two or more objects, it is clear that if it has not carefully considered
them and if it knows them only confusedly, it will be unable to perceive their
relations distinctly, and, as a result, will be unable to form a well-founded
judgment about them.

Ill. We are occupied more with our sensations than with the mind's
pure ideas.
One of the main causes of our mind's lack of application to abstract truths is
that we view them as remote, whereas things much closer to the mind are
constantly being presented to it. The mind's close attention, as it were, brings the
ideas of objects it is attending to much closer, but it often happens that when one
is intent upon metaphysical speculations, one is distracted from them because
some sensation crops up in the soul that is, as it were, still closer to it than its
ideas. All that is needed for this is a bit of pain or pleasure, since pleasure and
pain, and generally all sensations, are within the soul itself-they modify and
affect it more than do the simple ideas of pure intellection, which, though present
to the mind, do not modify or affect it sensibly. Thus. given that the mind on the
one hand is of limited scope and on the other is unable to avoid feeling pain and
its other sensations, its entire capacity is taken up by them. It cannot simultaneously sense something and freely think about other objects that cannot be sensed.
The buzzing of a fly, or some other slight noise -given that it is communicated
to the main part of the brain so that the soul may perceive it-in spite of our
resistance is capable of preventing us from thinking about the loftiest abstract
truths, because no abstract idea modifies the soul as sensations do.

IV. This is tire source of tire corruption of morals.
This is the cause of the mind's stupidity and lethargy with regard to the
greatest truths of Christian morality, as well as of the fact that without the grace
of Jesus Christ, men know them only in a vague and useless way. Everyone
knows that there is a God who must be served and adored, but who serves and
adores Him without that grace which alone makes us relish and enjoy these
duties? There are very few people who do not perceive the emptiness and unreliability of terrestrial goods, and who are not convinced (in the abstract, though
very clearly and certainly) that they do not deserve our attention and care. But
where are those who despise these goods in practice, and who spare the attention
and worry to acquire them? Only they who feel some distaste or bitterness in their
enjoyment, or whom grace has made receptive to spiritual goods through an
interior delight that God attaches to them, only they conquer the impressions of
sense and the urges of concupiscence. The mind's perception by itself is never
enough to make us resist the urges of concupiscence as we should; besides
perception, a sentiment of the heart is required. This illumination of the mind by
itself is, if you will, a grace sufficient only for condemning us, for making us

Nicolas Malebranche

214

aware of our weakness and of our need for appealing through prayer to Him who
is our strength. But this sentiment of the heart is a living, functioning grace. It
affects us, fills us, and inclines our heart; and without it, no one [can) ponder
with the heart: Nemo est qui recogitet corde. The most certain truths of morality
rest hidden in the folds and recesses of the mind, and they are sterile and
impotent as long as they remain there, since the soul fails to notice them. But
sense pleasures are much closer to the soul, and given that the soul cannot fail to
sense, and even to love pleasure,a it cannot through its own means withdraw
from the earth and rid itself of the charms and illusions of its senses.
I do not deny, however, that the righteous, whose heart has already been
inclined toward God by a prevenient delight, can perform meritorious actions or
resist the urges of concupiscence without this particular grace. b There are those
who endure in God's Law through the strength of their faith, through the care
they take in abstaining from sensible things, and through their contempt and
disgust for all that might tempt them. There are those who act almost always
without enjoying this involuntary and prevenient pleasure of which I speak. The
joy they find in acting in accordance with God is the sole pleasure they enjoy,
and this pleasure is enough to keep them in their present state and to confirm the
disposition of their heart. As they love God and the Holy Law, they ponder them
with great joy (for one always thinks with great pleasure about things one loves,
or what amounts to the same thing, one relinquishes them only reluctantly), and
that alone enables the righteous to overcome at least the smaller temptations. But
those who are beginning their conversion have need of this involuntary and
prevenient pleasure in order to abstain from sensible goods, to which they are
attracted by other such pleasures; the grief and remorse of their conscience are
not enough, and they do not yet have any joy. The just, however, are able to live
by faith in trying circumstances. In this state they are even more meritorious,
because given that men are rational, God wills to be loved by them with a freely
chosen love rather than with an instinctive, unwilled love like that with which
sensible goods are loved, i.e., without their being known as good except through
the pleasure they give. Yet most men, being of little faith and continually finding
themselves in a position to enjoy these pleasures, cannot long preserve their
voluntary Jove for God against their natural Jove of sensible goods unless the
delight of grace supports them against the urges of sensual delight-for the
delight of grace induces, preserves, and increases charity. as sensible pleasures
do cupidity.

V. And men· s ignorallet'.
It should be clear from what has been said above, that the capacity and scope
of man's mind is very much taken up with the passions and sensations (agreeable
or vexing) it always has, and that when man wishes to use the rest of its capacity
to examine some truth, he is often distracted from doing so by new sensations, by
•1.e .. wilh a nalural love. for we cannol dislike pleasure wirh a chosen or elecred hatred.
"Because a freely cho.en lo•·e cannol long exisr wirhour conforming 10 na1ur4l love.

The Search after Truth

215

the distastefulness of this enterprise, and by the inconstancy of the will, which
disturbs the mind and unceasingly leads it from one object to another. As a result
of this, if the habit of conquering these obstacles is not acquired at an early age
(as has been explained in the second pan), you will find yourself incapable of
understanding anything at all difficult or requiring any attention.
From this it must be concluded that all the sciences, and panicularly those
involving difficult questions, are filled with an infinite number of errors, and that
our suspicion should fall upon those thick volumes being written every day on
medicine, physics, and morals, and especially on the particular questions in these
sciences, which are much more complex than the more general questions. Indeed, these books ought to be scorned to the extent that they are well received by
the common man, i.e., by those who can concentrate but little and do not know
how to use their mind, because people's applause for an opinion on a difficult
matter is an infallible sign that the opinion is false and is based on the deceptive
ideas of the senses or on illusions of the imagination.
Yet it is not impossible for a single man to discover a great many truths that lay
hidden to past centuries-given that this person is of sound mind, and that alone
and as far away as possible from anything that might distract him. he applies
himself diligently to the search after truth. This is why people are not very
reasonable when they scorn Descanes's philosophy without knowing it, and for
the single reason that it seems impossible that one man should have found the
truth about things so hidden as those of nature. But if they knew the way this
philosopher lived, the means he used in his studies in order to prevent his mind's
capacity from being divided up by objects other than those about which he
wanted to discover the truth, the clarity of the ideas on which he founded his
philosophy. and generally all the advantages he had over the ancients through
new discoveries, they would thereby acquire a prejudice on his behalf stronger
and more reasonable than that of antiquity. which endorses Aristotle, Plato, and
several others.
Nevenheless, I would not advise them to remain in this prejudice, believing
that Descanes was a great man whose philosophy is good on account of the
favorable things that can be said about him. Descanes was a man among men,
and like men, subject to error and illusion; there is not a one of his works,
including even his Geometry, that does not bear the mark of the human mind's
weakness. He should not be believed on his word. then, but should be read as he
himself warns us-with great care, examining whether he has not made a mistake, and believing nothing he says until obliged to do so by evidence and the
secret reproaches of our reason. For, in a word, the mind truly knows only what
it sees with evidence.
In the preceding chapters we showed that our mind is not infinite, rather, that it
has an unimpressive capacity, that this capacity is usually filled by the soul's
sensations, and finally, that the mind, being directed by the will, cannot fix its
pen:eption on an object without soon being distracted from it by its own inconstancy and weakness. These things are unquestionably the most general causes of
our errors, and we might pause here further to view them in detail. But what has

216

Nicolas Malebranche

been said is enough to show those capable of a little attention the weakness of the
mind of the man. In the fourth and fifth books, the errors caused by our natural
inclinations and passions (of which we have already just said something in this
chapter) will be discussed at greater length.

BOOK THREE
PART Two: THE PURE UNDERSTANDING.
THE NATURE OF IDEAS

Chapter One

t
I. What is meant by ideas. That they really exist and are necessary in order to
perceive any material object. II. A classification of all the ways external objects
can be seen.
<1. What is meant by ideas. >

I think everyone agrees that we do not perceive objects extemaliO us by themselves. We see the sun, the stars, and an infmity of objects extemaliO us; and it is
not likely that the soul should leave the body 10 stroll about the heavens, as it
were, in order 10 behold all these objects. Thus, it does not see them by themselves, and our mind's immediate object when it sees the sun, for example, is not
the sun, but something that is intimately joined 10 our soul, and this is what I call
an idea. Thus, by the word idea, I mean here nothing other than the immediate
object, or the object closest 10 the mind, when it perceives something, i.e., that
which affects and modifies the mind with the perception it has of an object.
It should be carefully noted that for the mind 10 perceive an object, it is
absolutely necessary for the idea of that object 10 be actually presentiO it-and
about this there can be no doubt; but there need not be any external thing like that
idea. For it often happens that we perceive things that do not exist, and that even
have never existed-thus our mind often has real ideas of things that have never
existed. When, for example, a man imagines a golden mountain, it is absolutely
necessary that the idea of this mountain really be presentiO his mind. When a
madman or someone asleep or in a high fever sees some animal before his eyes, it
is certain that what he sees is not nothing, and that therefore the idea of this
animal really does exist, though the golden mountain and the animal have never
existed.
Yet given that men are naturally led, as it were, 10 believe that only corporeal
objects exist, they judge of the reality and existence of things other than as they
should. For as soon as they perceive an object, they would have it as quite certain
that it exists, although it often happens that there is nothing external. In addition,
they would have the object be exactly as they see it, which never happens. But as
for the idea that necessarily exists, and that cannot be other than as it is seen, they
217

218

Nicolas

Mal~branch~

ordinarily judge unreflectingly that it is nothing-as if ideas did not have a great
number of properties, as if the idea of a square, for example, were not different
from that of a circle or a number, and did not represent completely different
things, which can never be the case for nonbeing, since nonbeing has no properties. It is therefore indubitable that ideas have a very real existence. But now let
us examine their nature and essence, and let us see what there can be in the soul
that might represent all things to it.
Everything the soul perceives belongs to either one of two sorts: either it is in
the soul, or outside the soul. The things that are in the soul are its own thoughts,
i.e., all its various modifications-for by the words thought, mode of thinking,
or modification of tire soul, I generally understand all those things that cannot be
in the soul without the soul being aware of them through the inner sensation it has
of itself-such as its sensations, imaginings, pure intellections, or simply conceptions, as well as its passions and natural inclinations. Now, our soul has no
need of ideas in order to perceive these things in the way it does, because these
things are in the soul, or rather because they are but the soul itself existing in this
or that way -just as the actual roundness and motion of a body are but that body
shaped and moved in this or that way.
But as for things outside the soul, we can perceive them only by means of
ideas, given that these things cannot be intimately joined to the soul. Of these,
there are two sorts: spiritual and material. As for the spiritual, there is reason to
believe they can be revealed to the soul by themselves and without ideas. For
although experience teaches us that we cannot communicate our thoughts to one
another immediately and by ourselves, but only through speech or some other
sensible sign to which we have attached our ideas, still it might be said that God
has established this state of affairs only for the duration of this life in order to
prevent the disorder that would now prevail if men could communicate as they
pleased. But when order and justice reign, and we are delivered from the captivity of our body, we shall perhaps be able to communicate through the intimate
union among ourselves, as the angels seem to be able to do in heaven. Accordingly, it does not seem to be absolutely necessary to have ideas in order to
represent spiritual things to the soul, because they might be seen through themselves, though in imperfect fashion.
I shall not inquire a here how two minds can be united, or whether they can in
this way re1·eal their thoughts to each other. I beliel't', howe1·er, that the only
purely intelligible substance is God's. that nothing can be re1·ealed with clarity
e:ccept in tire light of this substance, and that a 1mion of minds cannot make them
1·isible to each other. For although we may be closely joined together. we are
and shall be unimel/igible to ead1 other umil we see each other in God, and umil
He presenu us with the perfectly intelligible idea He has of our being contained
in His being. Thus, although I may .~eem to allow that angels can by themse/1-es
show to each other both what they are and what they are thinking (which I really
do not belie1·e ), I warn that it is only because I ha1·e 110 desire to dispute the
"This paragraph is italicized because you may omil il as being 100 diflicull 10 underSiand unless
you know my views aboul lhe soul and lhe nalun: of ideas.

The Search after Truth

219

point-provided that you grant me what cannot be displlled, to wit, that you
cannot see material things by themsel,·es and without ideas.
In the seventh chapter I shall explain my view on how we know minds, and I
shall show that for the moment we cannpt know them entirely by themselves,
although they might be capable of union with us. But here I am speaking mainly
about material things, which certainly cannot be joined to our soul in the way
necessary for it to perceive them, because with them extended and the soul
unextended, there is no relation between them. Besides which, our souls do not
leave the body to measure the heavens, and as a result, they can see bodies
outside only through the ideas representing them. In this everyone must agree.

II. A classification of all the ways external objects can be sun.
We assert the absolute necessity, then, of the following: either(a) the ideas we
have of bodies and of all other objects we do not perceive by themselves come
from these bodies or objects; or (b) our soul has the power of producing these
ideas; or (c) God has produced them in us while creating the soul or produces them
every time we think about a given object; or (d) the soul has in itself all the perfections it sees in bodies; or else (e) the soul is joined to a completely perfect being
that contains aU intelligible perfections, or all the ideas of created beings.
We can know objects in only one of these ways. Let us examine, without
prejudice, and without fear of the difficulty of the question, which is the likeliest
way. Perhaps we can resolve the question with some clarity though we do not
pretend to give demonstrations that will seem incontrovertible to everyone;
rather, we merely give proofs that will seem very persuasive 10 those who
consider them carefully, for one would appear presumptuous were one to speak
otherwise.

BOOK THREE: PART TWO
Chapter Two

That material objects do not transmit species resembling them.
The most commonly held opinion is that of the Peripatetics, who hold that
external objects transmit species that resemble them, and that these species are
carried to the common sense by the external senses. They call these species
impressed, because objects impress them on the external senses. These impressed species, being material and sensible, are made intelligible by the agent,
or acti1•e intellect, and can then be received in the passh·e intellect. These
species, thus spiritualized, are called expressed species, because they are expressed from the impressed species, and through them the passive intellect knows
material things.
We shall not pause here to further investigate these lovely things and the
different ways different philosophers conceive of them. For although they disagree about the number of faculties they attribute to the interior sense and to the
understanding, and although there are many of them who doubt whether an agent
intellect is needed in order to know sensible objects, still they practically all
agree that external objects transmit species or images that resemble them, and
with only this as their basis, they multiply their faculties and defend their agent
intellect. As this basis has no solidity, as will be shown, it is not necessary to
pause further in order to overthrow everything that has been built upon it.
We assert, then, that it is unlikely that objects transmit images, or species, that
resemble them, and here are some reasons why. The first is drawn from the
impenetrability of bodies. All objects (such as the sun, the stars. as well as those
closer to our eyes) are unable to transmit species of a nature other than their own.
This is why philosophers commonly say that these species are gross and material
as opposed to the expressed species, which are spiritualized. These impressed
species are therefore little bodies. They therefore cannot penetrate each other or
the whole of the space between the earth and the heavens, which must be full of
them. From this it is easy to conclude that they must run against and batter each
other from all directions, and that hence they cannot make objects visible.
Furthermore, a great number of objects located in the sky and on earth can be
seen from the same place or the same point; the species of all these objects would

220

The Search after Truth

221

then have to be capable of being reduced to a point. Now since they are extended
they are impenetrable; therefore, ... and so on.
But not only can a great number of very large objects be seen from the same
point; there is no point in the universe's vast stretches from which an almost
infinite number of objects cannot be discovered, and even objects as large as the
sun, moon, and heavens. In the entire world there is no point" where the species
of all these things ought not meet-which is contrary to all indications of the
truth.
The second reason is based on the change that occurs in the species. It is
certain that the closer an object is, the larger its species must be, since we see the
object as larger. Now, I do not see what can make this species diminish or what
can become of the parts composing it when it was larger. But what is even harder
to understand on their view is how, if we look at this object with magnifying
glasses or a microscope, the species suddenly becomes five or six hundred times
larger than it was before, for still less do we see with what parts it can so greatly
increase its size in an instant.
The third reason is that when we look at a perfect cube, all the species of its
sides are unequal, and yet we see all its sides as equally square. And likewise
when we look at a picture of ovals and parallelograms, which can transmit only
species of the same shape, we see in it only circles and squares. This clearly
shows that the object we are looking at need not produce species that resemble it
in order for us to see it.
Finally, it is inconceivable how a body that does not sensibly diminish could
continually emit species in all directions, or how it could continually fill the vast
spaces around it with them-and all this with inconceivable speed. For a hidden
object can be seen at the very moment of its discovery from several million
leagues away and from every direction. And, what seems stranger still, very
active bodies, such as air and a few others, lack the force to emit images
resembling them-as coarser and less active bodies, such as earth, stones, and
almost all hard bodies do.
But I do not wish to linger to adduce all the reasons oppose4 to this view, since
it would be an endless task and the least mental effort will yieid an inexhaustible
number of them. Those we have just given are enough, and even they are not
necessary after what was said about this subject in the first book, where the errors
of the senses were explained. But so many philosophers hold this view that I
thought it necessary to say something about it in order to provoke them to reflect
on their thoughts.

"To see how the impessions of visible obja:IS, however opposed, can be communicated without
beins diminished, read the las! two Eludic:alions found 11 the end of this wort.

BOOK THREE: PART TWO
Chapter Three

t

That the soul does not ha1·e the power to produce ideas. The cause of our error in
this matter.

The second view belongs to those who believe that our souls have the power of
producing the ideas of the things they wish to think about, and that our souls are
moved to produce them by the impressions that objects make on the body. though
these impressions are not images resembling the objects causing them. According to them, it is in this that man is made after the image of God and shares in His
power. Further, just as God created all things from nothing, and can annihilate
them and create new things in their place, so man can create and annihilate ideas
of anything he pleases. But there is good reason to distrust all these views that
elevate man. These are generally thoughts that come from his pride and vanity.
and not from the Father of lights.
This share in God's power that men boast of for representing objects to
themselves and for several other particular actions is a share that seems to involve
a certain independence (as it is generally explained). But it is also an illusory
share, which men's ignorance and vanity makes them imagine. Their dependence
upon the power and goodness of God is much greater than they think, but this is
not the place to explain the matter. Let us try only to show that men do not have
the power to form ideas of the things they perceive.
Since ideas have real properties, no one can doubt that they are real beings, or
that they differ from one another, and that they represent altogether different
things. Nor can it be reasonably doubted that they are spiritual and are very
different from the bodies they represent. This seems to raise a doubt whether the
ideas by means of which bodies are seen are not more noble than the bodies
themselves. Indeed, the intelligible world must be more perfect than the material,
terrestrial world. as we shall see in what follows. Thus, when it is claimed that
men have the power to form such ideas as please them, one runs the risk of
claiming that men have the power of creating beings worthier and more perfect
than the world God has created. Yet this is never thought about, because an idea
is fancied to be nothing since it cannot be sensed-or if it is considered as a

222

The Search after Truth

223

being, it is only as a meager and insignificant being, because it is thought to be
annihilated as soon as it is no longer present to the mind.
But even if it were true that ideas were only lesser and insignificant beings,
still they are beings, and spiritual beings at that, and given that men do not have
the power of creation, it follows that they are unable to produce them. For the
production of ideas in the way they explain it is a true creation, and although they
may tl}' to palliate the temerity and soften the harshness of this view by saying
that the production of ideas presupposes something whereas creation presupposes
nothing, still they have not resolved the fundamental difficulty.
For it ought to be carefully noted that it is no more difficult to produce
something from nothing than to produce it by positing another thing from which
it cllllJI()t be made and which can contribute nothing to its production. For
exaiiiple, it is no more difficult to create an angel than to produce it from a stone,
because given that a stone is of a totally contrary kind of being, it can contribute
nothing to the production of an angel. But it can contribute to the production of
bread, of gold, and such, because stone, gold, and bread are but the same
extension differently configured, and they are all material things.
It is even more difficult to produce an angel from a stone than to produce it
from nothing, because to make an angel from a stone (insofar as it can be done),
the stone must first be annihilated and then the angel must be created, whereas
simply creating an angel does not require anything to be annihilated. If, then, the
mind produces its own ideas from the material impressions the brain receives
from objects, it continuously does the same thing, or something as difficult, or
even more difficult, as if it created them. Since ideas are spiritual, they cannot be
produced from material images in the brain, with which they are incommensurable.
But if it be said that an idea is not a substance, I would agree-but it is still a
spiritual thing, and as it is impossible to make a square out of a mind, though a
square is not a substance, so a spiritual idea cannot be formed from a material
substance, even though an idea is not a substance.
But even if the mind of man were granted a sovereign power of annihilating
and creating the ideas of things, still it would never use it to produce them. For
just as a painter, no matter how good he is at his art, cannot represent an animal
he has never seen and of which he has no idea-so that the painting he would be
required to produce could not be like this unknown animal-so a man could not
form the idea of an object unless he knew it beforehand, i.e., unless he already
had the idea of it, which idea does not depend on his will. But if he already has an
idea of it, he knows the object, and it is useless for him to form another idea of it.
It is therefore useless to attribute to the mind of man the power of producing its
ideas.
It might be said that the mind has general and confused ideas that it does not
produce, and that those of its own making are clearer, more distinct, particular
ideas. But this amounts to the same thing. For just as an artist cannot draw the
portrait of an individual in such fashion that he could be certain of having done a

224

Nicolas Malebranche

proper job unless he had a distinct idea of the individual, and indeed unless the
subject were to sit for it-so a mind that, for example, has only the idea of being
or of animal in general cannot represent a horse to itself, or form a vecy distinct
idea of it, or be sure that the idea exactly resembles a horse, unless it already has
an initial idea against which it compares the second. Now if it already has one
idea, it is useless to form a second, and therefore the question about the first
idea, . . . , and so on.
It is true that when we conceive of a square through pure intellection, we can
still imagine it, i.e., perceive it by tracing an image of it for ourselves in the
brain. But it should be noted, first, that we are neither the true nor the principal
cause of the image (but this is too long a matter to be explained here), and
second. that far from being more distinct and more accurate than the first idea,
the second idea accompanying the image is accurate only because it resembles
the first. which serves as a model [regie] for the second. For ultimately, the
imagination and the senses themselves should not be taken as representing objects to us more distinctly than does the pure understanding, but only as affecting
and moving the mind more. For the ideas of the senses and of the imagination are
distinct only to the extent that they conform to the ideas of pure intellection. a The
image of a square that the imagination traces in the brain, for example, is
accurate and well formed only to the extent that it conforms to the idea of a
square we conceive through pure intellection. It is this idea that governs the
image. II is the mind that conducts the imagination and requires it, as it were, to
consider occasionally whether the image it depicts is a figure composed of four
straight and equal lines, and exactly right-angled-in a word, whether what one
is imagining is like what one conceives.
After what has been said, I do not think anyone can doubt that those who claim
the mind can form its own ideas of objects are mistaken, since they attribute to
the mind the power of creating, and even of creating wisely and with order,
although it has no knowledge of what it does-which is inconceivable. But the
cause of their error is that men never fail to judge that a thing is the cause of a
given effect when the two are conjoined, given that the true cause of the effect is
unknown to them. This is why evecyone concludes that a moving ball which
strikes another is the true and principal cause of the motion it communicates to
the other, and that the soul's will is the true and principal cause of movement in
the arms, and other such prejudices-because it always happens that a ball
moves when struck by another, that our arms move almost every time we want
them to, and that we do not sensibly perceive what else could be the cause of
these movements.
But when an effect does not so frequently follow something not its cause, there
are ~till people who believe it to be caused by that thing, though not everyone
falls into this error. For example, a comet appears and a prince dies, stones are
•· "Tanto meliora esse judico quae oculis ccrno. quaoto pro sui natura viciniora sunt iis quae animo
iniCIIigo." Aug. Vrra rrligionc-, ch. 3. ""Quis bene sc inspicicns non Cllpcltus eSI, ramo sc aliquid
intcllnissc sinccrius, quaoto rcmovcrc atquc subduccrc intcntioncm mentis a corporis sensibus
potuit." Aug. Dr immvnalitr animaC'. ch. 10.

The SetUch after Tr11th

22S

exposed to the moon and are eaten by wonns, the sun is in conjunction with Mars
at the birth of a child and something extraordinary happens to the child. This is
enough to convince many people that the comet, the moon, and die conjunction
of the sun and Mars are the causes of the effects just noted and others like them;
and the reason why not everyone is of the same belief is that these effects are not
always observed to follow these things.
But given that all men generally have ideas of things present to the mind as
soon as they want them, and that this occurs many times daily, practically
everyone concludes that the will attending the production, or rather, the presence
of ideas is their true cause, because at the time they see nothing they can assign as
their cause, and because they believe that ideas cease to exist as soon as the mind
ceases to perceive them and begin to exist again when they are represented to the
mind. This is also why some people judge that external objects transmit images
resembling them, as we have just pointed out in the preceeding chapter. Unable
to see objects by themselves, but only through their ideas, they judge that the
object produces the idea-because as soon as it is present, they see it; as soon as
it is absent, they no longer see it; and because the presence of the object almost
always attends the idea representing it to us.
Yet if men were not so rash in their judgments, they would conclude from the
fact that the ideas of things are present to their mind as soon as they wish, only
this, that in the order of nature their will is generally necessary for them to have
these ideas, but not that the will is the true and principal cause that presents ideas
to their mind, and still less that the will produces them from nothing or in the way
they explain it. They should conclude not that objects transmit species resembling them because the soul ordinarily perceives them only when they are present,
but only that the object is ordinarily necessary for the idea to be present to the
mind. Finally, because a ball does not have the power to move itself, they should
not judge that a ball in motion is the true and principal cause ofthe movement of
the ball it finds in its path. They can judge only that the collision of the two balls
is the occasion for the Author of all motion in matter to carry out the decree of
His will, which is the universal cause of all things. He does so by communicating
to die second ball part of the motion of the first, i.e., to speak more clearly, by
willing that the latter ball should acquire as much motion in the same direction as
the former loses, forA the motor force of bodies can only be the will of Him who
preserves them, as we shall show elsewhere.

•Sec chaJ*r 3 of the ecoad

pen on Method, IIIII the ElucidatioD of lhis chaJ*r (IS).

BOOK THREE: PART TWO
Chapter Four

t

That we do not percei1·e objects by means of ideas created with 11s. That God
does n<JI prad11ce ideas in 11s eaclr time we need them.
The third view is held by those who would have it that all ideas are innate or
created with us.
To see the implausibility of this view, it should be considered that there are in
the world many totally different things of which we have ideas. But to mention
only simple figures, it is certain that their number is infinite, and even if we fix
upon only one, such as the ellipse, the mind undoubtedly conceives of an infinite
number of different kinds of them when it conceives that one of its diameters may
be infinitely lengthened while the other remains constant.
Likewise, an infinite number of different kinds of triangles can be conceived,
given that the altitude can be infinitely increased or decreased while the base
remains the same; moreover, and this is what I ask be noted here, the mind to
some extent perceives this infinite number of triangles, although we can imagine
very few of them and cannot simultaneously have particular and distinct ideas of
many triangles of different kinds. But it should be especially noted that the
mind's general idea of this infinite number of different kinds of triangles suffices
to prove that if we do not conceive of all these different triangles by means of
particular ideas, in short, if we do not comprehend the infinite, the fault does not
lie with our ideas, and that our failure to grasp the infinite is only for lack of
capacity and scope of mind. If a man were to apply himself to an investigation of
the properties of all the different kinds of triangles, and even if he should
continue his investigation forever, he would never want for further particular
ideas. But his mind would exhaust itself for no purpose.
What I have just said about triangles is applicable to figures of five, six, a
hundred, a thousand, often thousand sides, and so on to infinity. And if the sides
of a triangle can have infinite relations with each other, making an infinity of
different kinds of triangles. it is easy to see that figures of four, five, or a million
sides can have even greater differences, since they can have a greater number of
relations and combinations of their sides than can simple triangles.
The mind, then, perceives all these things; it has ideas of them; it is certain that

226

The Search after Truth

227

it will never want for ideas should it spend countless centuries investigating even
a single figure, and that if it does not perceive these figures in an instant, or if it
does not comprehend the infinite, this is only because of its very limited scope. It
has, then, an infinite number of ideas-what am I saying?-it has as many
infinite numbers of ideas as there are different figures: consequently, since there
is an infinite number of different figures, the mind must have an infinity of
infinite numbers of ideas just to know the figures.
Now, I ask whether it is likely that God created so many things along with the
mind of man. My own view is that such is not the case, especially since all this
could be done in another, much simpler and easier way, as we shall sec shortly.
For as God always acts in the simplest ways, it does not seem reasonable to
explain how we know objects by assuming the creation of an infinity of beings,
since the difficulty can be resolved in an easier and more straightforward fashion.
But even if the mind had a store of all the ideas necessary for it to perceive
objects, yet it would be impossible to explain how the soul could choose them to
represent them to itself, how, for example, the soul could make itself instantly
perceive all the different objects whose size, figure, distance and motion it
discovers when it opens its eyes in the countryside. Through this means it could
not even perceive a single object such as the sun when it is before the body's
eyes. For, since the image the sun imprints in the brain does not resemble the
idea we have of it (as we have proved elsewhere), and as the soul does not
perceive the motion the sun produces in the brain and in the fundus of the eyes, it
is inconceivable that it should be able to determine precisely which among the
infinite number of its ideas it would have to represent to itself in order to imagine
or see the sun and to see it as having a given size. It cannot be said, then, that
ideas of things are created with us, or that this suffices for us to sec the objects
surrounding us.
Nor can it be said that God constantly produces as many new ideas as there are
different things we perceive. This view is refuted well enough by what has just
been said in this chapter. Furthermore, we must at all times actually have in us
the ideas of all things. since we can at all times will to think about anythingwhich we could not do unless we had already perceived them confusedly, i.e.,
unless an infinite number of ideas were present to the mind; for after all, one
cannot will to think about objects of which one has no idea. Furthermore, it is
clear that the idea, or immediate object of our mind. when we think about
limitless space, or a circle in general, or indeterminate being, is nothing created.
For no created reality can be either infinite or even general, as is what we
perceive in these cases. But all this will be seen more clearly in what follows.

BOOK THREE: PART TWO
Chapter Five

t

That the mind sees neither the essence nor the existence of objects by considering
its own perfections. That only God sees them in this way.
The founh view is that the mind needs only itself in order to see objects, and that
by considering itself and its own perfections, it can discover all external things.
It is cenain that the soul sees in itself, and without ideas, all the sensations and
passions that affect it at the moment-pleasure, pain, cold, heat, colors, sounds,
odors, tastes, its love and hatred, its joy and sadness, and all the rest-because
none of the soul's sensations and passions represent anything resembling them
outside the soul, and are but modifications of which a mind is capable.• But the
difficulty lies in knowing whether the ideas representing something outside the
soul and resembling them to some extent (such as the ideas of the sun, of a house,
a horse, a river, etc.) are merely modifications of the soul, as a result of which
the mind would need only itself in order to represent all things external to itself.
There are some people who do not hesitate to affirm that with the soul made
for thinking, it has within itself all that it needs to perceive objects, i.e., by
considering its own perfections, because given that the soul is indeed more noble
than anything it distinctly conceives of, it can to some extent be said to contain
them eminently, as the School would put it, i.e., in a way more noble and
sublime than they are in themselves. They would have it that higher things
contain the perfections of lower things in this way. Thus, given that they are the
noblest creature they know of, these people claim to have within themselves in a
spiritual }Yay all that exists in the visible world, and to be able to modify
themselves in such fashion as to perceive all that the human mind is capable of
knowing. In a word, they would have the soul be like an intelligible world, which
contains in itself all that the material and sensible world contains, and indeed,
infmitely more.
But it seems to me rash to wish to maintain this view. Unless I am mistaken, it
is natural vanity, love of independence, and the desire to be like Him who
contains in Himself all beings that confound the mind and lead us to fancy that
"Sec Arnauld's Du vrayes et ths faus#s idies (ch. 27).

228

229

The Search after Truth

we possess what in fact we do not. "Say not that you are a light unto yourself."
says Saint Augustine,• for only God is a light unto Himself and can see all that
He has produced and might produce by considering Himself.
It cannot be doubted that only God existed before the world was created and
that He could not have produced it without knowledge or ideas; consequently. the
ideas He had of the world are not different from Himself, so that all creatures,
even the most material and terrestrial, are in God, though in a completely
spiritual way that is incomprehensible to us. h God therefore sees within Himself
all beings by considering His own perfections, which represent them to Him. He
also knows their existence perfectly. because given that they depend for their
existence on His will, and given that He cannot be ignorant of his own volitions,
it follows that He cannot be ignorant of their existence, and consequently. God
sees in Himself not only the essence of things but also their existence.
But such is not the case with created minds, which can see in themselves
neither the essence nor the existence of things. They cannot see the essence of
things within themselves since, given their own limitations, created minds cannot
contain all beings as does God, who might be termed universal being, or simply,
He Who is," as He calls Himself. Therefore, since the human mind can know all
beings, including infinite beings, and since it does not contain them, we have a
sure proof that it does not see their essence in itself. For the mind not only sees
things one after another in temporal succession, but it also perceives the infinite,
though it does not comprehend it, as we have said in the preceding chapter.
Consequently, being neither actually infinite nor capable of infinite modifications simultaneously, it is absolutely impossible for the mind to see in itself what
is not there. It does not see the essence of things, therefore, by considering its
own perfections or by modifying itself in different ways.
Nor does it see their existence in itself, because they do not depend for their
existence upon its will, and because the ideas of things can be present to the mind
though the things themselves might not exist. For everyone can have the idea of a
golden mountain without there being a golden mountain in nature, and although
one may rely on the reports of the senses to judge the existence of objects,
nevertheless reason does not assure us that we should always believe our senses,
since we clearly detect that they deceive us. When a man's blood is heated, for
example, or simply when he is asleep, he sometimes sees country scenes, battles,
and other such things before his eyes that are not present nor perhaps ever were.
Undoubtedly, then, it is not in itself or through itself that the mind sees the
existence of things, but rather it depends on something else for this.

u

"See the Reponst! au v~s cl ala fawses ide,:s, .t die Reponst! liM 3, urrrr d' M. Arnauld.
in the founh volume of my Rrpli':s. "'Die: quia au tibi lwnen non es ... Senn. 8, D' '"rbi:s Domini.
b•'Cum essentia Dei habeal in se quidquid perfa:tionis habet essenlia c:ujusque ~i alrerius, .t
adhuc 81Dplius, Deus in se ipso potcsl omnia propria c:ognitione c:oJIIOSCe~. Propria enim nalura
c:ujusque c:onsistit, secundum quod per aliquem modum naturun Dei panic:ipal ... St. Thomas. I. P. q.
14. an. 6.
<Exod. 3:14.

BOOK THREE: PART TWO
Chapter Six

t

That we see all things in God.
In the preceding chapters we have examined four different ways in which the soul
might see external objects, all of which seem to us very unlikely. There remains
only the fifth, which alone seems to conform to reason and to be most appropriate
for exhibiting the dependence that minds have on God in all their thoughts.
To understand this fifth way, we must remember what was just said in the
preceding chapter-that God must have within Himself the ideas of all the beings
He has created (since otherwise He could not have created them), and thus He
sees all these beings by considering the perfections He contains to which they are
related. We should know, funhermore, that through His presence God is in close
union with our minds, such that He might be said to be the place of minds as
space is, in a sense, the place of bodies. Given these two things. the mind surely
can see what in God represents created beings, since what in God represents
created beings is very spiritual, intelligible, and present to the mind. Thus, the
mind can see God's works in Him, provided that God wills to reveal to it what in
Him represents them. The following are the reasons that seem to prove that He
wills this rather than the creation of an infinite number of ideas in each mind.
Not only does it strictly conform to reason, but it is also apparent from the
economy found throughout nature that God never does in very complicated
fashion what can be done in a very simple and straightforward way. For God
never does anything uselessly and without reason. His power and wisdom are not
shown by doing lesser things with greater means-this is contrary to reason and
indicates a limited intelligence. Rather, they are shown by doing greater things
with very simple and straightforward means. Thus, it was with extension alone
that He produced everything admirable we see in nature and even what gives life
and movement to animals. For those who absolutely insist on substantial forms,
faculties, and souls in animals (different from their blood and bodily organs) to
perform their functions, at the same time would have it that God lacks intelligence, or that He cannot make all these remarkable things with extension
alone. They measure the power and sovereign wisdom of God by the pettiness of
230

The Search after Truth

231

their own mind. Thus, since God can reveal everything to minds simply by
willing thai they see what is in their midst, i.e., what in Him is related to and
represents these things, there is no likelihood that He does otherwise, or that He
does so by producing as many infinities of infinite numbers of ideas as there are
created minds.
But it should be carefully noted that we cannot conclude from their seeing all
things in God in this way that our minds see the essence of God. God's essence is
His own absolute being, and minds do not see the divine substance taken absolutely but only as relative to creatures and to the degree that they can participate
in it. What they see in God is very imperfect, whereas God is most perfect. They
see matter thai is shaped, divisible, and so on, but there is nothing divisible or
shaped in God, for God is all being, since He is infinite and comprehends
everything; but He is no being in particular. Yet what we see is but one or more
particular beings, and we do not understand this perfect simplicity of God, which
includes all beings. In addition, it might be said that we do not so much see the
ideas of things as the things themselves that are represented by ideas, for when
we see a square, for example, we do not say that we see the idea of the square,
which is joined to the mind, but only the square that is external to it.
The second reason for thinking that we see beings because God wills that what
in Him representing them should be revealed to us (and not because there are as
many ideas created with us as there are things we can perceive) is thai this view
places created minds in a position of complete dependence on God-the most
complete there can be. For on this view, not only could we see nothing but what
He wills that we see, but we could see nothing but what He makes us see. "Non
sumus sufficientes cogitare aliquid a nobis, tamquam ex nobis, sed sufficientia
nostra ex Deo est.'"' It is God Himself who enlightens philosophers in the
knowledge that ungrateful men call natural though they receive it only from
heaven. "Deus enim illis manifestavit. "b He is truly the mind's light and the
father of lights. "Pater luminum"•-it is He who teaches men knowledge"Qui docet hominem scientiam. "dIn a word, He is the true light that illumines
everyone who comes into the world: "Lux vera quae illuminatomnem hominem
venientem in hunc mundum. ·~
For after all, it is difficult enough to understand distinctly the dependence our
minds have on God in all their particular actions, given that they have everything
we distinctly know to be necessary for them to act, or all the ideas of things
present to their mind. And that general and confused term concours~, by means
of which we would explain creatures' dependence on God, rouses not a single
distinct idea in an attentive mind; and yet it is good that men should distinctly
know that they are capable of nothing without God.
•2 Cor. 3:5.
"Rom. 1:19.
•James 1:17.

•Ps. 93:10.
•John 1:9.

232

Nicolas Malebranche

But the strongest argument of all is the mind's way of perceiving anything. It
is certain, and everyone knows this from experience, that when we want to think
about some particular thing, we first glance over all beings and then apply
ourselves to the consideration of the object we wish to think about. Now, it is
indubitable that we could desire to see a particular object only if we had already
seen it, though in a general and confused fashion. As a resuh of this, given that
we can desire to see all beings, now one, now another, it is certain that all beings
are present to our mind; and it seems that all beings can be present to our mind
only because God, i.e., He who includes all things i1;1 the simplicity of His being,
is present to it.
It even seems that the mind would be incapable of representing universal ideas
of genus, species, and so on, to itself had it not seen all beings contained in one.
For, given that every creature is a particular being, we cannot say that we see a
created thing when, for example, we see a triangle in general. Finally, I think
that sense can be made of the way the mind knows certain abstract and general
truths only through the presence of Him who can enlighten the mind in an infinity
of different ways.
Finally, of the proofs of God's existence, the loftiest and most beautiful, the
primary and most solid (or the one that assumes the least)8 is the idea we have of
the infinite. For it is certain that (a) the mind perceives the infinite, though it does
not comprehend it, and (b) it has a very distinct idea of God, which it can have
only by means of its union with Him, since it is inconceivable that the idea of an
infinitely perfect being (which is what we have of God) should be something
created.
But not only does the mind have the idea of the infinite, it even has it before
that of the finite. For we conceive of infinite being simply because we conceive
of being, without thinking whether it is finite or infinite. In order for us to
conceive of a finite being, something must necessarily be eliminated from this
general notion of being, which consequently must come first. Thus, the mind
perceives nothing except in the idea it has of the infinite, and far from this idea
being formed from the confused collection of all our ideas of particular beings (as
philosophers think), all these particular ideas are in fact but participations in the
general idea of the infinite: just as God does not draw. His being from creatures,
while every creature is but an imperfect participation in the divine being.
Here is an argument that may prove demonstrative for those accustomed to
abstract reasoning. It is certain that ideas are efficacious, since they act upon the
mind and enlighten it, and since they make it happy or unhappy through the
pleasant or unpleasant perceptions by which they affect it. Now nothing can act
immediately upon the mind unless it is superior to it-nothing but God alone; for
only the Author of our being can change its modifications. All our ideas, therefore, must be located in the efficacious substance of the Divinity, which alone is
intelligible or capable of enlightening us, because it alone can affect intelligences. "lnsinuavit nobis Christus," says Saint Augustine, b "an imam
"This proof will be found trealed al grc:aler lcnglh in chapter II of lhc following book.
"Tr«t. 23 on S1. John.

The Search after Truth

233

humanam & mentem rationalem non vegetari, non beatificari,

NON tLLUMINARI

NISI AB IPSA SUBSTANTIA DEl."

Finally, God can have no other special end for His actions than Himself. This
is a notion common to all men capable of a little reflection, and Sacred Scripture
allows no doubt that God made all things for Himself. Therefore. not only must
our natural love, i.e., the impulse He produces in our mind, tend toward Him but
also the knowledge and light He gives it must reveal to us something in Him, for
everything coming from God can be only for God. If God had made a mind and
had given the sun to it as an idea, or immediate object of knowledge, it seems to
me God would have made this mind and its idea for the sun and not for Himself.
God can make a mind in order for it to know His works, then, only if that mind
to some extent sees God in seeing His works. As a result, it might be said that if
we do not to some extent see God, we see nothing, just as if we do not love God,
i.e., if God were not continuously impressing upon us the love of good in
general, we would love nothing.• For, given that this love is our will, we could
neither love nor will anything without it, since we can love particular goods only
by directing toward these goods the impulse of love that God gives us for
Himself. Thus, as we love something only through our necessary love for God,
we see something only through our natural knowledge of God; and all our
particular ideas of creatures are but limitations of the idea of the Creator, as all
the impulses of the will toward creatures are only determinations of its impulse
toward the Creator.
I do not think there are any theologians who will disagree that the impious love
God with this natural love I am speaking about, and Saint Augustine and several
other Fathers maintain as indubitable that the impious see eternal truths and
moral rules in God. Accordingly, the view I am expounding should upset no
one.b Here is how Saint Augustine expresses it:
Ab ilia incommutabilis luce veritatis etiam impius, clam ab ea avenitur.
quodammodo tangitur. Hinc est quod etiam impii cogitant aetemitatem, & multa
recte reprehendunt, recteque laudant in hominum moribus. Quibus ea tandem regulis judicant, nisi in quibus vident, quemadmodum quisque vivere debeat, etiam si
nee ipsi eodem modo vivant? Ubi autem eas vident? Neque enim in sua natura.
Nam cum procul dubio mente ista videantur, eorumque mentes constet esse
mutabiles, has vero regulas immutabiles videat, quisquis in cis & hoc videre
potuerit ... ubinam ergo sunt istae regulae scriptae. nisi in libro lucis illius. quae
veritas dicitur, unde lex omnis justa describitur... in qua videt quid operandum
sit. etiam qui opcratur injustiliam, & ipse est qui ab ilia luce avenitur a qua ramen
tangitur.<
Saint Augustine has an infinity of such passages by which he proves that we
already see God in this life through the knowledge we have of eternal truths. The
truth is uncreated, immutable, immense, eternal, and above all things. It is true
by itself. It draws its perfection from no other thing. It renders creatures more
"Bit. I, ch. I.

"Sec the

prcfllcc

to the Dialo1•• on MetQ[IIIysics.

cbs. 711. 21.

•Boot 14, De Trin. ch. IS.

and the R;po~~~~ au vrayes ll.fousses id;es

234

Nicolas Malebranche

perfect, and all minds naturally seek to know it. Only God can have all these
perfections. Therefore, truth is God. We see some of these immutable, eternal
truths. Therefore, we see God. These are the arguments of Saint Augustineours are somewhat different. and we have no wish to make improper use of the
authority of so great a man in order to support our own view.
We are of the opinion, then, that truths (and even those that are eternal, such as
that twice two is four) are not absolute beings, much less that they are God
Himself. For clearly, this truth consists only in the relation of equality between
twice two and four. Thus, we do not claim, as does Saint Augustine, that we see
God in seeing truths, but in seeing the ideas of these truths-for the ideas are
real, whereas the equality between the ideas, which is the truth, is nothing real.
When we say, for example, that the cloth we are measuring is three ells long. the
cloth and the ells are real. But the equality between them is not a real being-it is
only a relation found between the three ells and the cloth. When we say that twice
two is four, the ideas of the numbers are real, but the equality between them is
only a relation. Thus, our view is that we see God when we see eternal truths,
and not that these truths are God, because the ideas on which these truths depend
are in God-it might even be that this was Saint Augustine's meaning. We
further believe that changeable and corruptible things are known in God, though
Saint Augustine speaks only of immutable and incorruptible things, because for
this to be so, no imperfection need be placed in God. since, as we have already
said, it is enough that God should reveal to us what in Him is related to these
things.
But although I may say that we see material and sensible things in God, it must
be carefully noted that I am not saying we have sensations of them in God, but
only that it is God who acts in us; for God surely knows sensible things, but He
does not sense them. When we perceive something sensible, two things are found
in our perception: sensation and pure idea. The sensation is a modification of our
soul, and it is God who causes it in us. He can cause this modification even
though He does not have it Himself, because He sees in the idea He has of our
soul that it is capable of it. As for the idea found in conjunction with the
sensation, it is in God, and we see it because it pleases God to reveal it to us. God
joins the sensation to the idea when objects are present so that we may believe
them to be present and that we may have all the feelings and passions that we
should have in relation to them.
We believe, finally. that all minds see eternal laws, as well as other things, in
God, but with a certain difference. They know order and eternal truths, and even
the beings that God has made according to these truths or according to order,
through the union these minds necessarily have with the Word, or the wisdom of
God, which enlightens them, as has just been explained. But it is through the
impression they constantly receive from the will of God. who leads them toward
Him and who tries, as it were, to make their will entirely like His own, that they
realize that the immutable order is their own indispensable law, an order which
thus includes all eternal laws, such as that we ought to love good and avoid evil,
that justice should be prized more than all riches, that it is better to obey God than

The Search after Truth

235

to command men, and an infinity of other natural laws. For the knowledge of all

these laws, or of the obligation minds are under to conform to the immutable
order, is not different from the knowledge ofthis impression, which they always
feel in themselves, though they do not always follow it through the free choice of
their will, and which they know to be common to all minds, though it is not
equally strong in all minds.
It is through this dependence, this relation, this union of our mind with the
Word of God, and of our will with His love, that we are made in the image and
likeness of God. And though this image may be greatly effaced through sin, yet it
must subsist as long as we do. But if we bear the image of the Word humiliated
upon earth, and if we follow the impulses of the Holy Ghost, this union of our
mind with the Word of the Father, and with the love of the Father and the Son.
will be reestablished and made indelible. We shall be like God if we are like the
God-man. Finally, God will be entirely in us, and we in Him in a way much more
perfect than that by which we must be in Him and He in us that we might subsist.
These are some of the reasons that might lead one to believe that minds
perceive everything through the intimate presence of Him who comprehends all
in the simplicity of His being. Each of us will judge• the matter according to the
inner conviction he receives after seriously considering it. But I do not think
there is any plausibility in any of the other ways of explaining these things, and
this last way seems more than plausible. Thus, our souls depend on God in all
ways. For just as it is He who makes them feel pain, pleasure, and all the other
sensations, through the natural union He has established between them and our
bodies, which is but His decree and general will, so it is He who makes them
know all that they know through the natural union He has also established
between the will of man and the representation of ideas contained in the immensity of the Divine being, which union is also but His general wil!. As a result of
this, only He can enlighten us, by representing everything to us-just as only He
can make us happy by making us enjoy all sorts of pleasures.
Let us hold this view, then, that God is the intelligible world or the place of
minds, as the material world is the place of bodies; that from His power minds
receive their modifications; that in His wisdom they find all their ideas; that
through His love they receive their orderly impulses, and because His power and
love are but Himself, let us believe with Saint Paul, that He is not far from any of
us, and that in Him we live and move and have our being. "Non Ionge est ab
unoquoque nostrum, in ipso enim vivimus, movemus. & sumus. "b

"See the Eluddations J4J. The Riponsr uu li1-rr tks •·ru)>rS & fauues /tiers. The li-r•· l..t·ttn• nomn
lu Difen.rr against this Rr1xmse; the first two Drulog""·'"" Metul>ilysi•·J. The Ril""'••· il M. Rrxis.
and especially my Rrl"'"·"' iJ """ Je Lt-rm· de M. A rnu~rld. TheR: perhaps my view will be round
mo~ clearly demonstrated.
0 A"I< 17:28~

BOOK THREE: PART TWO
Chapter Seven

t

I. The four different ways of perceiving things. II. How we know God.
Ill. How we know bodies. IV. How we know our own souls. V. How we know
pure spirits and tire souls of other men.
In order to clarify and simplify the view I have just laid out concerning the way in
which the mind perceives all the various objects of its knowledge, I must distinguish its four ways of knowing.

I. Tire four ways of perceMng tlrings.
The first is to know things by themselves.
The second is to know them through their ideas, i.e .• as I mean it here, through
something different from themselves.
The third is to know them through consciousness, or inner sensation.
The fourth is to know them through conjecture.
We know things by themselves and without ideas when they are intelligible by
themselves, i.e., when they can act on the mind and thereby reveal themselves to
it. For the understanding is a purely passive faculty of the soul, whereas activity
is found only in the will. Even its desires are not the true causes of ideas-they
are but the occasional or natural causes of their presence as a result of the natural
laws concerning the union of our soul with universal Reason, as I have explained
elsewhere. We know things through their ideas when they are not intelligible by
themselves, whether because they are corporeal or because they cannot affect the
mind or reveal themselves to it. Through consciousness we know evecything that
is not distinct from ourselves. Finally, through conjecture we know those things
that are different both from ourselves and from what we know either in itself or
through ideas, such as when we believe that certain things are like certain others
we know.

II. How we know God.
Only God do we know through Himself, for though there are other spiritual
beings besides Him. which seem intelligible by their nature. only He can act on
our mind and reveal Himself to it. Only God do we perceive by a direct and
236

237

The Search after Truth

immediate perception. Only He can enlighten our mind with His own substance.
Finally, only through the union we have with Him are we capable in this life of
knowing what we know, as we have explained in the preceding chapter; for He is
the only master, according to Saint Augustine,• ruling our mind without the
mediation of any creature.
I cannot conceive how a created thing can represent the infinite, how being
that is without restriction, immense and universal, can be perceived through an
idea, i.e., through a particular being different from universal and infinite being.
But as far as particular beings are concerned, there is no difficulty in conceiving
how they can be represented by the infinite being that contains them in His most
efficacious and, consequently, most intelligible substance. Thus, it must be said
that (a) we know God through Himself, though our knowledge of Him in this life
is very imperfect, and (b) we know corporeal things through their ideas, i.e., in
God, since only God contains the intelligible world, where the ideas of all things
are located.
But while we can see all things in God, it does not follow that we in fact do
so-we see in God only the things of which we have ideas, and there are things
we perceive without ideas, or know only through sensation.

Ill. How we know bodies.
Everything in this world of which we have some knowledge is either a mind or
a body, a property of a mind or a property of a body. Undoubtedly, we know
bodies with their properties through their ideas, because given that they are not
intelligible by themselves, we can perceive them only in that being which contains them in an intelligible way. Thus, it is in God and through their ideas that
we perceive bodies and their properties, and for this reason, the knowledge we
have of them is quite perfect-i.e., our idea of extension suffices to inform us of
all the properties of which extension is capable, and we could not wish for an
idea of extension, figure, or motion more distinct or more fruitful than the one
God gives us.
As the ideas of things in God include all their properties, whoever sees their
ideas can also see all their properties successively; for when we see things as they
are in God, we always see them in perfect fashion, and the way we see them
would be infinitely perfect if the mind seeing them were infinite. What is lacking
to our knowledge of extension, figures, and motion is the shortcoming not of the
idea representing it but of our mind considering it.

IJI. How we know our own soul.
Such is not the case with the soul, [which] we do not know through its
idea-we do not see it in God; we know it only through consciousness, and
because of this, our knowledge of it is imperfect. Our knowledge of our soul is
limited to what we sense taking place in us. If we had never sensed pain, heat,
light, and such, we would be unable to know whether the soul was capable of
sensing these things, because we do not know it through its idea. But if we saw in
•Humanis mcntibus nulla inlerposira natura praesidet." Aug.

o~

wra

r~lig.

ch. SS.

238

Nicolas Malebranche

God the idea corresponding to our soul, we would at the same time know, or at
least could know all the properties of which it is capable -as we know, or at least
can know, all the properties of which extension is capable, because we know
extension through its idea.
It is true that we know well enough through our consciousness, or the inner
sensation we have of ourselves, that our soul is something of importance. But
what we know of it might be almost nothing compared to what it is in itself. If all
we knew about matter were some twenty or thirty figures it had been modified
by, we certainly would know almost nothing about it in comparison with what we
can know about it through the idea representing it. To know the soul perfectly,
then, it is not enough to know only what we know through inner sensationsince the consciousness we have of ourselves perhaps shows us only the least part
of our being.
From what we have just said it might be concluded that although we know the
existence of our soul more distinctly than the existence of both our own body and
those surrounding us, still our knowledge of the soul's nature is not as perfect as
our knowledge of the nature of bodies, and this might serve to reconcile the
differing views• of those who say that nothing is known better than the soul, and
those who claim to know nothing less.
This might also serve to prove that the ideas which represent to us things
outside us are not modifications of our soul. For if the soul saw all things by
considering its own modifications, it would have to know iLo; own nature or
essence more clearly than that of bodies, and all the sensations or modifications
of which it is capable more clearly than the figures or modifications of which
bodies are capable. However, it knows itself capable of a given sensation not
through the perception it has of itself in consulting its idea but only through
experience, whereas it knows that extension is capable of an infinite number of
figures through the idea it has of extension. There are even certain sensations like
colors and sounds which are such that most people cannot tell whether or not they
are modifications of the soul, but there is no figure that everyone, through the
idea he has of extension, does not recognize as the modification of a body.
What I have just said also shows why the modifications of the soul cannot be
made known through definition; for since we know neither the soul nor its
modifications through ideas but only through sensation, and since such sensations as, for example, pleasure, pain, heat, and so on, are not attached to any
words, it is clear that if someone had never seen color or felt heat, he could not be
made to know these sensations through any definition of them that might be
given him. Now, given that men have their sensations only on account of their
body, and given that their bodies are not all disposed in the same way, it often
happens that words are equivocal, that the words we use to express the modifications of our soul mean just the opposite of what we intend, and that we often
make people think of bitterness, for example, when we believe we are making
them think of sweetness.
•See the Elucidations (II).

The Search after Truth

239

Although our knowledge of our soul is not complete, what we do know of it
through consciousness or inner sensation is enough to demonstrate its immortality, spirituality, freedom, and several other attributes we need to know. And this
seems to be why God does not cause us to know the soul, as He causes us to
know bodies, through its idea. The knowledge that we have of our soul through
consciousness is imperfect, granted; but it is not false. On the other hand, that
knowledge we have of bodies through sensation or consciousness, if the confused
sensation we have of what takes place in our body can be called consciousness, is
not only imperfect, but also false. We therefore needed an idea of the body to
correct our sensations of it-but we need no idea of our soul, since our consciousness of it does not involve us in error, and since to avoid being mistaken in
our knowledge of it, it is enough not to confuse it with the body-and reason
enables us to do this since our idea of the body reveals to us that the modalities of
which it is capable are quite different from those we sense. Finally, if we had an
idea of the soul as clear as that which we have of the body, that idea would have
inclined us too much to view the soul as separated from the body. It would have
thus diminished the union between our soul and body by preventing us from
regarding it as dispersed through all our members, though I shall not further
explain the matter here.
V. How we know other men's souls.
Of all the objects of our knowledge, only the souls of other men and pure
intelligences remain; and clearly we know them only through conjecture. At
present we do not know them either in themselves or through their ideas, and as
they are different from ourselves, we cannot know them through consciousness.
We conjecture that the souls of other men are of the same sort as our own. We
suppose them to feel what we feel in ourselves, and even when these sensations
have no relation to the body, we are certain we are not mistaken because we see
in God certain ideas and immutable laws from which we know with certainty that
God acts uniformly in all minds.
I know that twice two is four, that it is better to be just than rich, and I am not
mistaken in believing that others know these truths as well as I do. I love pleasure
and good, I abhor pain and evil, I want to be happy, and I am not mistaken in
believing that all men, the angels, and even demons have these same inclinations. I even know that God will never make a mind that does not desire to be
happy. or that can desire to be unhappy. But I know this with evidence and
certainty because it is God who teaches it to me-for who else but God could
reveal to me His designs and volitions? But when the body plays a part in what
happens in me, I am almost always mistaken in judging others by myself. I feel
heat, I see something of a certain size, a certain color, I taste such and such a
flavor upon the approach of certain bodies-but I am mistaken if I judge others
by myself. I am subject to certain passions, I have a liking or an aversion for such
and such things, and I judge that others are like me-but my conjecture is often
false. Thus, the knowledge we have of other men is very liable to error if we
judge them only by the sensations we have of ourselves.

240

Nicolas Malebranche

If there are beings different from God and ourselves, as well as from bodies
and pure spirits, they are unknown to us. I can hardly persuade myself of their
existence, and after examining the arguments of cenain philosophers holding that
there are these things. I have found them unsound. This reinforces our view that
since all men have the same nature, we all have the same ideas, because we all
need to know the same things.

BOOK THREE: PART TWO
Chapter Eight

t

I. The intimate presence of the ''ague idea of being in general is the cause of all
of the mind's disordered abstractions, and of most of the chimeras of ordinary
philosophy that pre,·ent many philosophers from recognizing the solidity of the
true principles of physics. 1/. An example of this concerning the essence of
matter.
The clear, intimate, and necessary presence of God (i.e., the being without
individual restriction, the infinite being, being in general) to the mind of man acts
upon it with greater force than the presence of all finite objects. The mind cannot
entirely rid itself of this general idea of being, because it cannot subsist outside
God. Perhaps you will say that the mind can withdraw from this idea because it
can think about particular beings; but you would be mistaken. For when the mind
considers some being in particular, it moves not so much away from God as
nearer Him (if one of His perfections may be spoken of as representative of this
being) by moving away from all the others. Yet it moves away from them in such
a way that it never loses sight ofthem, and it is almost always ready to seek them
out and move near them. They are always present to the mind, but the mind
perceives them only in an unsolvable confusion due to its own pettiness and the
greatness of the idea of being. One might well not think about oneself for some
time, but it seems to me one cannot subsist a moment without thinking of being,
and at the very time that one takes himself to be thinking of nothing, one is
necessarily filled with the vague and general idea of being. But because commonplace things that do not affect us do not forcefully arouse the mind and
command its attention, this idea of being, however great, real, positive, and vast
it may be, is so familiar to us and affects us so little that we almost believe
ourselves not to see it, do not reflect on it, and then judge that it has but little
reality and is formed only from the confused collection of all our particular ideas,
although, quite to the contrary, it is in it and by it alone that we perceive all
beings in particular.
Although this idea that we receive through the immediate union we have with
the Word of God, sovereign Reason, never deceives us by itself as do those we
receive because of the union we have with our bodies, which represent things to
241

242

Nicolas Malebranche

us other than a'l they are, yet I have no hesitation in saying that we make such ill
use of the best of things that the inentdicable presence of this idea is one of the
main causes of all of the mind's disordered abstractions. and consequently, [it is
one of the main causes] of all that abstract and chimerical philosophy that explains all natural effects with the general terms act, potency. causes, effect,
substantial forms. faculties, occult qualities, and so on. For it is certain that all
these terms and several others arouse in the mind only vague and general ideas,
i.e., those ideas that present themselves to the mind with no difficulty or effort on
our part, those ideas that are contained in the ineradicable idea of being.
Let a man read as carefully as possible all the definitions and explanations that
are given of substantial forms; let him painstakingly search for what the essence
of all those entities consists of-those entities that philosophers imagine at will
and in such great numbers that they are forced to make divisions and subdivisions
of them-and I am certain that no idea of these things other than that of being
and of cause in general will ever arise in his mind.
Here is what commonly happens to philosophers. They observe some new
effect; immediately they fancy a new entity to produce it. Fire heato; thingstherefore there is something is fire that produces this effect, something different
from the matter of which fire is composed. And because fire is capable of several
different effects (such as disintegrating bodies, and reducing them to ashes and
earth, drying them, hardening them, softening them, enlarging them, purifying
them, as well as providing us with heat and light, and so on), they liberally
bestow on fire as many faculties or real qualities as effects it is capable of
producing.
But if you think about the definitions they give of these faculties. you will see
that they are only logical definitions, and that they arouse no other ideas than that
of being or of cause in general, which the mind relates to the effect that is
produced-as a result of which, we know no more about them after having
studied them a great deal. For all we get from that kind of study is the fancy that
we know better than others what in fact we know much less, not only because we
admit several entities that have never existed, but also because, being distracted,
we make ourselves incapable of conceiving how matter alone, such as that of
fire, when moved against differently disposed bodies, can produce in them all the
different effects that we see fire produce.
It is clear to anyone who has read a little that practically all books of science,
and especially those dealing with physics, medicine, chemistry, and all the other
specific areas of nature, are full of arguments based on elementary qualities and
on secondary qualities such as attracti,·n, retentin.>.f, cot~coctil'es, e:rpulsin.>.t,
and other such items, on other qualities they call occult, on specific virtues, and
on several other entities men compose from the general idea of being and the idea
of the cause of the effect they observe. All of which seems possible only because
of their aptitude for considering the idea of being in general, which idea is always
present to their mind through the intimate presence of Him who contains all
beings.
If these ordinary philosophers contented themselves with offering their physics
simply as a logic that might furnish appropriate terms for discussing the things of

The Search after Truth

243

nature, and if they were tolerant of those who attach distinct and particular ideas
to these tenns in order to understand them, we would find no complaint in what
they do. But they pretend to explain nature through their general and abstract
tenns -as if nature were abstract; and they would absolutely have it that the
physics of their master Aristotle is a true physics, explaining the foundation of
things, and not simply a logic, although it contains nothing of worth other than a
few definitions so vague and a few tenns so general that they can be used in aU
sorts of philosophies. Finally. they are so obstinate about these imaginary entities
and the vague and indetenninate ideas that spring naturally from their mind that
they are incapable of pausing long enough to consider the real ideas of things in
order to recognize their solidity and clarity. And it is this which is the cause of
their extreme ignorance of the true principles of physics. A proof of this must
now be given.
II. Tire essence of matter.

Philosophers agree that we ought to regard as the essence of a thing what we
recognize as primary in that thing. what is inseparable from it, and what all the
properties belonging to it depend on. • Accordingly, in order to discover what the
essence of maner consists in, we need to examine all the properties belonging to
it, or included in our idea of it-such as hardness, softness, fluidity, motion,
rest, figure, divisibility, impenetrability, and extension, and first consider which
of all its attributes is inseparable from it. Thus, given that fluidity. hardness,
softness, motion, and rest can be separated from matter, since there are many
bodies without hardness, or fluidity. or softness, that are not in motion, or not at
rest, it clearly follows that all these attributes are not essential to it.
But there remain four others that we conceive of as inseparable from matter. to
wit, figure, divisibility, impenetrability. and extension. Accordingly. in order to
see which attribute we should take as its essence, we no longer need to try to
imagine them as separated, but only to examine which is the primary one presupposing no other. We easily see that figure, divisibility. and impenetrability
presuppose extension, and that extension presupposes nothing, but that as soon
as extension is given, divisibility. impenetrability. and figure are given. We must
thus conclude that extension is the essence of matter, given that matter has only
those attributes, or attributes only like those which we have just mentioned, and I
do not think there is anyone in the world who, after seriously thinking about it,
can doubt that this is so.
But the difficult thing is to know whether matter does not have still other
attributes, different from extension and those depending on extension; as a result,
extension itself might not be essential to matter, and might presuppose something
else that would be its subject and principle.
After having carefully considered their idea of matter through all its known
attributes, and after having thought about nature's effects as much as the mind's
strength and capacity pennit, several people are finnly convinced that extension
"If this definition of the word essence is accepted. all the rest follows demonstratively; if it is not
accepted, then it is only a question of words as to what the essence of matter consists in (or rather. this
issue cannot even be discussed).

244

Nicokls Malebranche

presupposes nothing at all in matter, whether because they had no distinct particular idea of the thing supposed to precede extension, or because they saw no
effect establishing it.
For just as it is enough to know how the different disposition of its wheels can
produce the various motions in a watch, and to have besides this no distinct idea
of what could be the cause of this motion, although several of them might be had
from logic -as this is enough to convince us that a watch is not something
different from the matter of which it is composed, so these people are convinced
that extension is the essence of matter because (a) they have no distinct idea of
what could be in matter if extension were taken from it; (b) they see no attribute
that could make it known; (c) with extension given, all the attributes we conceive
of as belonging to matter are given; and (d) matter is the cause of no effect we can
conceive ofthat extension, variously configured and agitated, could not produce.
But just as we do not have a certain demonstration that there is not some
intelligence, or some newly created entity in the wheels of a watch, so no one,
without a private revelation, can affirm as a geometrical demonstration that there
is only variously configured extension in a stone. For it is absolutely possible that
extension might be joined to some other thing that, because we have no idea of it,
we do not conceive of-although it seems quite unreasonable to believe and
assen it, since to assen what one does not know or conceive of is contrary to
reason.
Yet if it be supposed that there is something beside extension in matter, there
would be nothing, if due caution is taken, to prevent extension from being its
essence according to the definition we have just given of this word. For in the
final analysis, it is absolutely necessary that everything in the world be either a
being or a mode of a being -which no attentive mind can deny. Now, extension
is not a mode of a being; therefore it is a being. But since matter, because it is but
a single being, is not composed of several beings-as is man, who is composed
of body and mind-matter clearly is nothing other than extension.
In order to prove now that extension is not a mode of a being but is truly a
being, it should be noted that we cannot conceive a mode of a being unless at the
same time we conceive the being of which it is the mode. We cannot conceive of
roundness, for example, unless we conceive of extension, because given that a
mode of a being is only that being (existing) in a cenain way, e.g., the roundness
of wax is the wax itself (existing) in a certain way, we clearly cannot conceive
the mode without the being. If extension were a mode of being, then, we could
not conceive of extension without that being of which extension was the mode.
Yet we can quite easily conceive it by itself. Therefore, it is not the mode of any
being, and consequently is itself a being. It is thus the essence of matter, since
matter is but one being, and is not composed of several beings, as we have just
said.
But many philosophers are so accustomed to general ideas and entities of logic
that their mind is more occupied with them than with those of physics, which are
panicular and distinct. This can be seen from the fact that their reasoning about
natural things is based only on logical notions, on act, potency, and an infinite

The Search after Truth

245

number of imaginauy entities they do not distinguish from those that are real.
Given, then, that these people have a marvelous facility for seeing in their own
way whatever they wish, they fancy that their vision is better than others', that
they distinctly see that extension presupposes something. and that extension is
only a property of matter from which it might even be stripped away.
Yet, if they are asked to explain this thing in addition to extension that they
pretend to see in matter, they do so in ways that indicate that they have no other
idea of this thing than being or substance in general. That this is the case is clear
when we notice that the idea in question contains no particular attribute belonging to matter. For if extension is taken from matter, all the attributes and properties we distinctly conceive as belonging to it are also taken away. even if this
thing they imagine to be its essence is left behind; it is clear that neither an earth
nor the heavens nor anything we see could be made from it. And, on the
contrauy, if what they imagine to be the essence of matter is taken away. provided that extension is left behind, all the attributes and propenies we distinctly
conceive as included in the idea of matter are also left-for with extension alone
we can cenainly form the heavens, an earth, and the entire world we see as well
as an infinity of others. Thus, this something that they suppose in addition to
matter, having no attributes we distinctly conceive as belonging to it, and which
are clearly contained in the idea we have of it, is, if we are to believe reason.
nothing real and cannot even be used to explain natural effects. And what is said
of its being the subject and principle of extension is said gratuitously and without
a clear conception of what is being said, i.e., without there being any idea of it
other than a general idea from logic. like principle and subject. As a result, a new
subject and a new principle of this subject of extension could in tum be imagined, and so on to infmity. because the mind represents general ideas of subject
and principle to itself as it pleases.
True, it is likely that men would not have so obscured their idea of matter
unless they had had several reasons for doing so, and, in fact, many hold views
contrauy to the above because of theological principles. Undoubtedly, extension
is not the essence of matter-if that position is contrauy to the faith, and we
acknowledge so. Thanks be to God, we are well aware of the weakness and
limitation of the human mind. We know that it has far too little scope to measure
an infinite power, that God can do infinitely more than we can conceive of, that
He gives us ideas only to know things happening according to the order of nature.
and that He conceals the rest from us. We are always prepared, then. to subordinate the mind to faith; but proofs other than those usually adduced against the
arguments just given are called for, because the ways of explaining the mysteries
of the faith are not of the faith, and we believe them even without understanding
how they can ever be clearly explained.
We believe the mystery of the Trinity. for example, although the human mind
cannot conceive it; and yet we do not give up our belief that two things not
differing from a third are not different from each other, although this proposition
seems to ovenhrow it. For I am convinced that the mind should not be employed
except on subjects suited to its capacity. and that our mysteries should not be

246

Nicolas Malebranche

scrutinized lest they benumb us, as warned by the Holy Ghost, "Qui scrutator est
majestatis opprimetur a gloria.·'
Yet if I believed that some people would be satisfied by an explanation of how
my position on matter agrees with what faith teaches us about Transubstantiation,
I could perhaps give one in clear and distinct enough fashion, and one that would
not disagree at all with the Church's decisions; but I think I can be dispensed
from doing so, especially in this work.
For it should be noted that the Church Fathers almost always spoke of this
mystery as an incomprehensible mystery, that they did not philosophize in an
attempt to explain it, that for the most pan they contented themselves with rather
inexact comparisons more appropriate to making the dogma known than to
giving an explanation of it that would satisfy the mind, and that therefore tradition is on the side of those who do not philosophize about this mystery and who
subordinate their mind to faith, without uselessly involving themselves in these
enormously difficult questions.
It would be wrong, then, to ask philosophers to give clear and straightforward
explanations of how the body Jesus Christ is in the Eucharist. for that would
amount to asking them to make innovations in theology. And if philosophers
were so ill-advised as to comply, it would seem they could not avoid having
either their theology or their philosophy condemned. For if their accounts were
obscure, their philosophical principles would rightly be distrusted; and if their
response were clear or straightforward, perhaps there would be apprehension
over the novelty of their theology, even though it might conform to the dogma of
Transubstantiation.
Since novelty in theological matters smacks of error, and since we are right in
dismissing views solely because they are new and without foundation in tradition, we should not, except for pressing reasons, undenake intelligible and
strightforward explanations of things that the Fathers and Councils have not
entirely explained; it is enough to hold the dogma of Transubstantiation, without
explaining it. To do otherwise would be to sow the seeds of new disputes and
quarrels, of which there are already too many. and the enemies of truth would not
fail to use them maliciously to oppress their opponents.
Disputes concerning theological explanations seem to be the most useless and
most dangerous of all, and they are all the more to be feared in that even people
of piety often imagine that they need not be charitable with those who are not of
their opinion. We have had only too many experiences of that son of thing, and
its cause is obvious enough. Thus. the best and safest course is never to hurry
into talk about things about which one has no evidence and which others find
difficult to understand.
Also, obscure and tenuous explanations of the faith, which we are not obliged
to believe, should not serve as rules and principles in philosophical reasoning,
where only evidence should convince us. The clear and distinct ideas of extension, figure, and locomotion must not be exchanged for the general and confused
ideas of principle or subject of extension, form. quiddities. real qualities. or
motion other than locomotion such as generation, corruption, alteration and the

The Search after Truth

247

like. Real ideas produce real science, but general or logical ideas never produce
anything but a science that is vague, superficial, and sterile. We must, then,
carefully consider the distinct. particular ideas of things in order to discover the
properties they contain, and study nature in this way rather than losing ourselves
in chimeras that exist only in certain philosophers' minds.
Funhermore, the truth that the soul is spiritual and immortal is essential to
religion and morals, and the last Lateran Council8 ordered philosophers to teach
it and to refute the arguments attacking it. Now, if we suppose that the essence of
matter is not extension in height, breadth, and depth, but some other thing we are
not familiar with, how shall we refute the error of the freethinker, who maintains
and even shows with plausible arguments that it is the matter composing the brain
that thinks, reasons, wills, and so fonh? How can we prove that a thing we do not
know does not have such and such a property, or convince them of their error
who claim that when the brain is injured we no longer think, or think poorly? But
moreover, as the Fathers and Saint Augustine, among others, have always recognized that extension is the essence of matter, and as no one will ever distinctly
conceive how an organized body such as Jesus Christ's could be reduced to a
mathematical point-1 do not say a physical point (for we clearly conceive that
God can reduce a billion organized bodies into the extension of a grain of sand,
for that extension is infinitely divisible) do we think that we dignify the dogma of
Transubstantiation and lead heretics to the faith by maintaining that the body of
Jesus Christ exists unextendedly in the Eucharist? On the contrary, must we not
fear to overthrow it, if it is not certain that Saint Augustine was correct in saying,
take away extension from bodies and you annihilate them. Let us therefore
believe the dogmas established by the Church, for she is infallible, but let us
suspend judgment on the explanations given of them. b

"Session 8.
bSce my Defrng apinst the accusations of Louis de Ia Ville, prinled • the end of the T"alisr ora
Nail'" allll Grocr. See also Dialog•ws ora Mrtallll)'sics and Rrligiora. Dialogue 13, from number I 0
IO !he end.

BOOK THREE: PART TWO

Chapter Nine

I. The last general cau.re of our errors. II. That the ideas of things are not
always present to the mind wlrene,·er we wish. Ill. That every finite mind is
subject to error. and why. IV. That we ought not judge that only minds and
bodies exist. or that God is a mind or spirit as we concei,•e of minds.
I. Tire final general cause of our errors.
Up till now we have discussed the errors whose occasional cause might be
located in the nature of the pure understanding (or the mind considered in itselO
or in the nature of ideas, i.e., in the way the mind perceives external objects. All
that remains now is to explain a cause that might be termed the general and
universal cause of all our errors, because every conceivable error depends on it in
some way. This cause is, that since nothingness has no idea representing it, the
mind is led to believe that things of which it has no idea do not exist.
Surely the general source of our errors is, as we have already said a number of
times, that our judgments are of greater scope than our perceptions. For when we
consider some object, we ordinarily do so from one aspect only; and as we are
not satisfied with judging merely from the aspect we have considered, we instead
judge the whole object. Thus, it often happens that we are mistaken, because
though the thing may be true from the aspect we have examined, it is commonly
false from another, and what we take to be true in fact only seems to be so. Now,
it is clear that we would not pass absolute judgments on things as we do unless
we thought we had considered all their aspects, or unless we presumed all their
aspects to be like the one we had examined. Thus, the general cause of our errors
is that since we have no idea of the other aspects of our object, or of their
difference from the one present to our mind, we believe that these other aspects
do not exist, or we at least suppose that they are not panicularly different.
This way of carrying on seems reasonable enough to us. For, given that
nothingness forms no idea in the mind, we have some grounds for believing that
things forming no idea in the mind when we examine them are like nothingness.
And we are confirmed in this by a kind of instinctive belief that ideas of things
are due to our nature, and that they are subject to the mind in such a way that they
must be present to it whenever it wishes.

248

The Search after Truth

249

II. That the ideas of things are not present to the mind whenever we
wish.
Yet if we reflected a little about the present state of our nature, we would not
be so inclined to believe that we have all the ideas of things whenever we wish.
Since Original Sin, man is, as it were, but flesh and blood. The least impression
from his senses or passions interrupts his mind's closest attention, and the flow of
spirits and blood sweeps the mind along with it and continually drives it toward
sensible objects. It is often only in vain that the mind struggles against this torrent
canying it along, and rarely does the mind think of resisting it, for it is too
pleasant to follow it and too exhausting to oppose it. The mind is depressed and
discouraged as soon as it has made an effort to stop itself and grasp a particular
truth; hence, it is absolutely false that in our present state ideas of things are
present to our mind every time we wish to consider them. Thus, we should not
judge that things do not exist from the sole fact that we have no ideas of them.

Ill. £1•ery finite mind is subject to error.
But even if we suppose man to be the absolute master of his mind and ideas,
still by his nature he would necessarily be subject to error. For the mind of man is
limited, and every limited mind is by its nature subject to error. The reason for
this is that the least things have an infmity of relations between them, and to
comprehend them an infinite mind is required. Thus, given that a fmite mind,
whatever effort it might make, can neither embrace nor comprehend all these
relations, man is led to believe that those he does not perceive do not exist,
especially when he does not heed the weakness and limitation of his own mind,
which is a common failing. Thus, the limitation of the mind alone carries with it
the capacity for falling into error.
Yet if men, even in their state of weakness and corruption, always made
proper use of their freedom, they would never be mistaken. For this reason
everyone falling into error is justifiably reprimanded and even deserves to be
punished; for to avoid error, it is enough to judge only what we see and never to
make complete judgments except about things all of whose parts we are certain
we have examined, which are two things in our power to do. But men prefer to
subjugate themselves more to error than to the rule of truth, and they want to
make decisions carelessly and without effort. Thus, it should not be surprising if
they fall into an infinite number of errors and often make less than certain
judgments.

IV. That we ought not judge that minds and bodies are the only
created things, or that God is a mind or spirit as we concei1·e of
minds.
The only ideas of substance men have, for example, are those of mind and of
body, i.e., ofa thinking substance and of an extended substance. And from this
they claim the right to conclude that everything which exists is either a body or a
mind. Not that I presume to claim that there is some substance that is neither
mind nor body-for we should not claim that things exist when we have no

250

Nicolas Ma/ebranche

knowledge of them. since God, who never conceals His works from us, seemingly would have given us some idea of it. Yet I believe that, through our ideas of
them, we should decide nothing concerning the number of kinds of beings God
has created, since, speaking absolutely, it is possible that God has reasons we do
not know for concealing them from us-even if it were only for the reason that
since these beings have no relation to us, knowing them would be of no use to us,
just as He did not give us eyes strong enough to count the teeth of a gnat, because
our having such sharp vision would be useless for the preservation of our body.
But though I do not think it right to judge hastily that every being is either a
mind or a body, yet I feel that it is completely contrary to reason that philosophers, in order to explain natural effects, employ ideas other than those depending on thought and extension, since these are indeed the only ideas we have that
are distinct or particular.
There is nothing so unreasonable as to imagine an infinity of beings based on
the simple ideas of logic, to attribute to them an infinity of properties, and to
wish thus to explain things we do not understand through things we not only do
not conceive but even cannot conceive. This is to act like blindmen, who,
wishing to converse about colors and to have opinions about them, would use
definitions philosophers give them to draw conclusions. For as these blindmen
could produce only comical and ridiculous arguments about colors-because
they would have no distinct ideas of them, and because they would reason on the
basis of general ideas and ideas of logic-so philosophers cannot reason solidly
on the effects of nature when to this end they employ only general ideas and ideas
of logic, i.e .• act, potency. being, cause, principle, form, quality, and other such
ideas. It is absolutely necessary that they rely solely on the distinct, particular
ideas of thought and extension, and those ideas contained in them or that can be
deduced from them. For we should not expect to understand nature without
considering the distinct ideas we have of it, and it is better not to meditate at all
than to meditate on chimeras.
We should not claim. however. that all that exists are minds and bodies.
thinking beings and extended beings, because we might be mistaken in this. For
though it suffices to explain nature, and consequently we can conclude without
fear of being mistaken that the natural things we have some knowledge of should
depend on extension or thought, yet absolutely speaking it is possible that there
are others of which we have no idea and see no effect.
Men's judgment is hasty, then. when they judge as an indubitable principle
that every substance is either a body or a mind. But they draw another hasty
conclusion when by the light of reason alone they conclude that God is a mind or
spirit. It is true that since we are created in His image and likeness. and since
Sacred Scripture in several places teaches us that God is a spirit. we must believe
this and call Him a spirit-but reason alone cannot teach us this. It tells us only
that God is an infinitely perfect being, and that He must be a mind rather than a
body since our soul is more perfect than our body. but it does not assure us that
there are no beings still more perfect than our minds, and higher above our minds
than our minds are above our bodies.

Th~ s~arch aft~r

Truth

251

Now if there were these beings-and reason makes it seem indubitable that
God could have created them-it is clear that they would resemble God more
than we do. Thus, reason also informs us that God would have their perfections
ratherthan ours, which to them would be but imperfections. We should not jump
to conclude, then, that the word mind, which we use to express what God is and
what we are, is a univocal term signifying the same or quite similar things. God
is a mind or spirit, He thinks, He wills; but let us not humanize Him-He does
not think or will as we do. God is higher above created minds than created minds
are above bodies, and we should term God a mind not so much to show positively
what He is as to indicate that He is not material. He is an infinitely perfect being,
and this we cannot doubt. But as we should not imagine with the Anthropomorphites that He must have a human figure because this seems to be the most
perfect figure-even if we supposed Him to be corporeal-so we should not
think that the mind of God has human thoughts and that His mind is like ours
because we know of nothing more perfect than it. Rather, we should believe that
as He contains within Himself the perfections of matter without being material,
since it is certain that matter is related to some perfection in God, so He also
comprehends the perfections of created minds without being a mind in the way
we conceive of minds, and that His true name is HE WHO IS, i.e., unrestricted
being, all being, the infinite and universal being.

BOOK THREE: PART TWO

Chapter Ten

Examples of some errors in physics that we fall into because we suppose that
beings that in fact differ in their nature, qualities. extension, duration, and
proportion are alike in all these things.
We saw in the preceding chapter that men judge hastily when they judge that
every being is one of but two kinds, minds or bodies. In the following chapters
we shall show that when they judge that beings are not different in either their
relations or modes because they have no idea of these differences, their judgments are not only hasty but also quite false and are the sources of an infmite
number of errors.
It is certain that the mind of man seeks out only the relations of things; first
those the objects it is considering might have with it, and then the relations they
have among themselves. For the mind of man seeks out only two things, its own
good and the truth. To find its good, it carefully considers through reason and
taste, or sensation, whether objects have a relation of agreement with it. To fmd
the truth, it considers whether objects have a relation of equality or resemblance
between them, or precisely what magnitude is equal to their inequality. For just
as the good is the mind's good only because it is agreeable to it, so the truth is the
truth only through the relation of equality or resemblance found between two or
more things-be it between two or more objects, as between an ell and some
cloth, for the cloth is an ell because of the equality between the ell and the cloth,
or between two or more ideas, as between the two ideas of three and three and the
idea of six, for three and three are six because of the equality between the two
ideas of three and three and the idea of six, or finally, between ideas and things,
as when ideas represent what things are; for when I say that a sun exists, my
proposition is true because the ideas I have of existence and the sun represent that
the sun exists, and the sun truly exists. All the mind's action and attention toward
objects, then, is only in an attempt to discover their relations, because we attend
to things only to learn of their truth or goodness.
But as we have already said in the preceding chapter, its attention greatly tires
the mind. It soon gives up resisting the impression of the senses that diverts it
from its object and carries it toward others that its love for the body makes

252

The Search after Truth

253

agreeable to it. The mind is extremely limited and thus is incapable of distinguishing the differences among the subjects it considers, which are infmite or
almost infinite. The mind therefore supposes imaginary resemblances, or fails to
notice real and positive differences, since ideas of resemblance are simpler, more
familiar, and more present to it than others. For clearly resemblance includes
only one relation, and a single idea is needed to judge that a thousand things are
similar, whereas to judge without fear of error that a thousand objects are all
different from one another, a thousand different ideas absolutely must be present
to the mind.
Men imagine, then, that things of a different nature are of the same nature, and
that all things of the same species hardly differ from one another. They judge that
unequal things are equal, that uncertain things are certain, and that things without
order or proportion are well-ordered and proportioned. In a word, they often
believe that things differing in nature, quality, extension, duration, and proportion are alike in all these things. But this deserves to be explained at greater
length with several examples, because it is the cause of an infinite number of
errors.
Mind, the substance that thinks, and body, the substance that is extended, are
two entirely different and completely contrary kinds of beings -what belongs to
the one cannot belong to the other. Yet since they pay so little attention to the
properties of thought, and since they are continually affected by the body, most
men have viewed the soul and the body as one and the same thing; they have
fancied a resemblance between two so different things. They have made the soul
out to be material, i.e., extended throughout the entire body and figured like the
body. They have attributed to the mind what can belong only to the body.
Moreover, given that men sense pleasure, pain, odors, tastes, and so on, and
that their body is more present to them than their very soul, i.e., that they easily
imagine their body and cannot imagine their soul, they have attributed to the
body the faculties of sensing, imagining, and sometimes even of conceiving, all
of which can belong only to the soul. But the following examples will be more
illustrative.
It is certain that all natural bodies, even those said to be of the same kind,
differ from each other, that no two portions of gold are entirely like, and that one
drop of water is different from another drop of water. What is true of faces is also
true of all bodies of the same kind. All faces have two eyes, a nose, a moulh, and
so on, and they are all faces and faces of men; and yet it might be said that there
have never been two entirely alike. Similarly, a piece of gold has parts very much
like another piece of gold, and one drop of water certainly bears a great resemblance to another drop of water; yet it might be affirmed that no two drops
can be produced, even from the same river, that are exactly alike. Nevertheless,
philosophers unreflectingly assume essential likenesses between bodies of the
same kind, or likenesses that are indivisible, for according to their false view, the
essences of things are indivisible.
The reason why they fall into such a gross error is that they are unwilling to
consider carefully the things on which they meanwhile compose thick volumes.

254

Nicolas Malebranche

For just as we do not suppose a perfect resemblance between faces, because we
take care to view them from up close. and because the habit we have formed of
distinguishing them makes us notice the smallest differences between them, so if
philosophers would consider nature with some allention, they would recognize
sufficient causes of diversity even in things that cause the same sensations in us,
and that we therefore term of the same kind, and they would not so easily assume
essential likenesses. Blindmen would be wrong if, because they did not perceive
any sensible differences between faces, they were to suppose an essential, indivisible likeness between them. Philosophers, then, should not assume such
likenesses in bodies of the same kind because they do not notice any differences
in them.
Our inclination toward assuming likenesses in things also leads us to believe
that there is a determinate number of differences and forms, and that these forms
cannot vary quantitatively. We think that all bodies differ from each other by
degrees, as it were, that these degrees even maintain certain proportions between
them-in a word, we judge material things as if they were numbers.
Clearly all this is due to the fact that the mind loses itself among the relations
of incommensurable things, among which are the infinite differences found in
natural bodies, and is relieved to fancy some resemblance or proportion between
them, because it can then represent several things to itself with great ease. For as
I have already said. only one idea is needed to judge that things are alike,
whereas many are needed to judge that they are all different. For example, if a
man knew the number of angels, and that for each angel there were ten archangels, and that for each archangel there were ten thrones, and so on with the same
ten-to-one proportion up to the last order of Intelligences, his mind could know at
will the number of all these blessed spirits and with a lillie effort even judge their
number at a single glance-which must please it enormously. And this might
have led certain people thus to judge the number of the celestial spirits, as has
happened to certain philosophers who have placed a tenfold proportion of lightness and heaviness among the elements by supposing fire ten times lighter than
air, and so on for the others.
When the mind finds itself forced to admit differences between bodies by the
different sensations it has of them, and for other reasons as well, it always does
so to the least extent that it can. This is why it easily convinces itself that the
essences of things are indivisible and that they are like numbers, as we have just
said -because it then needs but one idea to represent all the bodies it terms of the
same kind. If a glass of water is poured into a hogshead of wine, for example, the
philosophers would have it (a) that the essence of the wine remains the same and
that the water is converted into wine, (b) that just as there can be no number
between three and four, since true unity is indivisible, so the water must be
converted into the nature and essence of wine, or else the wine must lose its
nature, (c) that just as every number four is exactly like every other, so the
essence of water must be exactly alike in all amounts of water, (d) that as the
number three differs esentially from the number two and cannot have the same
properties it has, so two bodies of different kinds differ essentially, and in such a

The Search after Truth

255

way that they can never have the same essential properties, and other such things.
Yet if men would attentively consider the true ideas of things, they would soon
discover that, given that all bodies are extended, their nature or essence bean; no
resemblance to numbers and cannot be indivisible.
Men not only suppose identity, likeness. or proportion in the nature, number,
and essential differences of substances, but they make the same suppositions
about everything they perceive. Practically all men judge that the fixed stm are
all at an equal distance from the earth and are attached to the sky as to a vault.
Astronomers for a long time held that the planets revolve in perfect circles, and in
order to explain the phenomena contradicting their prejudices, they invented a
huge number of circles, such as concentrics, eccentrics, epicycles, deferents. and
equants.
It is true that in recent ages the more ingenious among us have corrected the
ancients' errors and that they now believe that the motion of the planets describes
certain ellipses. But if they assume that these ellipses are regular-as one is led
to believe, since the mind supposes regularity where it fails to see irregularitythey fall into an error all the more difficult to correct, as the observations we can
make of the course of the planets cannot be correct or precise enough to show the
irregularity of their motion. Only physics can correct this error, for it is less
perceptible than the error found in the system of perfect circles.
But something remarkable has occurred with regard to the distance and motion
of the planets. For since astronomers have been unable to find either an arithmetical or geometrical proportion among them, this being manifestly contrary to
their observations, some of them have imagined that the planets preserve a kind
of proportion they term harmonic in their distances and motion. Hence, it is that
an astronomer of this century in his 8 Almagestum novum, begins the section
entitled "De systemate mundi harmonica" with the following words: "There is
no astronomer who would fail to recognize a kind of harmony in the motion and
intervals of the planets if he but carefully consider the order found in the
heavens.'' Not that the author is of this opinion-for observations that have been
made have shown him the extravagance of this imaginary harmony that has
nonetheless been the admiration of many ancient and modem authors whose
views Father Riccioli relates and then refutes. Pythagoras and his followers are
even said to have believed that through their regular motion the heavens produce
a wonderful concert, which men do not hear because they are accustomed to
it-just those who live near the rapids of the Nile, said Pythagoras, do not hear
its noise. But I raise this view concerning the harmonic proportion of the distances and motion of the planets only to show that the mind is pleased with
proportions and often sees them where they are not.
The mind also assumes uniformity in the duration of things, and when it is not
forced, as it were, by the reports of the senses to judge otherwise, it imagines that
things are not subject to change and instability.
All material things, being extended, are capable of division and hence of
corruption; a little reflection on the nature of bodies clearly shows them to be
"Father Riccioli. vol. 2.

256

Nicolas Malebranche

corruptible. Yet there have been a great number of philosophers who are convinced that the heavens, though material, are incorruptible.
We are too far away from the heavens to be able to discover the changes
occurring there, and rarely are there changes great enough to be visible from here
below. This was enough for an infinity of people to believe that they were indeed
incorruptible. And they were confirmed in their view in that they attributed the
corruption occurring in sublunary bodies to contrariety of qualities. For as they
never were in the heavens to see what happens there, they had no experience to
the effect that this contrariety of qualities is found there-which led them to
believe that it is in fact not found there. Thus, on the basis that what according to
their view corrupts everything here below is not found up there, they concluded
that the heavens were exempt from corruption.
This argument clearly is without foundation, for I do not see why some cause
of corruption might not be found other than this contrariety of qualities they
imagine, nor on what basis they can claim that there is no heat, cold, dryness or
moisture in the heavens, and that the sun is not hot and Saturn not cold.
There is some plausibility in saying that hard stones, glass, and other bodies of
this nature do not corrupt, since we see them subsist for a long time in the same
state, and we are close enough to see the changes that would take place in them.
But given our great distance from the heavens, it is completely contrary to reason
to conclude that they do not corrupt because we do not perceive contrary qualities
there and do not see that they corrupt. Yet not only do they say that the heavens
do not corrupt, but they say absolutely that the heavens are inalterable and
incorruptible, and the Peripatetics very nearly say that the celestial bodies are so
many divinities, as their master Aristotle believed.
The beauty of the universe docs not consist in the incorruptibility of its parts
but in the variety found in them, and this great work that is the world would not
be so admirable without the vicissitude of things we see in it. Maner infinitely
extended, without motion, and consequently without form and without corruption, would manifest the infinite power of its Author, but it would give no idea of
His wisdom. For this reason, all corporeal things are corruptible, and all bodies
have some change taking place in them that with time alters and corrupts them.
Even stones and glass are perhaps food for certain insects. • These bodies, though
quite hard and dry, are not exempt from corruption with time. The air and the sun
to which they are exposed change some of their parts, and they provide nourishment for certain worms, according to experiments reported on the maner.
There is no difference between these very hard and dry bodies and all others,
other than that they are composed of very gross and solid parts, and consequently
are less capable of being agitated and separated from one another by the motion
of bodies striking against them-which makes us view them as incorruptible.
Yet they are not so by their nature, as time, experience and reason make sufficiently manifest.
And as for the heavens, they are composed of the most fluid and subtle maner,
especially the sun, which, far from being incorruptible and without heat, as the
•JournoJ drs

S~;avans

of 9 August 1666.

The Search Gjter Truth

257

foUowers of Aristotle say, is of all bodies the hottest and most subject to change.
The sun even heats, agitates, and changes all things, for through its action, which
is nothing but its heat, or the motion of its particles, it produces all the changes
we see with the seasons. Reason demonstrates these things; but if reason can be
withstood, experience cannot. For since we have discovered through the use of
telescopes or large glassts spots in the sun as large as the entire earth, which fonn
there and are dispersed in a short time, we can no longer deny that it is subject to
change a great deal more than the earth we inhabit.
All bodies, then, are in a state of continuous motion and change, and especially those that are most fluid, such as fire, air, and water; next would be the
parts of living bodies, such as flesh and even bones, and finally the bodies that
are hardest; and the mind should not suppose a kind of immutability in things
because it does not see change or corruption in them. For it is no proof that a
thing remains the same because we see no difference in it from one time to
another, nor that things do not exist because we have no idea or knowledge of
them.

BOOK THREE: PART TWO

Chapter Eleven

t

•

Examples of some errors in morals that depend on this same principle.
This aptitude the mind has for imagining and supposing resemblances, especially
where it does not visibly recognize differences, also casts most men into very
dangerous errors in moral matters. Here are some examples of this.
A Frenchman meets an Englishman or an Italian. The foreigner has his own
particular humor: he is refined, or, if you wish, he is vain and disagreeable. This
will immediately lead the Frenchman to judge that all Englishmen, or all Italians,
have the same character of mind as the one he has met. He praises or condemns
them all as a whole, and if he meets another of them, the Frenchman is immediately struck by his being like the one he has already seen, and he gives in to
some secret liking or dislike for the man. In a word, he will judge all the
individuals of these countries on the remarkable evidence that he has seen one or
more having certain qualities of mind, because having no information from any
other source about their differences, he supposes them all alike.
A member of some religious order falls into error and this is enough for most
of those who know about it to condemn indifferently all the individuals of the
same order. They all wear the same habit and have the same name, and as they
are alike in these things it is enough for ordinary men to fancy them alike in
everything. They suppose them alike because they do not penetrate to the bottom
of the hearts of these individuals to see positively whether they differ.
Slanderers who seek means of besmirching their enemies' reputation commonly employ this technique, and experience informs us of their almost universal
success. Indeed, it is well suited to the standard of ordinary men, and there is no
difficulty in finding in large communities, however holy they might be, somebody who fails to keep the rule or is of improper persuasion, since in the
company of apostles, of which Jesus Christ Himself was the head, there was a
robber, a traitor, a hypocrite, in a word, a Judas.
The Jews undoubtedly would have made a great mistake had they judged ill of
the holiest society there ever was on account of the avarice and corruption of
Judas, or had they condemned them all because they allowed this miserable man
in their midst and because Jesus Christ himself, though he knew his crimes, did
not punish him.

The Search after Truth

259

It is clearly against reason and charity, then, to assume that an entire community is in error because some of its members have erred, even if its leaders should
hide the error, or be themselves caught up in it. It is true that when all the
individuals of a community willingly uphold the error or mistake of their confrere
the whole community should be judged guilty. But I might add that this hardly
ever happens, for it appears morally impossible that all the individuals of an
order should hold the same views.
Men therefore should not draw general conclusions in this way on the basis of
particulars; but they cannot judge simply about what they see, they always go to
extremes. A religious of a given order is a great man, a man of good will, and
from this they conclude that the whole order is full of great men and men of good
will. Likewise, a member of a given order is of improper persuasion, and therefore the whole order is corrupt and of improper persuasion. But these latter
judgments are much more dangerous than the former, because we should always
judge well of our neighbor, and because the malice of men makes our condemnation and speech against the reputation of others much more pleasing and makes a
greater impression on the mind than do our complimentary judgments and
speech.
When a wordly man, who follows his passions, remains rooted in his view and
pretends he is right in following the impulse of his passions, he is properly
judged to be opinionated and will recognize himself as such when his passion has
abated. Likewise, when a pious man who is convinced of what he says, and who
has seen the truth of religion and the vanity of wordly things, wishes by his lights
to oppose the misbehavior of others and reprimands them with some zeal, wordly
men judge that he too is opinionated, and in this way conclude that all devout
people are opinionated. They even judge that people of good will are much more
opinionated than unruly, evil people, because these latter defend their opinions
only according to the various agitations of their blood and passions and cannot
long retain their views, and in fact, soon give them up. Instead, pious people
remain firm in theirs, because theirs are based only on secure foundations, which
do not depend on so uncertain a thing as the circulation ofthe blood and humors.
Here, then, is why ordinary men judge that people of piety are as opinionated
as vicious people. The reason is that good people are as impassioned for the truth
and virtue as bad men are for vice and lies. Both speak in almost the same way to
uphold their views; they are alike at least in this, though at bottom they are
different. But this is enough for those who do not comprehend the difference in
their reasons, to judge them alike in everything, i.e., because they are alike in the
way everyone is capable of judging.
The devout, then, are not opinionated; they are only firm as they should be,
whereas vicious men and libertines are always opinionated, even if they should
remain in their position for but an hour, because one is always opinionated when
one defends a false opinion, even if one defends it for but a short time.
The same is true of certain philosophers who have maintained chimerical
opinions that they reject. They would have others who defend certain truths
whose certitude they clearly see give them up as mere opinions, as they have
given up those that they had been inappropriately obstinate about. And because it

260

Nicoltu

Ma/~branch~

is not easy to defer to them at the expense of truth, and because our natural love
for the truth leads us to defend it ardently, they judge us opinionated.
These people were wrong to defend their chimeras so obstinately, but the
others are right in maintaining the truth with strength and firmness of mind. The
manner of each is the same, but their views differ, and this is what makes the
latter firm and the former opinionated.

CONCLUSION OF THE FIRST THREE BOOKS

At the outset of this work. I distinguished, as it were, two parts in the simple and
indivisible being ofthe soul, the one purely passive and the other both active and
passive. The first is the mind or the understanding; the second is the will. I have
attributed to the mind three faculties, because it receives its modifications and
ideas from the Author of nature in three ways. I have called it sense when it
receives from God ideas mixed with sensations. i.e .• sensible ideas, on the
occasion of certain movements taking place in its sense organs in the presence of
objects. I have called it imagination and memory when it receives from God
ideas mixed with imqes, which are a kind of weak and languid sensation the
mind receives only because of certain traces being produced or aroused in the
brain by the flow of spirits. Finally, I call it pure mind, or pure understanding,
when it receives from God entirely pure ideas of the truth, with no admixture of
sensations or images, through its union not with the body but with the Word, or
the Wisdom, of God; not because it is in the sensible, material world, but
because it subsists in the immaterial, intelligible world; not in order to know
mutable things suited to the preservation of the life of the body, but to enter into
immutable truths, which preserve in us the life of the mind.
In the first and second books, I showed (a) that our senses and imqination are
very useful to us in knowing the relations external bodies have to our own; (b)
that all the ideas the mind receives through the body are entirely for the benefit of
the body; (c) that no truth whatever can be clearly discovered through the idea of
the senses or the imagination; (d) that these ideas serve only 10 bind us 10 our
body and through it to all sensible things; and fmally; (e) that if we wish to avoid
error. we should not place our trust in them. I further concluded (a) that it is
morally impossible to know through the mind's pure ideas the relations that
bodies have with our own; (b) that we should not reason with these ideas in order
10 know whether an apple or a stone is good to eat, but that we must taste them;
and (c) that although the mind can be used to know in a confused way the
relations other bodies have with our own, it is always safest to use the senses. I
shall give a further example of this, for truths that are so necessary and essential
cannot be impressed too much upon the mind.

261

262

Nicolas Malebranche

Suppose I wish to determine, for example. which would be of greater advantage to me, to be just or to be rich. If I open the body's eyes, justice seems to be a
chimera; I see nothing attractive in it. I see the just miserable, abandoned,
persecuted, without defense or consolation, because He who consoles and supports them does not appear to my eyes. In a word, I do not see of what use justice
and virtue could possibly be. But if with my eyes open I consider riches, I am
immediately struck and dazzled by them. Power. grandeur, pleasures, and all the
sensible goods accompany riches, and I cannot doubt that to be happy we need
only be rich. Likewise, if I use my ears I hear how everyone values riches, talks
only of the means to obtain them, and constantly praises and honors those who
possess them. This and all the other senses tell me, then, that I must be rich in
order to be happy. But if I close my eyes and ears and consult my imagination, it
will unceasingly represent what my eyes have seen, what they have read, and
what my ears have heard about the advantage of riches. But it will also represent
these things in an entirely different way than do the senses, for the imagination
always increases the ideas of things that we Jove and that are related to the body.
If I let it have its way, it will soon lead me into an enchanted palace like those so
wonderfully described by poets and novelists, and there I shall see beauties I
need not describe that will convince me that only the god of riches inhabiting it is
capable of making me happy. This is what my body can convince me of, for it
speaks only in its own interest, and the imagination must bow before the grandeur and splendor of riches, for the good of the body.
But if I consider that the body is infinitely below the mind, that the body
cannot be its master, and that the body cannot inform it of the truth or illuminate
it, and if with this attitude I withdraw into myself and ask myself-or rather
(since I am neither my own master nor my own light), if I draw near God and,
with my senses and passions quiet, ask Him whether I should prefer riches to
virtue or virtue to riches-then shall I hear a clear and distinct reply about what I
should do, an eternal reply that has always been given, is being given, and
always will be given, a reply I need not explain because everyone knows it, both
those who read this and those who do not, a reply that is neither Greek, nor Latin,
nor French, nor German, but that all nations understand, a reply, in short, that
consoles the just in their poverty and afflicts sinners in the midst of their riches. I
shall hear this reply and be persuaded by it. I shall laugh at the visions of my
imagination and the illusions of my senses. The inner man in me will mock the
terrestrial, animal man that I wear. Finally, the former man will be destroyed and
the new will thrive-provided, however, that I obey the voice of Him who
speaks to me so clearly in the most secret recesses of my reason, and who having
made Himself sensible to adapt Himself to my weakness and corruption and to
give me life through what used to give me death, speaks to me still in a strong,
lively, and familiar way through my senses, i.e., through the preaching of His
Gospel. But if I consult Him in all metaphysical, natural, and purely philosophical questions as well as in questions regarding rules of conduct, I shall always
have a loyal master who will never deceive me-l shall be not only a Christian
but a philosopher as well; I shall be a sound thinker and a lover of what is good;

The Search after Truth

263

in a word, I shall follow the road leading to all the perfection I am capable of
either by nature or by grace.
It must therefore be concluded from what I have said that to make the best
possible use of the faculties of our soul, our senses, our imagination, and our
mind, we should apply them only to those things for which they were given us.
Our sensations and imaginings must be carefully distinguished from our pure
ideas, and the former must guide our judgments about the relations external
bodies have with our own, without our using them to discover the truths they
always confound; and we must use the mind's pure ideas to discover these truths,
without using them to make judgments about the relations external bodies have
with our own, because these ideas never have enough scope to represent them
exactly.
Men cannot, at a given period during sickness, have sufficient knowledge of
all the figures and motion of the tiny particles of their body and blood, as well as
of those of a particular fruit, to know that there is a relation of agreement between
the fruit and their body such that if they eat it they will recover. Thus, our
senses• alone are more useful in preserving the body's health than the rules of
experimental medicine, and the latter is more useful than theoretical medicine.
But theoretical medicine that gives way to experience and even more so to the
senses is best, because all these things should be joined together.
We can use reason in all matters, then, which is its privilege over the senses
and the imagination, that are limited to sensible things-but it must be used with
moderation. For although reason is our principal part, it often happens that we err
by letting it act too much, because it cannot act very long without tiring, that is, it
might not know enough to judge properly and yet we want to judge.

•Sec the EIIICidtJiions (13).

BOOK FOUR: THE INCLINATIONS, OR,
THE MIND'S NATURAL IMPULSES
Chapter One

t

I. Minds must have inclinations as bodies have motions. II. The only impulse
God gives to minds is for Himself. Ill. Minds are moved toward individual
goods only through their impulse toward the good in general. IV. The source of
the principal natural inclinations, which will be the sections into which this
fourth boolc will be divided.
There would be no need to discuss natural inclinations, as we are about to do in
this fourth book, or the passions, as we shall do in the following book, in order to
discover the causes of men's enors, if the understanding did not depend on the
will in our perception of objects. But because it receives its direction from the
will, and its attention is directed by the will toward certain objects rather than
others, it is absolutely necessary that its inclinations be well understood, in order
to penetrate the causes of the enors to which we are subject.

I. Minds must have inclinations just as bodies have motions.
If, in creating the world, God had produced infinitely extended matter without
impressing any motion on it, no body would have been different from any other.
The entire visible world would still be but a single mass of matter or extension
that would have served as witness to the grandeur and power of its Author; but
there would not have been the succession of forms and variety of bodies that
constitute the beauty of the universe and lead all minds to admire the infmite
wisdom of Him who governs it.
Now it seems to me that the mind's inclinations stand to the spiritual world as
motion does to the material world, and that if every mind were without inclinations or never willed anything, there would not be, in the order of spiritual
things, the variety that arouses admiration not only for the profundity of God's
wisdom, as does the diversity found in material things, but also for His mercy,
justice, goodness, and generally all His other attributes. The difference inclinations make among minds is therefore rather like that made by motion among
bodies, and the inclination of minds together with motion in bodies constitutes all
there is of beauty among created beings. Thus, every mind must have some
inclinations just as bodies have different kinds of motion. But let us now try to
discover what inclinations they must have.

26S

266

Nicolas Malebranche

If our nature had not been corrupted there would be no necessity for employing
reason, as we are about to do, in seeking the natural inclinations created minds
must have; all we would have to do would be to consult ourselves, and we would
recognize through the inner sensation we have of what occurs within us all the
inclinations we naturally must have. But because we know through faith thai
Original Sin has upset the order of nature, and because even reason teaches us
that our inclinations are disordered (as will be made clearer in what follows), we
are obliged to take another tack: as our sensations are untrustworthy we are
obliged to explain things in a way which, though more sublime, will undoubtedly
seem less firm to those who appreciate only what can be sensed.
II. God lras no otlrer principal end for His action than Himself; and
tlrey only impulse God gi1·es to minds is for Himself.
It is an unquestionable truth that God can have no other principal end for His
operations than Himself and that He may have many subordinate ends all of
which tend toward the preservation of the beings He has created. He can have no
other special end than Himself because He cannot err or place His final end in
beings that do not contain every sort of good. But He can have as a subordinate
end the preservation of created beings, since as they participate in His goodness,
they are necessarily good and even, according to Scripture, very good: 1•alde
bona. [Gen. I :31) Thus, God loves them, and it is even His love that preserves
them because every being subsists only insofar as God loves it. "Diligis omnia
quaesunt," says the sage, "& nihil odisti eorum quae fecisti: nee enim odiens
aliquid constituisti & fecisti. Quomodo autem posset aliquid permanere, nisi tu
voluisses; aut quod a te vocatum non esset conservaretur" [Wisd. II :25-26).
Indeed, it is inconceivable that things not pleasing to an infinitely perfect and
omnipotent being should subsist, since all things subsist only by His will. God
wills His glory, then, as His principal end and the preservation of His creatures
only for His glory.
Since the mind's natural inclinations are undoubtedly the constant impressions
of the Will of Him who has created and preserves them, it seems to me that these
inclinations must be exactly like those of their Creator and Preserver. By their
very nature, then, they can have no other principal end than His glory, nor any
secondary end than their own preservation as well as the preservation of others,
though always in relation to Him who gives them being. For in short, it seems to
me incontrovertible that since God cannot will that the wills He has created
should love a lesser good more than a greater good, i.e., that they should love
more what is less lovable than what is more lovable, He cannot create a creature
without directing it toward Himself and commanding it to love Him more than all
things, though He can create it free and with the power of separating itself and
turning from Him.

Ill. Minds are mo1•ed toward particular goods only through their
impulse toward the good in general.
As there is properly but one love in God, which is His love for himself, and as
God can love nothing except through this love (since God can love nothing

The SetUch after Truth

267

except in ~lation to HimseiO, so God imprints but one love in us, which is the
love of the good in general, and we can love nothing except through this love
(since we can love nothing that is not, or that does not seem to be, a good). The
love of the good in general is the source of all our particular loves because, in
effect, this love is but our will, for, as I have al~ady said elsewhe~. the will is
nothing other than the continuous imp~ssion of the Author of nat~ that leads
the mind of man toward the good in general. It cenainly need not be imagined
that this power of loving we have comes from, or depends on, us. Only the power
of loving badly, or rather of loving well what we should not love at all, depends
on us, because as free beings we can and do in effect determine toward particular, and consequently false, goods the good love that God unceasingly imprints in
us so long as He continues to p~serve us.
But not only our will (or our love for the good in general) comes from God, but
also our inclinations for particular goods (which inclinations~ common to, but
not equally strong among, all men,) such as our inclination toward the p~serva­
tion of both our own being and those with which we a~ naturally united a~
imp~ssions of God's will on us-for by the term natural inclination, I mean all
the imp~ssions of the Author of natu~ common to all minds.

IV. The source of the principal natural inclinations that will be the
sections of this fourth boo/c.
I have just said that God loves His c~atures and even that His love both
endows them with, and preserves, their being. Thus, since God unceasingly
imprints in us a love like His own (seeing that it is His will that c~ates and rules
our own), He also provides us with all those natural inclinations that do not
depend on our choice, and that necessarily dispose us toward p~serving our own
being and the being of those with whom we live.
For although sin has corrupted all things, it has not destroyed them. Although
our natural inclinations do not always have God as their end by free choice of our
will, they always have God as their end according to nature's institution, for
God, who produces and p~serves them in us, does so only for Himself. Evecy
sinner tends toward God through the impression he receives from Him, though he
draws away from Him due to his mind's errors and abberations. Sinners love well
enough (for it is impossible to love badly, since God is the source of love), but
they love evil things-things that are evil only because God, who endows sinners
with the power of loving, prohibits them from loving these things, because since
Original Sin they tum men away from His love. For as men imagine that creatures cause in them the pleasure they feel upon their occasion, they furiously
chase after material things and utterly forget God, whom they no longer see.
We today, then, still have the same natural inclinations or the same impressions from the Author of nature that Adam had before his sin; we even have
the same inclinations as the blessed in heaven, for God does not create or
preserve creatures without endowing them with a love like His own. He loves
Himself, He loves us, He loves all His creatures; therefore He creates no mind
without inclining it to love Him, to love itself, and to love all creatures.

268

Nicolas Malebranche

But as all our inclinations are only impressions of the Author of nature that
incline us toward loving Him, and all things for Him, they can be controlled only
when we love God will all our strength and all things for God through the free
choice of our will. For we cannot without injustice abuse the love God gives us
for Himself by directing this love toward something other than Him and unrelated
to Him. Thus, we presently know not only what our natural inclinations are, but
further, what they ought to be, if they are to be well regulated and in accordance
with the institution of their Author.
We have then primarily an inclination for the good in general, the cause of all
our natural inclinations, of all our passions, and even of all our soul's voluntary
love, because this inclination for the good in general gives us the power of
withholding our consent to particular goods, which do not fully satisfy it.
Secondly, we have an inclination for the preservation of our own being.
Thirdly, we all have an inclination toward other creatures useful either to us or
to those whom we love. We have many other particular inclinations that depend
on these, but I give this division only to provide some order. In this fourth book I
intend only to relate the errors of our inclinations to three main ones: our inclination for the good in general, self-love, and love of our neighbor.

BOOK FOUR
Chapter Two

t

I. The inclination toward the good in general is the source of the restlessness of
our will. II. And, consequently, of our lack of application and our ignorance.
Ill. First example, that morality is but little known by ordinary men. IV. Second example, that the immortality of the soul is contested by some people.
V. That we are extremely ignorant of abstract things, or things that ha,•e but
little relation to us.
I. The inclination toward the good in general is the source of the
restlessness of our will.
Because it was made only for a good that contains all other goods within itself,
the will's vast capacity for all goods in general cannot be satisfied by all the
things the mind represents to it; and yet this continual impulse toward the good
God impresses upon it cannot be arrested. This impulse, never ceasing, necessarily imparts a continual agitation to the mind; the will, searching out what it
desires, obliges the understanding to represent to itself all sorts of objects. The
understanding represents them to itself, but the soul does not enjoy them; or, if it
does, it is not content with them. The soul does not enjoy them because often the
mind's perception is not accompanied by pleasure; for it is through pleasure that
the soul enjoys its good; and the soul is not content with them, because nothing
can arrest the soul's impulse except Him who has imprinted this impression upon
it. Everything the mind represents to itself as its good is finite, and everything
finite can momentarily distract our love, but cannot hold it permanently. When
the mind considers novel and extraordinary objects, or when it considers objects
containing something of the infinite, the will allows it to examine them attentively for some time, because it hopes to find what it seeks in them, and what is
great and appears infinite and perfect bears the mark of its true good. But after a
while, it is disgusted with these things as well as with others. It is therefore
always restless, because the will is constantly driven to search after what it can
never find, but nevertheless constantly hopes to find. It loves whatever is grand,
extraordinary, or contains the infinite because, not having found its true good in
common and familiar things, it imagines it will find it in those things it does not

269

270

Nicolas Ma/ebranche

know. We shall show in this chapter that the restlessness of our will is one ofthe
principal causes of our ignorance and of the errors into which we fall about an
infinity of subjects. In the two following chapters we shall explain what it is that
produces in us our inclination for everything great and extraordinary.

II. And, consequently. of our lack of application a11d cmr ignorance.
First of all, it is sufficiently evident from what has been said that the will
hardly applies the understanding but to those objects that have some relation to
us, and that it grossly neglects others. Because the will always ardently desires
happiness, and because of its natural impression, it turns the understanding only
toward things that appear useful to us and that provide us with some pleasure.
Second, the will does not permit the understanding to be occupied for very
long even with those things that give it some pleasure, because, as has been said,
all created things can please us for a while, but they quickly become distasteful to
us, and then our mind turns away from them and searches once more for something else to satisfy it.
Third, the will is prompted to make the mind run from object to object,
because it is never without the confused and, as it were, distant representation of
Him who contains all things in Himself (as has been said in the third book). For
the will, desiring, so to speak, to approach its true good more closely in order to
be affected by it and to receive from it the impulse that animates it, excites the
understanding to represent this good to itself in some particular way. But then it
is no longer the general, universal. and infinitely perfect being that the mind
perceives; it is something limited and imperfect, which cannot arrest the will's
impulse, nor please it for very long, and which the will abandons in order to
pursue some other object.
Yet since the attention and application of the mind are absolutely essential in
order to discover even slightly concealed truths, it is obvious that ordinary men
must be in a state of the grossest ignorance even with regard to those things
having some relation to them, and a state of inconceivable blindness in relation to
all abstract truths and those having no sensible relation to them. But we must try
to illustrate these things by examples.

Ill. First example. that morals is but little kllol\'11 by ordinary men.
No science has such a close relation to us as morals. Morality teaches us our
duties to God, our king, our relatives, our friends, and generally to our whole
environment. It even teaches us the path we must follow in order to become
eternally happy; and all men are under an essential obligation, or rather an
indispensable necessity, of applying themselves exclusively to it. Nevertheless,
there have been men for 6,000 years, and this science is still very imperfect.
That part of morals concerning our duty to God, which doubtless is the most
important part, since it relates to eternity, has been little understood by the most
learned men, and even today one finds people of intelligence who have hardly
any awareness of it. Nonetheless, it is the easiest part of morals. For, first of all,
what difficulty is there in recognizing that there is a God? Everything that God
has made proves His existence; everything that men and beasts do proves it;

The Search after Truth

271

everything we think, see. and feel proves it; in shon, there is nothing that does
not prove the exislence of God, or that cannot prove it to attentive minds who
seriously apply themselves to seeking the Author of all things.
In the second place, it is obvious that we must follow the commands of God in
order to be happy. Since He is powerful and just, we cannot disobey Him without
being punished, nor can we obey Him without being rewarded. But what does He
ask of us? That we love Him, that our minds be occupied with Him, that our
heans be turned toward Him. For why has He created minds? Cenainly He can
do nothing other than for Himself: He made us then only for Himself. and we are
indispensably obliged not to tum away from Him the impression of love that He
constantly preserves in us in order that we should love Him constantly.
These truths are not very difficult to discover for anyone who applies himself
to them a little. And yet this single principle of morality-that, in order to be
vinuous and happy, it is absolutely necessary to love God above all things and in
all things-is the foundation of the whole Christian morality. Nor is it necessary
to work very hard in order to derive from this principle all the consequences we
need to establish the general rules of our conduct, although there are very few
people who do derive them, and there are still daily disputes over questions of
morality that are the immediale and necessary consequences of a principle as
evident as this one.
Geomelers are always making new discoveries in their science; now, if they do
not significantly perfect this science, it is because they have already drawn the
most useful and necessary consequences from their principles. But the majority
of men seem incapable of concluding anything from the first principle of morality; even when they wish to think about this principle. all their ideas fade away
and vanish, because they are unwilling to think about it in the right way, and this
is either because they have no taste for it or because they find it distasleful too
soon after tasting it. This principle is abstract, metaphysical, purely intelligible;
it is not sensed or imagined. It therefore appears without solidity to carnal eyes,
or to minds that see only through their eyes. Nothing is to be found in the dry and
abstract consideration of this principle that can quiet the restlessness of their wilts
and focus their mind's perception in order to consider it with some atlention.
What hope is there then, that they will see and understand it well, and will
directly conclude from it what they should conclude?
If men only imperfectly understood this proposition of geometry, namely, that
the sides of similar triangles are proponional to one another, cenainly they would
not be great geomelers. But if, aside from the imperfect and confused understanding of this fundamental proposition of geometry, they had in addition
some interest in seeing that the sides of similar triangles were not proponional,
and if false geometry were as suitable for their perverse inclinations as false
morality, they could well make paralogisms as absurd in geometry as in matters
of morality, because their mistakes would be agreeable to them, and because the
truth would only embarrass, perplex, and anger them.
We should not be surprised, therefore, at the blindness of men who lived in
centuries past when idolatry reigned in the world, or at those now living who are
not yet illuminated by the light of the Gospel. Eternal Wisdom finally had to

Nicolas Malebranche

272

render itself sensible in order to teach men who consult only their senses. For
4,000 yean; the truth spoke to their minds; but, not entering into themselves, they
did not hear it: it had to speak to their em. The light illuminating all men shone
upon their darkness without dispelling it, and they could not even see it; intelligible light had to veil itself and become visible; the Word had to be made tlesh, and
the hidden and inaccessible wisdom had to be taught to carnal man in a carnal
manner; "carnaliter," says Saint Bernard.• Most men, and especially the poor,
who are the most worthy object of the mercy and providence of the Creator, those
who are obliged to work in order to earn their living, are extremely come and
stupid; they hear only because they have em and see only because they have
eyes. They are incapable of retiring into themselves by some effort of the mind,
there to question the truth in the silence of their senses and passions. They cannot
apply themselves to the truth, because they cannot enjoy it; and often they do not
even bother to try because it does not occur to them to apply themselves to what
does not affect them. Their restless and shifting will incessantly turns their
minds' perception toward all the sensible objects that please and divert them
through their variety; for the multiplicity and diversity of sensible goods make it
more difficult for us to recognize their vanity, and always sustain our hope of
finding the true good, which we all desire, among these objects.
Hence, although the counsels that Jesus Christ, as man, as Author of our faith,
gives us in the Gospel are a great deal more in keeping with the weakness of our
mind than those which the same Jesus Christ, as eternal wisdom, as interior truth,
as intelligible light, inspires in us in the most secret recesses of our reason;
although Jesus Christ makes these counsels agreeable through His grace, sensible
by His example, and convincing by His miracles, men are so stupid, and so
incapable of reflection even upon matters whose knowledge is critically important for them to know that they hardly ever think about them as they should. Few
men see the beauty of the Gospel; few conceive the solidity and necessity of the
counsels of Jesus Christ; few meditate upon them; few are nourished and fortified
by them, because the continuous agitation of the will, which searches after the
enjoyment of the good. does not permit us to stop and think about truths that
seem to deprive the will of this enjoyment. Here is another proof of what I say.

IV. Second example. that tire immortality of tire soul is contested by
some people.
The impious undoubtedly must go to great lengths to find out whether their soul
is mortal, as they think, or whether it is immortal, as faith and reason teach us.
This is a matter of ultimate importance to them, since their eternity is at stake and
even their peace of mind depends upon it. How is it, then, that they do not know the
answer to this question, or that they remain in doubt about it, if not because they
are incapable of paying moderately serious attention to it, and because their
restless and corrupted wills do not permit their minds to scrutinize the arguments
opposed to the opinions that they wish to be true? For in the end, is it such a
"Senn. 39, lH 11a1ali Domi11i.

The Search after Truth

273

difficult thing to recognize that there is a difference between the soul and the
body, between that which thinks and that which is extended? Is such great
attention of mind necessary in order to see that a thought is neither round nor
square, that extension is only capable of different figures and motion, and not of
thought and reasoning, and that therefore what thinks and what is extended are
two completely opposite beings? And yet this alone suffices to demonstrate that
the soul is immortal, and that it cannot perish even should the body be annihilated.
When a substance perishes, it is true that the modes or the ways of being of this
substance perish with it. If a piece of wax were annihilated, it is true that the
figures of the wax would also be annihilated with it, because in effect the
roundness of the wax, for example, is only the wax <existing> in a cenain way:
hence it cannot subsist without the wax. But should God destroy all the wax in
the world, it would not follow from this, however, that any other substance, or
the modes of any other substance, would be annihilated. All stones, for example,
would subsist with their modes, because stones are substances or beings, and not
modes of wax.
Li1tewise, if God should annihilate half of some body, it would not follow
from this that the other half would be annihilated. The second half is united with
the first, but it is not one with it. Hence, one half being annihilated, it follows
from this, according to the light of reason, that the other half no longer has any
relation to it; but it does not follow that it no longer exists, since, its existence
being different, it cannot be reduced to nothing by the annihilation of the other. It
is therefore clear that since thought is not the modification of extension, our soul
is not annihilated, even supposing that death should Mnihilate our bodies.
But we are even wrong in imagining that the body is annihilated when it is
destroyed. The particles composing it are vaporized and turned into dust; one no
longer sees or recognizes them. This is true, but one should not conclude from
this that they are no longer, for the mind still perceives them. If we divide a
mustard seed into two, four, or twenty parts, we annihilate it for our eyes,
because we no longer see it; but we have not annihilated it in itself, it has not
been annihilated for the mind, for the mind sees it, even though it be divided into
a thousand or a hundred thousand parts.
It is a common notion to all men who use their reason rather than their senses
that nothing can be annihilated by the ordinary forces of nature; for just as it is
naturally impossible for something to be made from nothing, so it is also impossible for a substance or a being to become nothing. The passage from being to
nothingness or from nothingness to being is equally impossible. Bodies can
therefore be corrupted, if we wish to call the changes that happen to them
corruption, but they cannot be annihilated. What is round can become square,
what is flesh can become eanh, vapor, and whatever you wish, for whatever is
extended is capable of all sons of configurations; but the substance of what is
round and of what is flesh cannot perish. There are certain laws established in
nature, according to which bodies successively change their forms, because the
successive variety of these forms produces the beauty of the universe and gives

274

Nicolas Malebranche

admiration for its Author. But there is no law in nature for the annihilation of any
being, because in nothingness there is no beauty or good, and because the Author
of nature loves His work. Therefore, bodies can change, but they cannot perish.
But if you go no further than the report of your senses, and wish to cling
obstinately to the view that the dissolution of bodies is truly an annihilation
(because the parts into which they are dissolved are imperceptible to our eyes),
then at least remember that bodies can only be divided into these imperceptible
particles because they are extended; for if the mind is not extended, it will not be
divisible, and if it is not divisible, it must be agreed that in this sense it will not be
corruptible. But how could anyone imagine that the mind is extended and divisible? A straight line can be used to cut a square into two triangles, two parallelograms, or two trapeziums; but by what line could a pleasure, a pain, or a desire
conceivably be cut, and what figure would result from this division? Certainly I
do not believe that the imagination is so stocked with false ideas as to be satisfied
with this.
The mind therefore is neither extended nor divisible; it is not susceptible to the
same changes as our bodies; nevertheless, it must be agreed that it is not by its
nature immutable. If the body is capable of an infinite number of different figures
and configurations, the mind is also capable of an infinite number of different
perceptions and modifications. Just as after our death the substance of our flesh
will be decomposed into earth, vapors, and an infinity of other bodies without
being annihilated, so our souls, without returning to nothingness, will have
thoughts and sensations very different from those which it has during this life.
While we are alive, our body must be composed of flesh and bone; and in order
to be alive, our soul must have the ideas and sensations that it has through its
relation to the body to which it is united. But when the soul is separated from its
body, it will be completely free to receive all kinds of ideas and modifications
quite different from those it presently has, as our body for its part will be capable
of receiving all sorts of figures and configurations quite different from those it
must have to be the body of a living man.
It seems to me that the things I have just said make it sufficiently clear that the
immortality of the soul is not such a difficult thing to understand. How does it
happen then that so many people doubt it, unless it is because it pleases them not
to bring to bear upon them the modest attention needed to be convinced by the
arguments that prove it. And what is the cause of their not wanting to bring this
attention to bear, unless it is that their wills are disturbed and inconstant, thereby
incessantly agitating their understanding, so that the understanding does not have
the leisure to perceive distinctly even those ideas that are most present to it, such
as those of thought and extension: just as a man excited by some passion, who
constantly glances in all directions, usually does not discern those objects closest
to him and most easily perceived. For in the end the question of the immortality
of the soul is one of the easiest questions to resolve, if, without listening to our
imagination, we consider with some mental attention, the clear and distinct idea
of extension in order to realize that extension cannot be related to thought.

The Search after Truth

275

If the inconstancy and weakness of our will does not permit our understanding
to penetrate to the bottom of things immediately present to it and of the utmost
importance for us to know, it is easy to judge that it will permit us even less to
meditale upon those things removed from us, having no relation to us. Consequently if we are in a state of extreme ignorance concerning most things that it is
most necessary for us to know, we will not be very enlightened about those that
seem completely vain and useless to us.
It is not really necessary for me to pause here in order to prove this by boring
examples not supporting any significant truths, for if there are things of which
one ought to be ignorant, they are useless things. Although there are but few
people who apply themselves seriously to completely vain and useless things,
there are still too many. But the~ cannot be too many people who ignore and
despise such things, provided they do not make judgments about them. It is not a
fault of a limited mind not to know certain things; it is only a fault to judge them.
Ignorance is a necessary evil, but we can and should avoid error. And so I do not
condemn the ignorance of men in very many matters, but only the excessively
bold judgments they make about them.
Jl. That we are extremely ignorant of abstract things. or things

ha,·ing but little relation to us.
When things are closely related to us, when they are sensible and fall under our
imagination easily, the mind can be said to apply itself to them and to be able to
have some knowledge of them. For when we know that things a~ related to us,
we are inclined to think about them; and when we sense that they affect us, we
apply ourselves to them with pleasure. The~fore, we should be wiser than we a~
with ~gard to a ~at many things, we~ it not for the ~stlessness and agitation
of our will, which ceaselessly troubles and tires our attention.
But when things are abstract and insensible, then even with effort we can
hardly have any assu~d knowledge of them; not because abstract truths are in
themselves very puzzling, but because the mind's focus of attention and perception normally begins and ends in the same sensible perception of objects because
we think only what we sensibly perceive, and only as long as we sensibly
perceive it.
Su~ly, if the mind could easily apply itselfto clear and distinct ideas, without
being, as it we~. supponed by some sensation, and ifthe restlessness of the will
did not unfailingly distract its application, we would not find great difficulties in
an infinity of natural questions we now regard as insoluble and we would be able
in but a little time to deliver ourselves from ignorance and errors in regard to
these questions.
It is, for example, an incontestable truth to every man who uses his mind that
creation and annihilation surpass the ordinary forces of nature. If, then, we
remained attentive to this pure notion of the mind and reason, we would not
admit the c~ation and annihilation of an infmite number of new beings (such as
substantial forms, real qualities and faculties, and so on) with such facility. We

276

Nicolas Malebranche

would search after the explanation of natural effects in the distinct ideas we have
of extension, figure, and motion; and this is not always as difficult as we imagine, for all things in nature are connected with and prove one another.
The effects of fire, like those of cannons and mines, are very startling, and
their cause is somewhat hidden. Nevertheless, if instead of adhering to the
impressions of their senses and to those of certain false or deluding experiences
men would insist strongly upon this single notion of the pure mind, namely, that
it is not possible for a body that is only slightly agitated to produce a violent
motion in another body since it cannot communicate more speed to the body it
strikes than it has in itself, it would be simple to conclude from this alone that
there is some subtle and invisible matter that is violently agitated and is generally
spread throughout all bodies, and to conclude many other similar things that
would enable us to know the nature of fire, and that we could also use to discover
many other more hidden truths.
For the two facts (I) that such great motion is produced in a cannon and in a
mine and (2) that none of the visible bodies that surround them is in a state of
agitation sufficiently great to produce this motion, constitute certain proof that
there are other invisible and insensible bodies that have at least as much agitation
as the cannon ball, but that, being very subtle and delicate, can by themselves
pass freely through the pores of the cannon without rupturing them, before it
fires, i.e., as can be found explained at length and with some probability in
Descartes,• before these more subtle particles have enclosed the hard and coarse
particles of saltpeter composing the cannon powder. But when the cannon is
fired, i.e., when these very subtle and highly agitated particles have surrounded
the coarse and solid parts of the saltpeter and have communicated their strongest
and most violent motion to them, then the whole must explode, because the pores
of the cannon (which left free passage in every direction to the subtle particles of
which we speak when they were alone) are not large enough to give passage to
the coarser particles of saltpeter, and to certain other particles of which the
powder is composed, once they have received the agitation of the subtle particles
that surround them.
For just as the river water running underneath bridges does not disturb them
because of the minuteness of its particles, so the subtlest and most delicate matter
of which I have just spoken continually passes through the pores of all bodies
without causing any sensible changes in them. But yet, just as that river is
capable of overturning a bridge when it carries large masses of ice or some other
solid bodies in its current, and pushes against the bridge with the very same
motion, so the subtle matter is capable of the surprising effects that we see in
cannons and mines. The motion of the subtle matter is infinitely more violent and
rapid than that of rivers and torrents, and when the matter communicates its
motion to the parts of powder floating in it, they cannot pass freely through the
pores of the bodies surrounding them because the particles are too large. They
therefore rupture these bodies violently to gain free passage for themselves.
•Principlrs of Philosophy [4:109-13). See E1ucidalion 16 on lbe generalion of fire.

The Search after Truth

277

But men cannot very easily represent these subtle and delicate panicles to
themselves, and they regard them as illusory because they cannot see them.
"Contemplatio fere desinit cum aspectu," says Bacon. Even the majority of
philosophers would prefer to invent some new entity rather than be silent about
things of which they are ignorant. And if one objects against their false and
incomprehensible suppositions that fire must be composed of very highly agitated particles because it produces such violent motion, and that a thing cannot
communicate what it does not have (which is certainly a very clear and wellfounded objection), they never fail to confuse everything by some frivolous and
imaginary distinction (such as that between equivocal and univocal causes) in
order to appear to say something when in effect they have said nothing. For at
bottom it is a common notion among attentive minds that there is no such thing in
nature as a true equivocal cause (in the sense they understand it) and that only the
ignorance of men has invented them.
Men ought therefore to become more devoted to the consideration of clear and
distinct notions if they wish to know nature. They should check and resist the
inconstancy and weakness of their wills a bit if they wish to penetrate to the
bottom of things, for their minds will always be weak, superficial, and digressive
so long as their wills remain frivolous, inconstant, and fickle.
True, it is fatiguing, and it takes some self-control in order to become anentive
and to penetrate to the bottom of things we wish to know; but nothing is anaincd
without difficulty. It is shameful that intelligent people and philosophers, who
are obliged for very many reasons to search after and defend the truth, speak
without knowing what they say, and are content with terms that do not arouse any
distinct idea in attentive minds.

BOOK FOUR
Chapter Three

t

I. Curiosity is natural and necessary. II. Three r11les for controlling c11riosity.
Ill. An explanation of the first of these rules.
I. C11riosity is nat11ral and necessary.

So long as men have an inclination for a good that surpasses their strength and
that they do not possess, they will always have a secret inclination for anything
that seems novel and extraordinary. They will constantly pursue things to which
they have given no consideration, in the hope of finding what they search for in
them; and since their mind can never be entirely satisfied except through the
perception of Him for whom they were made, they will always be in a state of
restlessness and agitation until He appears to them in His glory.
This disposition of mind is doubtless very consonant with their state, for it is
infmitely better to search restlessly after the truth and the good that we do not
possess than to remain in a state of false satisfaction by being content with the
illusions and false goods with which we normally feed ourselves. Men should not
be insensible to the truth and to their happiness; the new and the extraordinary
should arouse them, and curiosity should be permitted, or rather, ought to be
recommended to them. Thus, common and ordinary things do not contain the
true good; and since the ancient opinions of philosophers are very uncenain, it is
fitting that we be curious about new discoveries, and always restless in the
enjoyment of ordinary goods.
If a geometer had just given us some new propositions contrary to those of
Euclid, if he claimed to prove that this science is full of errors, as Hobbes wanted
to do his book De principii et ratiocinatione Geometrarum . . . .contra fastum
professorum geometriae. I admit that one would be mistaken in being pleased by
this son of novelty, because when we have found the truth, we should stick by it
firmly, since curiosity is given us only in order to lead us to its discovery. Hence,
being curious about new opinions in geometry is not a common fault of geometers. They would be quickly disgusted by a book that contained only propositions
contrary to those of Euclid, because, being very cenain of the truth of these
propositions through incontestible demonstrations, all their curiosity ceases with

278

Th~ s~arch aft~r

279

Truth

regard to them. This is an infallible sign that men have an inclination toward
novelty only because they have not seen the evidence for the truth of the things
they naturally desire to know, and because they do not possess the infinite goods
they naturally wish to possess.

II.

Thr~e

rules for controlling curiosity.

It is therefore fitting that men be excited by novelty and that they love it; but
there are nevertheless some exceptions to be made, and men should observe
certain rules that are easy to derive from what I have just said, that the inclination
toward novelty is given to us only for use in the search after truth and our true

good.
There are three of these rules, the first of which is that men must not love
novelty in maners of faith, which are not subject to reason.
The second rule is that novelty is not a reason that should lead us to believe
that things are good or true, i.e., we should not judge that opinions are true
because they are new, nor that goods can satisfy us because they are new and
extraordinary, when we have not yet possessed them.
The third rule is that when we are well assured that some truths are so deeply
hidden that it is morally impossible to discover them, and that some goods are so
slight and insignificant that they cannot satisfy us, we should not allow ourselves
to be excited by the novelty we find in them, nor permit ourselves to be seduced
by false hopes. But these rules must be explained at greater length, to show that
failure to observe them causes us to fall into a great number of errors.

Ill. A particular explanation of the first of these rules.
One very often finds minds of two very different temperaments. One sort
always wishes to believe blindly, while the other always wishes to see clearly.
The first, having almost never used their mind, indiscriminately believe whatever
is told to them. The others, always wishing to use their minds even in maners that
infinitely surpass them, have indiscriminate contempt for all kinds of authorities.
The first are normally stupid and weak minds, such as children and women; the
others are haughty and libertine ones, such as heretics and philosophers.
It is extremely rare to find people who are exactly in the middle of these two
extremes and who never search for evidence in matters of faith by a useless
agitation of mind, or who do not sometimes believe false opinions concerning
natural things without evidence because of an indiscreet deference and a base
submission of mind. If they be pious and very submissive to the authority of the
Church, their faith sometimes extends, if I may be permitted to state it this way,
over into the realm of purely philosophical views. They often regard these views
with the same respect that they give to the truths of religion. They condemn those
who do not share their convictions too readily with a false zeal. They entertain
injurious suspicions against people who make new discoveries. It is sufficieot to
be adjudged a libertine, in their minds, to deny that there are substantial forms,
that animals feel pain and pleasure, and other philosophical views that they

280

Nicolas

Mal~branche

believe to be true without evident reason, only because they imagine necessary
connections between these opinions and the truths of the faith.
But if they are too bold, their pride makes them despise the authority of the
church, and it is only with difficulty that they submit to it. They are pleased by
harsh and presumptuous opinions, they pretend to be freethinkers, and in this
state they speak of things divine without respect and with a sort of anogance.
They condemn as too credulous those who speak modestly about certain received
views. Lastly, they are extremely prone to doubt everything, and they are completely opposite to those who have too great a facility for submitting to the
authority of men.
It is obvious that both extremes are worthless, and that persons who want no
evidence in natural questions are reprehensible, just as are those who demand
evidence in the mysteries of the faith. But those who place themselves in danger
of being mistaken in questions of philosophy by too ready an acceptance are
doubtless more excusable than others who place themselves in danger of falling
into some heresy by presumptuous doubt. For in the end it is less dangerous to
fall into an infinity of philosophical enors for want of studying them than to fall
into a single heresy for want of humbly submitting to the authority of the Church.
The mind rests when it finds evidence, and it is agitated when it does not,
because evidence is the mark of truth. Hence, the enor of skeptics and heretics
arises from their doubting that the truth is to be found in the decisions of the
Church, because they see no evidence there, and they think that truths of faith
can be recognized by evidence.• Now, their love for novelty is disordered,
because possessing the truth in the faith of the church, they ought no longer to
search after it; further, since the truths of the faith are infinitely beyond their
minds, they could not discover them even supposing (in accordance with their
false thinking) that the church had fallen into enor.
But if there are many people who err in refusing to submit to the authority of
the Church, there are no fewer who err by submitting to the authority of men. We
must submit to the authority of the Church, because she can never err; but it is
never necessary to submit blindly to the authority of men, because they can
always err. What the Church teaches us is infinitely superior to the power of
reason; what men teach us is subject to our reason. Consequently, if it is a crime,
and an intolerable conceit, to search for the truth in matters of faith by following
our reason with no regard to the authority of the Church, it is also frivolous, and a
contemptible meanness of spirit, to blindly believe the authority of men on
subjects which depend upon reason.
Nonetheless, most of those we call learned in this world can be said to have
acquired this reputation only because they know from memory the opinions of
Aristotle, Plato, Epicurus, and some other philosophers, blindly agree with their
views, and obstinately defend them. In order to have some degrees and external
marks of learning in the universities, it is sufficient to know the views of a few
philosophers. Provided one is willing to swear in l•erba magistri, with a bit of
"See nos. 13 and 14. DialoRues on Metaphysics.

The Search after Truth

281

memory he soon becomes a doctor. Nearly all communities have a doctrine that
is proper to them and that is members are forbidden to give up. What is true for
some of them is often false for others. They sometimes glory in upholding the
doctrine of their order against all reason and experience, and they believe themselves obliged to twist either the truth or their authors in order to make them
agree with one another. This produces an infinite number of frivolous distinctions, which are merely so many detours leading infallibly to error.
If some truth is discovered, it must be shown that Aristotle saw it; or if
Aristotle's opinion is contrary to it, the discovery will be false. Some make this
philosopher speak in one way, others in another; for everyone who wants to pass
as a learned man makes him speak in their language. There is no absurdity that
they will not have him pronounce, and there are few new discoveries that are not
mysteriously to be found in some recess of his works. In short, he almost always
contradicts himself, if not in his works, then at least in the mouths of those who
teach him. For although the philosophers protest and claim merely to teach his
doctrine, it is difficult to find two of them in agreement about his views because,
in effect, the books of Aristotle are so obscure and filled with terms so vague and
general that the opinions of those most opposed to him can be attributed to
Aristotle with some plausibility. In certain of his works, one can make him say
anything one wishes because, although he makes a great deal of noise, he says
nearly nothing, just as children interpret the sound of bells in any way that
pleases them because bells make a lot of noise and say nothing.
It is true that it appears very reasonable to focus and fix the mind of man upon
particular opinions, in order to prevent it from wandering. But must it be done by
falsehood and error? Or rather, do you believe that error can reconcile minds? Let
anyone see how rare it is to find intelligent people who are satisfied with the
interpretation of Aristotle, and who are persuaded that they have acquired
genuine knowledge even after growing old with his books, and he will clearly
recognize that only truth and evidence ease the agitation of the mind, and that
disputes, aversions, errors, and heresies are even upheld and strengthened by our
bad methods of study. The truth is indivisible, it does not vary; and only truth can
reconcile minds whereas falsehood and error can but divide and agitate them.
I have no doubt that there are some persons who believe in good faith that he
whom they call the Prine~ of Philosophers is never mistaken, and that only in his
works do we fmd the true and solid philosophy. There are people who imagine
that in the two thousand years since Aristotle wrote, no one has yet been able to
discover that he made a mistake, and that therefore, since he is somehow infallible, they can follow him blindly and quote him as infallible. But we cannot pause
here to respond to those people, for they must be in a state of very great
ignorance, more worthy of disdain than of refutation. I ask only one thing of
them: if they know that Aristotle or any of his followers has ever deduced any
truth from principles of physics that are uniquely his, or if perhaps they have
done this themselves. that they state it, explain it. and prove it. I will promise
them never again to speak of Aristotle except with praise. I shall no longer speak
of his principles as useless, since they will finally have been used to prove a

282

Nicolas Malebranche

truth; but there is little hope for this. This challenge was offered long ago, and
Descartes among others, in his metaphysical meditations, has taken it up, even
promising to demonstrate the falsity of that alleged truth. And to all appearances,
no one will ever hazard to do what the greatest enemies of Descartes and the most
zealous defenders of Aristotle's philosophy have not yet dared to undertake.
Let me therefore be pennitted after all of this to say that it is blindness,
meanness of mind, and stupidity to surrender in this way to the authority of
Aristotle, Plato, or any other philosopher, that it is a waste of time to read them
when we have no other goal than to remember their opinions, and that it is a
waste for those to whom these opinions are taught in this way. Let me say with
Saint Augustine that "a man must be stupidly curious to send his son to school in
order to learn the opinions of his teacher. '•• The philosophers cannot instruct us
through their authority, and if they pretend to do so, they are unjust; it is a kind of
folly and impiety to swear solemnly to defend them. And finally, to oppose the
new opinions of philosophy that may be true, out of <personal> interest, in
order to preserve those that are known to be false or useless, is to hold the truth
captive unjustly.

""Quis ram 5tulle c:uriosus est qui filium suum mitral in ic:holam ut quid magister c:ogitet disc:at. ••
Aug. IN magi•tro [c:h. 141.

BOOK FOUR
Chapter Four

Continuation of th' sam' subj,ct: I. Explanation of the second rule of curiosity.
II. Explanation of the third.
I. Second rule concerning curiosity.
The second rule that must be observed is that novelty should never be used as a
reason for believing that things are true. We have already said several times that
men should not be satisfied with error, and in the false goods they enjoy; that it is
fitting for them to search after evidence of the truth and the true good they do not
possess, and as a result to be led by things extnM>rdinary and novel to them. But
for all that, they should never attach themselves to these things, nor believe
through some weakness of mind that novel opinions are true simply because they
are novel, and that goods are real because they have not yet been experienced.
Novelty should only urge men to examine new things carefully; they should not
hold these new things in contempt, since they do not know them. nor should they
rashly believe they contain what they hope and wish for.
But here is what happens often enough. After having examined ancient and
generally held opinions, men do not recognize the light of truth in any of them.
After having enjoyed ordinary goods, they do not find in them the solid pleasure
that should accompany the possession of the good; their des ires and longings are
therefore not appeased by ordinary goods and opinions. If we tell them about
something novel and extraordinary, then the idea of the novelty immediately
makes them hope that this is exactly what they seek; and because men normally
flatter themselves and willingly believe that things are as they wish them to be,
their hopes are strengthened in proportion as their desires are increased, until in
the end they are insensibly changed into imaginary assurances. They then attach
the ideas of novelty and truth so closely that the one can never be represented to
them without the other; and the more novel always appears to them as truer and
better than the more ordinary and common. In this regard they differ very greatly
from certain other people who, having joined together the ideas of novelty and
falsity (because of an avenion to heresies) imagine that all novel opinions are
false and that they contain something dangerous.
283

284

Nicolas Ma/ebranche

We can say then that this ordinary disposition of the mind and heart of men
with regard to everything that bears the mark of novelty is one of the most
general causes of their errors, for it hardly ever leads them to the truth. When it
does, it is only by chance and good fonune, and in the end it always turns them
away from their true good by involving them in that multiplicity of diversions
and false goods with which the world is filled; and this is the most dangerous
error into which we can fall.

II. Tire third rule of curiosity.
The third rule against excessive desire for novelty is that when we are in
addition assured that truths are so hidden that it is morally impossible to discover
them. and that the goods are so slight and insignificant that they cannot make us
happy, we should not allow their novelty to excite us.
Everyone can know through faith, reason, and experience that all created
goods together cannot exhaust the will's infinite capacity. Faith teaches us that
all wordly goods are mere vanity, and that our happiness does not consist in
honors or in riches. Reason assures us that since it is not in our power to limit our
desires, and since we are inclined through a natural inclination to love all goods,
we cannot become happy except by possessing Him who contains all goods. Our
own experience shows that we are not happy in the possession of the goods we
enjoy, since we desire still others.
Finally, we see every day that the great goods which even the most powerful
princes and kings enjoy on earth are still incapable of satisfying their desires, that
they are even more restless and unhappy than others, and that being, so to speak,
on top of the wheel of fonune, they are bound to be infinitely more agitated and
shaken by its motion than those lower and nearer the center. For when they fall. it
is always from a great height; any wounds they receive are serious; and all that
grandeur which accompanies them and which they make a part of their own being
only makes them larger and more extended, so that they are capable of a greater
number of wounds and are more exposed to the blows of fonune.
Faith. reason, and experience convince us then that earthly goods and pleasures that we have not yet tasted would not make us happy if we possessed them,
and that we ought to take great care (according to this third rule) not to let
ourselves be stupidly deceived by a vain hope of happiness, which increases little
by little in proponion to our passion and desires, and which will be changed in
the end into a false assurance. For when we are extremely impassioned in the
pursuit of some good, we always imagine it to be very great, and are even
imperceptibly convinced that we will be happy when we possess it.
It is necessuy then to resist these vain desires, since it would be useless to try
and satisfy them; but principally because when we abandon ourselves to our
passions and use our time to satisfy them, we lose God and everything else with
Him. We only run from one false good to another; we remain always in a state of
false hope; we dissipate ourselves; we are agitated in a thousand different ways;
we find opposition everywhere because the goods we seek are desired by many
and can be possessed by only a few; and finally we die and possess nothing. For,

The Search after Truth

285

as we are taught by Saint Paul, "Those who wish to become rich fall into the
temptation and snare of the Devil, and into various useless and pernicious desires
that precipitate men into the abyss of perdition and damnation; for cupidity is the
root of all evil. "•
But if we ought not involve ourselves in searching after terrestrial goods that
are new to us, because we are assured that we shall not find in them the happiness
we seek, we likewise should not have the least desire for novel opinions on a
great number of difficult questions, because we know that the mind of man
would be unable to discover their truth. The majority of questions treated in
morals and especially in physics are of this nature, and for this reason we should
mistrust many of the books composed daily on these most obscure and confusing
matters. For although, absolutely speaking, the questions they contain are solvable, nevenheless there have been so few truths discovered as yet, and there are so
many more of them to know before coming to those treated in these books, that
we cannot read them without risk of great loss.
Yet this is not how men proceed: they do just the opposite. They do not
question the possibility of what is told to them. It is only necesslll}' to promise
them extraordinlll}' things, such as the restoration of natural heat, radical moisture, vital spirits, or other things they do not understand, in order to excite their
vain curiosity and preoccupy them. In order to dazzle them and to win them over
it is sufficient to propose paradoxes, to use obscure words, impressive terms, or
the authority of some unknown authors, or even better, to perform some extraordinlll}' experiment that appeals to the senses, even though it has no relation to the
thesis that is advanced; for in the case of such men, to confuse them is to
convince them.
If a physician, a surgeon, or an empiric quotes Greek and Latin passages and
uses novel and extraordinlll}' terms for his audience, then they are great men. We
give them the poweroflife and death; we believe them as we would oracles; they
imagine themselves to be well above common men and believe that they penetrate to the bottom of things; and if someone is so indiscreet as to claim that we
cannot take five or six words that signify and prove nothing as an argument, they
imagine that he has no common sense and that he is denying first principles. But
in effect, the first principles of these people are five or six Latin words of some
author (or some Greek passage, if they are more adept).
It is sometimes even necesslll}' for learned medical men to speak a language
that their patients do not understand in order to acquire some reputation and to be
obeyed.
A doctor who knows only Latin might be highly esteemed in his village,
because Latin might as well be Greek or Arabic for the peasant. But if a doctor
cannot at least read Greek, in order to learn some aphorism of Hippocrates, he
should not expect to pass for a learned man in the eyes of city people, who
normally understand Latin. Hence doctors, even the most learned of them, knowing this fancy of men, find themselves obliged to speak as cheats and ig"Ch. 6, Tim. [(II, 6:9-lq.

286

Nicolas Malebranche

noramuses, and we should not always judge their capacity and good sense by the
things that they might say during their visits. lflhey occasionally speak Greek, it
is 10 chann the sick person and not the illness, for they know very well that a
Greek passage has never cured anyone.

BOOK FOUR
Chapter Five

t

I. The second natural inclination, or self-lo,·e, II. Its division into tl1e lo,•e of
being, and of well-being, or of grandeur and pleasure.
I. The second natural inclination, or self-lo,·e.
The second inclination the Author of nature unceasingly impresses on our will is
the love of ourselves or of our own preservation.
We have already said that God loves all His works, that it is His love alone that
preserves them, and that he wishes all created minds to have the same inclinations toward Him. He therefore wills that they all have a natural inclination for
their preservation and for their happiness, because they cannot be happy without
existing. Nevertheless, it is not fining for man to place his final end in himself,
and to love himself except in relation to God. Because in fact we do not have any
goodness or independent subsistence in and of ourselves; we have no power to
make ourselves happy and perfect, and we should love only in relation• to God,
Who alone can be our sovereign good and make us perfect.
If faith and reason teach us that only God is the sovereign good, and that He
alone can fill us with pleasures, we can easily conceive that we should therefore
love Him and yield to Him without resisting; but without grace, we always love
Him imperfectly and through self-love-1 mean here an unjust and disordered
self-love. For ahhough we might love Him for having the power to make us
happy, we do not love Him as sovereign justice, we do not love Him as He is.
We love Him from our point of view as a humanely kind and accommodating
God, and we do not wish to conform to His law, to the immutable order of His
divine perfections. Pure charity is so far beyond our strength that no matter how
hard we try to love God for Himself, or as He is in Himself, human reason does
not easily understand that it is possible to love in a way other th~m in relation to
self, and to have a different purpose than its own satisfaction.
"I explain myself IIICft clearly .ad II pater length in lhe aealitelH r Amour d~ Dwu. aad in lhe
1hinl leuer 10 Fr. Lamy. For hele I speak of inclinalions only in pusinJ. and 10 relale lhe c:a~~~~:s of
our enon wilh some order.

287

288

Nicolas Malebranche
II. Self-love is divided into /01•e of being and of well-being. or of
grandeur and pleasure.

Self-love can be divided into two species, namely, love of grandeur and love
of pleasure; or into the love of one's being, and the perfection of one's being, and
into the love of one's well-being or felicity.
Through the love of grandeur we affect power, excellence, independence, and
self-subsistence of our being. We desire somehow to have necessary being: in a
sense we wish to be like gods. For only God properly has being, and necessarily
exists, since everything dependent exists only through the will of Him upon
whom they depend. Therefore men, desiring the necessity of their being, also
desire the power and independence that will place them beyond the power of
others. But by the love of pleasure, they desire not simply being but well-being
since pleasure is the mode [manniere d' etre] of being that is the best and most
agreeable to the soul: I say pleasure precisely as pleasure. Consequently, it
appears certain to me that pleasure in general, in so far as it contains both rational
and sensible pleasures, is the unique motive or principle of natural love or of all
the soul's impulses toward any possible good, for one can love only what is
pleasing. If the blessed love the divine perfections, God as He is in Himself, it is
because the perception of these perfections pleases them. For since man is made
to know and love God, it was necessary that the perception of everything perfect
should please them.
It must be noted that grandeur, excellence, and independence are not modes
that render creatures happier by themselves, since it often happens that one
becomes miserable in proportion to the increase in one's grandeur. But as for
pleasure, it is a mode we could not receive without actually becoming happier; I
do not say permanently happy. Grandeur and independence most often are not in
us at all, and they normally consist only in the relations we have to the things
around us. But pleasures are in the soul itself, and they are real modes that
modify it and that, through their own nature, are capable of satisfying it. Therefore, we regard excellence, grandeur, and independence as proper things for the
preservation of our being, and sometimes even as things very useful according to
the natural order for the preservation of well-being. But pleasure is always a
mode of the mind that by itself makes it happy (and if it is well-founded, makes it
perfectly content), so that pleasure is well-being, and the love of pleasure is the
love of well-being.
Now this love of well-being is stronger in us than the love of being; and
self-love sometimes causes us to desire nonbeing, because we do not have
well-being. This happens to all the damned, for whom it would be better, according to the word of Jesus Christ, not to be than to be as evil as they are, because
these unhappy people, being declared enemies of Him who contains in Himself
all goodness (and who is the sole cause of the pleasures and pains we can feel)
cannot enjoy any satisfaction. They are and eternally will be miserable, because
their will shall always remain in the same disposition and in the same derangement. Self-love contains two loves then: the love of grandeur, power, indepen-

The Seorch after Truth

289

dence, and generally of all things that appear to us to contribute to the preservation of our being, and the love of pleasure and of all things necessary for our
weD-being, i.e., for our happiness and contentment.
These two loves can be divided in many ways either because we are composed
of two different parts, body and soul, according to which they may be divided, or
because we can distinguish or specify them according to the different objects
useful for our preservation. Nevertheless, I shall not pause to discuss this, because my plan is not to produce a moral philosophy, and thus it is not necessary
to undertake a study and an exact division of all the things we regard as our
goods. It has only been necessary to make this initial division in order to repon
the causes of our errors with some order.
I shall therefore first speak of the errors caused by our inclination for grandeur
and for everything that frees our being from dependence on others. And following this, we shall treat of those errors that arise from our inclination toward
pleasure, and toward everything that renders our being as best it can be for us, or
that most satisfies us.

BOOK FOUR
Chapter Six

I. Tire inclination we have toward e~·erything that raises liS abow! others. II. Tire
false judgments of certain pious people. Ill. The false judgments of tire
superstitious and of hypocrites. IV. Vo~t. enemy of Descartes.
I. The inclination we ha1•e toward e1•erything that raises
others.

liS

abo1•e

Everything that gives us a certain elevation over others by making us more
perfect, such as science and virtue, or else by giving us a certain authority over
them by making us more powerful, such as honors and riches, seems to make us
to some extent independent. All those below us revere and fear us; they are
always prepared to do what pleases us for our preservation, and they dare not
harm us or resist our desires. Hence men always try to possess these advantages
that raise them above other men. For they do not consider that their being and
their well-being depend, in truth, upon God alone, and not upon men, and that
true grandeur, which will make them eternally happy, does not consist in the rank
that they hold in the imagination of other men as feeble and as miserable as
themselves, but in the honorable rank they have in the divine Reason, in that
omnipotent Reason that will eternally render to each according to his works.
But men not only desire actually to possess knowledge and virtue, honors and
riches, they exert all their efforts so that people will at least believe they truly
possess them. And if it can be said of them that they put themselves to less
trouble to appear rich than really to be so, it can also be said that they often take
fewer pains to be virtuous than to appear so; for, as the author of the Moral
Reflections nicely put it, "Virtue would not go far if vanity did not keep her
company.''
The reputation of being rich, learned, and virtuous produces in the imagination
of those around us, or who concern us most closely, dispositions that are very
advantageous to us. It prostrates them at our feet; it excites them in our favor; it
inspires in them all the impulses that tend to the preservation of our being, and to
the increase of our grandeur. Therefore, men preserve their reputation as a good
that they need in order to live comfortably in the world.
290

The Search after Truth

291

All men therefore have an inclination toward virtue, knowledge, honors, and
riches, and for the reputation of possessing these advantages. We shall now show
with a few examples how these inclinations can involve us in enor. Let us begin
with the inclination toward virtue, or toward the appearance of virtue.
People who seriously work to become virtuous utilize their minds and their
time almost exclusively in the study of religion and the doing of good works.
Like Saint Paul, they only wish to know that Jesus Christ crucified <is> the
remedy for the illness and corruption of their nature. They do not desire any other
light than that necessary to live as Christians, and to recognize their duties; and
afterward they apply themselves only to what fulfills them, with fervor and
precision. Hence, they hardly amuse themselves with sciences that appear vain
and sterile for their salvation.

II. Tire false judgments of certain pious people.
We can find nothing to criticize in this conduct; we hold it in infinite esteem,
and would be happy to think of ourself as holding exactly to this path, and we
repent of not having followed it closely enough. But what cannot be approved is
this: it is established that there are purely human sciences, quite certain and quite
useful, that detach the mind from sensible things and gradually accustom or
prepare it to taste the truths of the Gospel; and yet some people of piety, without
having examined them, condemn these sciences too freely as being either useless
or uncertain.
It is true that the majority of sciences are very uncertain and quite useless. One
would not be greatly mistaken to believe that they contain only truths oflittle use.
It is permissible never to study them, and it would be better to hold them
completely in contempt than to allow oneself to be charmed and dazzled by them.
Nevertheless, one can be assured that it is very necessary to know certain truths
of metaphysics. Knowledge of the universal cause, or of the existence of a God,
is absolutely necessary, since even the certainty of the faith depends on the
knowledge that reason gives of the existence of a God. We ought to know that it
is God's will that creates and rules nature, that the force or power of natural
causes is but His will, and in a word, that all things depend upon God in every
way.
It is also necessary to know what truth is, the means for distinguishing it from
enor, the distinction between minds and bodies, the conclusions we can draw
from these distinctions, such as the immortality of the soul and many such others
we can know with certainty.
The science of man, or of oneself, is a science that cannot reasonably be
depreciated. It is filled with an infinity of things absolutely necessary to know in
order to have some accuracy and penetration of mind. If it may be said that even
a coarse and stupid man is infinitely above matter because he knows that he exists
whereas matter does not, then those who know <the nature of> man are very
much above coarse and stupid people because they know what they are, whereas
the others do not.

292

Nicolas Ma/ebranche

But the science of man is not only estimable because it raises us above others;
it is even more so because it lowers and humbles us before God. This science
makes us perfectly aware of our dependence upon Him in all things, even in our
most ordinlll)' actions; it makes manifest to us the corruption of our nature; it
disposes us to have recourse to Him who alone can cure us, to attach ourselves to
Him, to mistrust ourselves and to look beyond ourselves; It thus disposes the
mind in several quite proper ways to submit to the grace of the Gospel.
One can hardly do without at least a crude smattering and a general knowledge
of mathematics and nature. Everyone should have learned these sciences in his
youth; they detach the mind from sensible things, and they prevent it from
becoming soft and effeminate. They are rather useful in life, and they even direct
our attention toward God; the knowledge of nature causes this in and of itself,
and that of mathematics through the distaste that it inspires in us for the false
impressions of our senses.
Virtuous people should not belittle these sciences, or regard them as uncertain
or useless, unless they are sure they have studied them sufficiently to make solid
judgments about them. There are sufficient numbers of others they can
wholeheartedly condemn. Let them readily condemn to the flames the pagan
poets and philosophers, the rabbis, certain historians, and a large number of
authors who are responsible for the glory and erudition of certain learned men;
we will hardly be troubled by it. But let them not condemn the knowledge of
nature as being contrary to religion, because since nature is ruled by the will of
God, true knowledge of nature causes us to understand and admire the power,
grandeur, and wisdom of God. For in the end it seems that God has formed the
universe that minds might study it, and that through this study they might be led
to the knowledge and worship of its Author. Consequently, those who condemn
the study of nature seem to oppose the will of God, were it not for the fact that
they claim that since the Fall of Man, his mind is incapable of such study.
Neither let them say that the knowledge of man only puffs him up and makes him
vain, because those who pass in this world as having a perfect knowledge of man
(although often they know very little about him) are normally full of an insupportable pride; for it is obvious that one cannot really know man without feeling
his weaknesses and miseries.

Ill. The false judgments of superstitious and hypocritical people.
Moreover, it is not people of a true and solid piety who normally condemn
what they do not understand, but rather those who are superstitious and hypocritical. The superstitious, because of a servile fear, and a baseness and weakness of
the mind, are frightened whenever they see some lively and penetrating mind.
For example, it is only necesslll)' to give them the natural explanation of thunder
and its effects in order to be an atheist in their view. But the hypocrites, by a
devilish malice, transform themselves into angels of light. They use the appearances of holy and universally revered truths to oppose, out of special interest,
truths that are only slightly known and appreciated. They impugn the truth with
the image of truth; and, while sometimes mocking in their hearts what everyone

The Search after Truth

293

respects, they establish a reputation in the minds of men that is the more solid and
fearful, as the thing that they have abused is more holy.
These persons are, therefore, the strongest, most powerful, and most redoubtable enemies of truth. It is true that they are fairly rare, but it only takes a few of
them to cause very great evil. The appeamnce of truth and virtue often does
greater hann than truth and virtue themselves do good; for it only takes one adroit
hypocrite to upset what many truly wise and virtuous people have constructed
with very great pain and labor.

IV. Voet.
Descartes, for example, demonstratively proved the existence of a God, the
immortality of our souls, many other metaphysical questions, and a large number
of physical ones, and our age is infinitely indebted to him for the truths he has
discovered for us. Nevertheless, an insignificant man appears, an ardent and
vehement declaimer, respected by people because of the zeal he manifests for
their religion, and this person writes books full of insults against Descartes and
accuses him of the greatest crimes. Descartes was a Catholic; he studied under
the Jesuits, and he often spoke of them with admiration. This was enough to
enable this malign spirit to persuade the enemies of our religion (who are easily
excitable over maners as delicate as those of religion) that Descartes is an
emissary of the Jesuits with dangerous plots, because the slightest appearance of
truth in matters of faith has more force upon men's minds th~m in real and
positive truths of physics or metaphysics, to which they have given very linle
effort. Descartes wrote about the existence of God. And this was enough for this
slanderer to exercise his false zeal in order to suppress all the truths defined by
his enemy. He accuses him of being an atheist, and even of cunningly and
secretly teaching atheism, just like the infamous atheist called Vanini who was
burned at the stake in Toulouse, who concealed his malice and impiety by writing
for the existence of a God. One of the reasons Voet gives to support his claim
that his enemy is an atheist is that he wrote against atheists, as Vanini did, in
order to conceal his impiety.
This is how the truth is suppressed when someone is supported by the appearances of truth and has acquired great authority over feeble minds. Truth loves
gentleness and peace, and as strong as she is, she sometimes gives in to the pride
and arrogance of a lie adorned and anned with her own appeamnces. She knows
well that error can do nothing against her; and if she sometimes dwells as an exile
in obscurity, it is only to await more favorable occasions for coming into the
daylight. For in the end the truth nearly always appears stronger and more
brilliant than ever, even in the very place she was suppressed.
It is not surprising that an enemy of Descartes, a man of a religion different from
his, an ambitious man who dreamed only of raising himself upon the ruins of
those above him, a declaimer without judgment, in other words, a Voet. speaks
with contempt about what he does not understand and does not wish to understand. But we have cause for astonishment when men who are neither enemies
of Descartes nor of his religion have accepted the adverse and contemptuous

294

Nicolos Malebranche

opinions against him because of the insults they have read in books composed by
the enemy of his person and his religion.
This heretic's book, entitled Desperata causa papat1is, sufficiently shows his
impudence, ignorance, enthusiasm, and his desire for appearing zealous in order
to acquire some reputation among his own. Thus, he is not a man one should
believe on his word. For just as we should not believe all the fables he has
amassed in this book against our religion, so also we should not accept on his
word the atrocious accusations and insults he has invented against his enemy.
Reasonable men need therefore not allow themselves 10 be persuaded that
Descartes is a dangerous man because they have read this in some book, or
because they have heard it said by some people whose piety they respect. II is not
permissible 10 believe men on their word when lhey accuse others of the greatest
crimes. II is not a sufficient reason to believe a thing because it was said by a man
who spoke with zeal and gravity; for in the end cannot falsehoods and stupidities
be uttered in the same way as good things. especially when the speaker is
convinced of them because of simplicity and weakness?
II is easy 10 determine the truth or falsity of the accusations made against
Descartes; his writings are readily available, and quite easy 10 understand if one
is capable of paying attention 10 them. Let a man read his works then, so that he
might have other proofs against him than simple hearsay: and I hope that after he
has read them and meditated on them, Descartes will no longer be accused of
atheism. and that on the contrary he will have all the respect that one should have
for a man who has demonstrated in a very simple and evident way not only the
existence of a God and the immortality of the soul but also an infmity of other
truths that were unknown until his time.

BOOK FOUR
Chapter Seven

t

Th~ d~sir~

for knowledge, and til~ judgment of count~rfeit scholars.

The mind of man doubtless has very little capacity and scope, but nevertheless
there is nothing it does not wish to know. All the human sciences cannot content
man's desile, yet the capacity of his mind is so restricted that it cannot perfectly
comprehend a single panicular science. He is continually agitated, and always
desires to know, whether because he hopes that he will find what he searches for,
as we have noted in the preceding chapters, or because he is penuaded that his
soul and mind will be made greater through the vain possession of some extraordinary knowledge. The inordinate desire for his own happiness and grandeur
causes him to study all the sciences, hoping to fmd his happiness in the moral
ones, and searching after this false grandeur in the speculative, and in all those
vain and exotic sciences that elevate those who possess them in the minds of
those ignorant of them.
How is it that there are people who spend their entile lives reading the Rabbis
and other corrupt books written in foreign, obscure languages by authors with
neither taste nor intelligence, unless it is because they are persuaded that knowing oriental languages places them in a greater and more elevated position than
those ignorant of them? And what can support them in their thankless, disagreeable, difficult, and useless work if it is not the hope of some elevation and the
sight of some vain grandeur? Indeed, we look at them as rare men; we compliment them on their profound erudition; we listen to them more willingly than to
others; and although it can be said that they are usually the least judicious of men
(as would be the case if only because they spend their entire lives in such a
useless task, which can make them neither wiser nor happier), nevertheless they
are imagined to be more intelligent and judicious than other people. Because they
are more knowledgeable about the origin of words, we let ourselves be persuaded
that they are learned in the nature of things.
It is for the same reason that astronomers spend their time and wealth to get a
precise knowledge of what is not only useless but impossible to know. They hope
to fmd in the paths of the plaoets an exact regularity that simply is not to be found
there, and to formulate astronomical tables in order to predict effects of whose
295

296

Nicolas Malebranche

causes they are ignorant. They have composed a Selenography, or geography of
the moon, as if men planned to travel there. And they have already divided up
this planet among the illustrious of astronomy; there are few of these iUustrious
scholars who do not have some province in this country as a reward for their great
labors, and I do not doubt that they take some pride in having been in the good
graces of him who distributed these realms among them so magnificently.
How is it that reasonable men apply themselves so vigorously to this science,
while remaining in the grossest errors with regard to truths very useful for them
to know, unless it is that knowledge of what happens in the heavens seems to
them to be something grand? Knowledge of the slightest thing that happens
above us seems to them more noble, more sublime, and more worthy of the
greatness of their minds than the knowledge of vile, abject, and corruptible
things, which, in their opinion, all sublunary bodies are. The nobility of a science
derives from the nobility of its object; this is a great principle! The know ledge of
the motion of unchangeable and incorruptible bodies is therefore the highest and
most sublime of all sciences. Therefore, it appears worthy to them of the greatness and excellence of their mind.
Thus it is that men permit themselves to be dazzled by a false idea of grandeur
that flatters and excites them. As soon as their imagination is struck by it, it bows
down before this phantom; it reveres this phantom while overthrowing and blinding reason, which ought to judge such matters. It seems that men are in a dream
when they judge the object of their passion, and that they are lacking in common
sense. For in the end, what is there that is so grand about the knowledge of
planetary motion, and do we not already know enough about it in order to
regulate our months and years? Why do we make so much of knowing whether
Saturn is surrounded by a ring, or by many small moons, and why take sides on
the issue? Why glorify ourself for having predicted the size of an eclipse when
the accuracy of our prediction might have been due to luck? There are people
designated by the order of a prince to observe the stars; let us content ourselves
with their observations. They apply themselves to this work with good reason,
for they do their duty in so doing: it is their occupation. They achieve success in
it, for they work at it ceaselessly with art, industry, and with all possible precision; nothing is denied them in their efforts. Thus, when they make us party to
their discoveries, we should be completely satisfied about a matter that so little
concerns us.
It is good that many apply themselves to the study of anatomy, because it is
extremely useful and because the knowledge to which we ought to aspire is that
which is the most useful to us. We can and we should apply ourselves to what
contributes something to our happiness or rather to the easing of our infirmities
and miseries. But to spend whole nights hanging from a telescope in order to
discover some spot or some new planet in the sky, to ruin one's health and lose
one's wealth and abandon the demands of our businesses in order to pay regular
visits to the stars, and to measure their size and positions, seems to me to
completely forget what man is presently, and what he will one day be.
And let no one say that this is to recognize the grandeur of Him who has made
all these great objects. The smallest fly better manifests the power and wisdom of

The Search after Truth

297

God to those who will consider it with attention, and without being prejudiced
by its size, than everything the astronomers know about the heavens. Yet men are
not made to spend their lives studying flies and insects; and we do not highly
approve the trouble certain persons have taken to inform us of how the lice of
each species of animal are made, and how different worms are changed into flies
and butterflies. We might divert ourselves with this for lack of something better
to do, but unless they are insensible to their miseries, men should not spend all
their time in such pursuits.
They should continually apply themselves to learning about God and themselves, to working seriously to rid themselves of their errors and prejudices, their
passions and their inclination toward sin, to arduously searching after the truths
most necessaey to them. For in the end the most judicious people are those who
most carefully search after the most solid truths.
The major cause that engages men in false ideas is that they have attached the
idea of learning to these vain and fruitless studies instead of to solid and necessaey sciences. For when a man takes it into his head to become learned, and the
spirit of polymathy begins to excite him, he hardly ever examines which among
the sciences are the most necessaey to him, either for conducting himself as an
honest man or for perfecting his reason; he only looks at those accepted as
learned in the world, and at whatever they have in them that makes them worthy
of consideration. Since all the most solid and most necessaey sciences are rather
common, they bring neither admiration nor respect to those who possess them;
for people regard common things without attention and emotion, however beautiful and admirable they may be in themselves. 1bose who wish to become learned
hardly pause, therefore, to study the sciences necessaey to the conduct of life and
the perfection of the mind. This is because these sciences do not evoke in them
the idea of the sciences that they have formed, because they are not the ones they
have admiml in others and that they hope others will admire in them.
Knowledge of the Gospel and morality are too common and ordinaey for them.
Their hope is to understand the criticism of certain terms found in the ancient
philosophers or in the Greek poets. Languages, and especially those not used in
their countries, such as Arabic and the language of the rabbinate, or the like,
appear to them worthy of their dedication and study. If they read Sacred Scripture, it is not in order to learn religion and piety; points of chronology, geography, and the difficulties of grammar completely occupy them; they desire the
knowledge of these things with greater ardor than they do the knowledge of the
salutary truths of the Gospel. They want to possess in themselves the science that
they have foolishly admired in others, so that the foolish will not fail to admire it
in them.
Likewise with regard to the knowledge of nature, they rarely search after the
most useful, but rather the least common. Anatomy is too lowly for them,
whereas astronomy is more exalted. Ordinary experiments are little worthy of
their application, but these rare and surprising experiments, which can never
enlighten the mind, they observe with the greatest care.
The rarest and most ancient histories are the ones that they glory in knowing.
They do not know the genealogy of currently reigning princes, but they carefully

298

Nicolas Malebranche

research those of men who have been dead for four thousand years. They neglect
to learn the most common histories of their own time, but they seek a perfect
understanding of the fables and fictions of poets. They do not even know their
own relatives, but if you wish, they will present many authorities to prove that
some Roman citizen was allied with some emperor, and other such things.
They hardly know the names of ordinary garments used in their own times, but
they amuse themselves in finding out the names of those used by the Greeks and
Romans. The animals of their own countries are hardly known to them, yet they
have no fear in taking many years to compose great volumes about the animals of
the Bible, in order to appear better than others at having divined what unknown
terms signify. Such a book delights its author and the scholars who read it,
because being laced with Greek, Hebrew, Arabic, etc., passages and quotations
from the rabbis, and other rare and obscure authors, it satisfies the vanity of its
author and the silly curiosity of those who will fancy themselves more learned
than others when they can proudly say that there are six different words in the
Scripture signifying a lion, or some such thing.
The map of their country, or even of their own city, is often unknown to them,
but they are studying the maps of ancient Greece, Italy. Gaul during the time of
Julius Caesar, or the streets and public places of ancient Rome. "Labor stultorum," says the Sage, "affliget eos, qui nesciunt in urbem pergere" [Eccl.
10:15]: they do not know the way to their city, and they tire themselves foolishly
in useless inquiries. They know neither the laws nor the customs of the place
where they live, but they carefully study ancient law, the laws of the Twelve
Tables, the customs of the Lacedaemonians, or of the Chinese, or the ordinances
of the great Mogol. In short they want to know all rare things. all the extraordinary and irrelevant things. that others do not know, because through a subversion
of the mind, they have attached the idea of learning to these things. and because
it is sufficient to be esteemed as learned to know what others do not know. even
when one is ignorant of the most necessary and beautiful truths. It is true that the
knowledge of all these and other similar things is called science, erudition, and
knowledge; usage will have it so; but there is a science according to Scripture that
is nothing but folly and stupidity: "Doctrina stultorum fatuitas" [Prov. 16:22]. I
have not yet noticed that the Holy Spirit, who praises science so much in the holy
writings, says anything on behalf of this false science of which I have just
spoken.

BOOK FOUR
Chapter Eight

t

I. The desire to appear learned. II. The discourse of counterfeit scholars. Ill.
Their works.
I. The desire to appear learned.
If the inordinate desire to become learned often makes men more ignorant, the
desire to appear learned not only makes them more ignorant but seems to subvert
their reason. For there are an infinity of people who lose their common sense
because they wish to surpass it, and who utter nothing but stupidities because
they wish to speak only in paradoxes. They deviate so far from aU common
thinking in their plan for acquiring the quality of a rare and extraordinary mind
that indeed they succeed, and are no longer noticed, or are regarded either with
admiration or with very much contempt.
They are sometimes regarded with admiration when, being elevated by some
high office that covers them, they are imagined to be above other people as much
because of their genius and learning as because of their rank or birth. But when
they are closely studied and when their grandeur does not hide them from the
eyes of others, they are most often regarded with contempt, and sometimes are
even looked upon as fools.
Counterfeit scholars manifestly exhibit themselves as such in the books they
write and in their ordinary conversations. Perhaps it may be appropriate to say
something of them.

II. The discourse of counterfeit scholars.
Since it is vanity and the desire to appear greater than others that motivates
<counterfeit scholars> to study, no sooner do they take part in conversation
<than> the passion and the desire for advancement is reawakened in them and
carries them away. They suddenly fly so high that almost everyone loses them
from sight, and often they themselves do not know where they are. They are so
fearful of not being above all those who listen to them that they are angered even
when followed, infuriated when anyone asks them for some clarification, and
even take on a proud air in the face of the slightest disagreement. In short, they
say things so novel and extraordinary, but so far removed from common sense,
299

300

Nicolas Malebranche

that the wisest men have difficulty not laughing, whereas others are simply
dumbfounded by them.
After their initial assualt, if there is some mind strong and firm enough not to
have been upset who shows them that they are wrong, they nonetheless remain
stubbornly attached to their errors. The air of those whom they have confused
confuses them; the aftereffect of seeing the approval their impression has elicited
is that they themselves are convinced; or, if this sight does not convince them, it
at least infuses them with enough courage to uphold their false views. Vanity
does not permit them to retract their words. They always look for some argument
by which to defend themselves; they never speak with more ardor and conviction
than when they have nothing to say; with each argument that is brought against
them, they imagine that they have been insulted and that someone is trying to
belittle them; and the stronger and more judicious these arguments are, the more
it irritates their aversion and pride.
The best way to defend the truth against them is not to argue, for in the end it is
better for both them and us to leave them in their errors than to excite their
hatred. Their heart must not be wounded when we wish to heal their minds, since
the wounds of the heart are more dangerous than those of the mind. Besides, it
sometimes happens that we must deal with a truly learned man whom we might
despise for lack of understanding his thinking. <Because of this> it is essential
to ask those who speak with authority to explain themselves as distinctly as they
can, without permitting them to change the topic or to use obscure and equivocal
terms; and if they are enlightened, we shall learn something with them. But if
they are counterfeit scholars, they will shortly be confounded by their own
words, and they will have no one to blame for it but themselves. We may receive
some instruction and even some entertainment from this, if it is permissible to be
entertained by the weakness of others when we are trying to cure it. But what is
more important is that by doing this we shall prevent the weak who listen to them
admiringly from submitting to error by following their decisions.
For it must be carefully noted that since the number of fools, or those who
allow themselves to be mechanically led by sensible impressions, is infinitely
greater than those who have some breadth of mind and who are only convinced
by reason, when one of these counterfeit scholars speaks and pronounces on
something, there are always very many more people who take him at his word
than there are those who distrust him. But, because these false scholars remove
themselves as far as they can from common thinking, as much because of the
desire to find some opponent to mistreat in order to elevate themselves and to
appear <learned> as because of a perverse mind or a spirit of contradiction,
their pronouncements are usually false or obscure, and it is quite rare for anyone
to listen to them without falling into some error.
Now, this method for discovering the errors of others, or the solidity of their
views, is quite difficult to put into practice. The reason is that counterfeit scholars are not the only ones who want to appear to know everything. Almost all men
have this fault, especially those who have done some reading and studying,
which makes them always want to discuss and to explain their views without

The Search after Truth

301

paying enough attention to completely understand those of others. The most
accomodating and reasonable among them, secretly despising the views of
others, merely show a superficial attentiveness, while we can see in their eyes
that they think the complete opposite of what is being said to them, and that they
are only concerned with what they want to prove to us, without bothering to reply
to our questions. This often makes conversations with them very disagreeable;
for just as there is nothing more pleasing and nothing that would do us more
honor than for a man to accept our arguments and approve our opinions, so there
is nothing so offensive as to see that someone does not understand them, and
does not even care to understand them. For at bottom there is no pleasure in
conversing with statues, who are only statues in our eyes because they are men
who do not have much respect for us, who do not care whether they please us,
and are only concerned with their own cause. But if men would learn to listen and
answer well, conversations would not only be very agreeable, but even very
useful: whereas when everyone tries to appear learned, we only succeed in
becoming swellheaded and in disputing without understanding; charity is sometimes offended, and truth nearly never discovered.
But the aberrations into which false scholars fall in their conversations are in
some respects excusable. It can be said on their behalf that normally little attention is paid to what is said on these occasions; but the most precise individuals
often utter stupidities, and they do not intend that all their words be gathered into
a collection, such as was done with those of Scaliger and Cardinal Perron.
There is something to these excuses, and one wants to believe that these sorts
of faults deserve a certain indulgence. All of us want to take part in conversation,
but there are unfortunate days on which we do it badly. We are not always in the
proper humor to think and speak carefully. and time is so brief in certain encounters that the slightest cloudiness or inattention unfortunately makes even the most
precise and penetrating minds fall into extravagant absurdities.
But if the mistakes the falsely learned commit in conversations are excusable,
the faults they fall into in their books, after having seriously thought about them,
are not pardonable, especially if they are frequent, and if they are not balanced by
some good things. For after all, when one composes a mischievous book, one is
the cause of wasted time for many people while they read it, and is responsible
for their often falling into the same errors he has fallen into, and for their
deducing many others from them, which is no small harm.
But, although it be a greater fault than one imagines to write a mischievous
book, or simply a useless one, it is a fault for which these authors are more
frequently rewarded than punished; for there are crimes men do not punish, either
because they are in fashion, or because men do not usually have a sufficiently
good case for condemning criminals whom they esteem more than they do
themselves.
We usually look upon authors as rare and extraordinary individuals. very much
superior to others; and we therefore revere rather than punish and despise them.
Thus, there is hardly any chance that men will ever set up a tribunal for examining and condemning all the books that do nothing but corrupt reason.

302

Nicolas Malehranche

This is why we ought never to hope that the Republic of Letters will be better
governed than other republics, since it is always composed of men. It is even
quite appropriate, in order that we might deliver ourselves from errors, that there
be more liberty in the Republic of Letters than in others where novelty is always
very dangerous. For to deprive scholarly men of their liberty, and to condemn all
novelties indiscriminately, would be to confirm ourselves in our present errors.
You should not therefore find it a matter for criticism if I speak against the
government of the Republic of Letters, and if I try to show that often these great
men who are the admiration of others for their profound erudition are at bottom
only vain and haughty men, without judgment and without any true science. I am
obliged to speak of them in this manner so that people will not blindly yield to
their pronouncements, and will not follow their mistakes.
Ill. The hooks of counterfeit scholars.
The proofs of their vanity, lack of judgment, and ignorance can be clearly
drawn from their works; for if we take the trouble to examine them in order to
judge them according to the light of common sense, and without any prejudicial
esteem for these authors, we will find that most of the plans of their studies are
formed by an injudicious vanity, and that their principal end is not to perfect their
reason, and still less to regulate the impulses of their heart, but only to dazzle
other people and to appear more learned than they.
In view of this they treat (as we have already said) only rare and extraordinary
subjects, and this is also why they couch all their explanations in rare and
extraordinary terms, and quote only rare and extraordinary authors. They hardly
ever write in their own language because it is too common; nor in simple, clear,
and easy Latin; it is not for the purpose of being understood that they speak, but
simply for speaking itself, in order to be admired. They rarely apply themselves
to subjects that might be useful in the conduct of life, for this seems too common
to them; what they seek is not to be useful either to others or to themselves, but
only to be esteemed as learned; they do not offer arguments in support of the
things that they advance, or, if they do offer them, they are mysterious and
incomprehensible arguments that neither they nor anyone else can conceive with
clarity; they have no clear arguments; but if they did, they would not state them.
These arguments do not astonish the mind, they seem too simple and too common, and everyone is capable of <understanding> them. Rather, they produce
authorities in order to prove, or to seem to prove, their thoughts, for often the
authorities whom they use do not prove anything through any sense which they
contain; they only prove because they are in Greek or Arabic. But perhaps il
would be appropriate to speak of their quotations, which will enable us to
understand to some extent the disposition of their mind.
It seems to me evident that only a false erudition and the spirit of polymathy
could explain the fashion these quotations have had and continue to have among
some scholars. For it is not very difficult to find authors who quote long passages
at every opportunity with no justification: either because the things they propose

The Search after Truth

303

are so clear that none could doubt them, or because they are so obscure that the
authority of their authors cannot prove them. since they could know nothing
about them, or finally because the quotations they advance are inelevant to what
they say.
It is contrary to common sense to produce some lengthy Greek passage to
prove that the atmosphere is transparent, because this is something everyone
knows; or to use the authority of Aristotle to have us believe there are intelligences that move the heavens. because it is obvious that Aristotle could not have
known anything about them; or to mix foreign tongues, Arabic and Persian
proverbs in French or Latin books written for everyone, because these quotations
cannot be an adornment in such a context, or else if they are so used, they are so
bizarre that they shock a very large number of people while satisfying few.
Nevertheless, the majority of those who want to seem learned are so thoroughly pleased with these sons of quotations that they sometimes have no shame
in relating them in languages that even they themselves do not understand, and
they make great efforts to sew into their works an Arabic passage that they
sometimes do not know how to read. Thus do they greatly burden themselves to
reach an end that is contrary to good sense, but that satisfies their vanity and
makes foolish people esteem them.
Another of their very considerable defects is that they take very little care to
appear to have read with choice and discrimination. They only want to appear to
have read a great deal, and especially obscure works, in order to be thought more
learned. They want us to believe that they have read rare and expensive books so
that we will believe they have missed nothing-deceptive and impious books
that honest people do not dare to read, for much the same motives as men who
brag that they have committed crimes that others dare not commit. Hence they
would rather cite very expensive, rare, ancient, and obscure books than others
that are more common and more intelligible -works in astrology, cabala. and
magic-than good books, as though they did not see that since reading is the
same as conversation, they should want to appear to have carefully sought to read
good books, the most intelligible books, and not those that are mischievous and
obscure.
For just as it is a perversion of the mind to search out people whom one cannot
understand without an interpreter for the purposes of ordinary conversation when
one can gather their information in some other way. so it is ridiculous to read
only those books we cannot understand without a dictionary when we can learn
the same things in books that are more intelligible to us. And just as it is a mark
of disorder to affect the company and the conversation of impious people, so it is
also the mark of a corrupted heart to find pleasure in reading evil books. But it is
a sign of an extravagant pride to want to appear to have read these books even
when one has not read them (which nevertheless very often happens); for there
are people thirty years of age who quote more evil books for you in their works
than they could have read in several centuries, and nevertheless they hope to
convince others that they have read them very closely. But most books of cenain

304

Nicolas Malebranche

scholars are fabricated only with the help of dictionaries, and they have hardly
read the indexes of the books they quote and some commonplaces gathered
together from different authors.
We would not dare enter into greater detail in these matters, or give examples
of them, for fear of shocking people as proud and bilious as are these counterfeit
scholars, for we take no pleasure in being insulted in Greek and Arabic. Besides,
it is not necessary to give particular proofs of what I say in order to make it more
intuitive because the mind of man is sufficiently capable of finding the grounds
for criticism of the conduct of others and of making practical applications of what
I have just said. Meanwhile, let them be nourished as they wish by this vain
phantom of greatness, and let them give one another the applause we deny them.
For we may already have bothered them too much about a pleasure that seems so
sweet and agreeable to them.

BOOK FOUR

Chapter Nine

t

How our inclination for honors and riches leads to e"or.
Honors and riches as well as virtue and the sciences of which we have just spoken
are the principal things that raise us above other men, for it seems that our being
is enlarged and becomes independent through the possession of these advantages.
Consequently, the love we have of ourselves naturally reaches out to include
honors and riches. It can be said that there is no one who does not have some
inclination, great or small, toward these things. We will explain in a few words
how these inclinations prevent us from finding the truth and involve us in falsehood and error.
We have shown in many places that a great deal of time and trouble, of
diligence and application of mind, is required in order to penetrale complex
truths, which are surrounded with difficulties and which depend upon very many
principles. From this it is easy to judge that people in public life who are in
important positions, who have many assets to control and great affairs to conduct, and who ardently desire honors and riches, are hardly suited to search after
these truths, and that they often fall into error with regard to the difficult things
they wish to judge.
I. Bec:ause they have little time for the search after the truth.
2. Because they normally take little pleasure in this search.
3. Because they are incapable of very great concentration, because the capacity of their minds is divided by the large number of ideas of things they want, and
with which they are occupied even in spite of themselves.
4. Because they imagine they know everything and can hardly believe that
people who are their inferiors might be more correct than they: they may allow
these inferiors to teach them some facts, but they will not willingly allow themselves to be instructed in solid and necessary truths by them, and they are enraged
when anyone contradicts or corrects them.
5. Because people are accustomed to applauding them in all their imaginings,
however false and far removed from common sense they may be, and to ridiculing those who, even if they are defending incontestable truths, do not share their
opinions. And it is because of the craven flattery of those who surround them that
305

306

Nicolas Ma/ebranche

they become continned in their errors and their false self-esteem, and dare to
judge cavalierly about everything.
6. Because they are hardly concerned with anything but sensible notions,
which are more appropriate to ordinary conversations and for preserving the
esteem of men than are the mind's pure and abstract ideas, which are used in the
discovery of truth.
7. Because those who aspire to some honor try as much as they can to
accommodate themselves to the views of others, because there is nothing that so
strongly excites the envy and dislike of men than appearing to have slightly
uncommon views. It is rare that those whose minds and hearts are occupied with
the thought and desire of success can discover hidden truths; but when they do
discover them, they often abandon them out of self-interest, and because the
defense ofthese truths does not agree with their ambition. It is often necessary to
consent to injustice to become a magistrate; a solid and uncommon piety often
keeps one from benefices, and a generous love for truth often loses men the
chairs from which only truth should be taught.
All these reasons taken together cause men whose honors, nobility, and riches
raise them above others, or who think of nothing but promotion and success, to
be extremely subject to error and but little capable of discovering truths that are
slightly hidden. For among the things necessary to avoid error in questions of
some difficulty, there are two main ones that are not very often encountered in
the kind of person I speak of, to wit, the concentration of mind to penetrate to the
bottom of things, and the restraint not to judge these things too preciptiously.
Even those who are chosen to teach others, and who should have no other
purpose than to prepare themselves to teach those committed to their care,
usually become subject to error as soon as they enter public life either because,
having little time to themselves, they are incapable of concentration and of
applying themselves to things that demand very much of them, or because,
greatly desiring to appear learned, they boldly pronounce on all matters without
reservation, and hardly suffer anyone to resist them or instruct them.

BOOK FOUR

Chapter Ten

t

The love of pleasure in relation to morality. I. We must avoid pleasure e\·en
though it makes us happy. II. Pleasure should not lead us to the IO\·e of sensible
goods.
We have just spoken in the three preceding chapters of our inclination for the
preservation of our being, and of how this is the cause of our falling into many
errors. We shall now discuss the inclination we have for well-being, i.e., for
pleasures and for all things that make us happier and more content. And we shall
try to discover the errors to which this inclination gives rise.
There are philosophers who try to persuade men that pleasure is not a good and
that pain is not an evil; that we can be happy in the midst of the most violent pains
and miserable in the midst of the greatest pleasure. Since these philosophers are
quite moving and very imaginative, they immediately arouse weak minds and
those who allow themselves to be impressed by what they hear; for Stoics are
rather visionary, and visionaries are passionate. Hence they easily impress upon
others the false view with which they themselves are prejudiced. But as there is
no conviction contrary to our experience and our inner sensation, all these
pompous and magnificent arguments that distract and confuse men's imagination
vanish with all their brilliance as soon as the soul is affected by some sensible
pleasure or pain. And those who have placed their confidence in this false
persuasion of their mind find themselves with neither wisdom nor strength in the
face of the slightest attack by vice; they feel themselves deceived and conquered.

I. We must a\·oid pleasure, e\·en tllouglt it makes us happy.
lf philosophers cannot give their disciples the strength to conquer their
passions, at least they ought not to seduce them, or persuade them that they have
no enemies to fight. One must describe things as they are: pleasure is always a
good, and pain always an evil; but it is not always advantageous to enjoy
pleasure, and it is sometimes advantageous to suffer pain.
But in order to understand what I mean, we must know:
I. That only God is sufficiently powerful to act in us, and to make us feel
pleasure or pain. For it is obvious to every man who consults his reason and who

307

308

Nicolas Malebranche

scorns the reports of his senses that it is not the objects of sense that act effectively in us, since body cannot act upon mind; neither does our soul cause its
pleasure and pain in itself upon the occasion of objects, for if the suffering of
pain were dependent upon the soul, it would never suffer pain.
2. That ordinarily a good should be given only to cause some good action or to
reward it, and pain should ordinarily be given only to deter some wrong action or
to punish it. And therefore, since God always acts with order, and according to
the rules of justice, all pleasure in His institution inclines us toward some right
action or rewards us for it, and all pain deters us from some wrong action or
punishes us for it.
3. That there are actions which are right in one sense and wrong in another. It
is, for example, a wrong action to expose oneself to death when God forbids it;
but to do so is also a right action when God commands it, for all our actions are
right or wrong only because God commands or prohibits them either by the
eternal law, which every rational man can consult though introspection, or by the
written law, exposed to the senses of sensible and camal man, who, since the sin,
is not always able to consult reason.
I say then that pleasure is always good, but that it is not always advantageous
to enjoy it.
I. Because instead of attaching us to Him who alone is capable of causing
pleasure in us, it separates us from Him and unites us with what seems, falsely,
to cause it; it takes us away from God to unite us with a vile creature. It is always
to our advantage to enjoy pleasure that is related to its true cause, and that is the
perception of the true cause. For as one can only love what one perceives, this
pleasure can only excite a just love, the love of the true cause of happiness. But it
is at the least very dangerous to enjoy pleasures related to sensible objects, which
are the perception of them, because these pleasures incline us to love that is not
the cause of our actual happiness. For although those who are enlightened by the
true philosophy sometimes think that pleasure is not caused by external objects,
and although this knowledge can to some extent lead them to recognize and love
God in all things, nevertheless, since his sin the rational part of man is so feeble,
and his senses and imagination have so much power over his mind, that they soon
corrupt his heart if he does not deprive himself, according to the counsel of the
Gospel, of all things that do not of themselves lead to God. For the best philosophy could not cure the mind, or resist the disorders of pleasure.
2. Because pleasure is a reward, it is an act of injustice for us to produce
movements in our body that oblige God, as a result of the general laws He has
established, to make us feel pleasure when we do not deserve it, either because
the action we perform is useless or criminal, or because, being full of sin, we
should not ask God to reward us. Before his sin man could, with justice, partake
of sensible pleasures in his ordered actions. But since the sin, there are no more
completely innocent pleasures, or pleasures which are incapable of harming us
when we enjoy them, for often we can become enslaved by them just by enjoying
them.
3. Because God is just, He cannot help but one day punish the violence we do
Him when we oblige Him to give us pleasure as a reward for the criminal actions

The Search after Truth

309

we commit against Him. When our souls are no longer joined to our bodies, God
will no longer have the self-imposed obligation of giving us sensalions thai must
correspond to braiD traces, whereas He will always have the obligation of satisfying His justice. And so this will be the time of His vengeance and anger. He will
punish the unjust pleasures of the voluptuous with pains that will never end.
4. Because the certainty we have in this life that this justice will be achieved
excites the mind with mortal anxieties and throws it into a sort of despair thai
makes the voluptuous miserable even in the midst of the greatest pleasures.
5. Because an uneasy remorse nearly always accompanies the most innocent
pleasures, because we are sufficiently convinced that we do not deserve them,
and this remorse deprives us of a certain inner joy that we find even in the pain of
penitence.
Therefore, although pleasure is a good, it must be agreed for all these reasons
thai it is not always to our advantage to enjoy it. And for other similar reasons
very useful to know, and quite easy to deduce from these, it is nearly always very
advantageous to suffer pain, though it be in actuality an evil.
Nevertheless, every pleasure is a good and in fact makes him who enjoys it
happy at the instant he enjoys it and for as long as he enjoys it; and every pain is an
evil and in fact makes him who suffers it unhappy at the instant he suffers it, and
for as long as he suffers it. It can be said that without the hope and foretaste of
promised goods the just and the saints would be the unhappiest of all men in this
life, and the most deserving of compassion. "Si in vita tantum in Christo
speramus, miserabiliores sumus omnibus hominibus," says Saint Paul.• For
those who weep and suffer persecution for justice are happy not because they
suffer for justice but because the kingdom of heaven is theirs, and because a great
reward is reserved for them in heaven, i.e., because they will be happy some
day. Those who suffer persecution for justice are in so doing just, virtuous, and
perfect; for they are in the order of God, and peifection consists in following this
order. But they are not happy because they suffer. One day they will suffer no
more, and then they will be happy as well as just and perfect. b "Omnes bani et
sancti," says Saint Augustine, "etiam in tormentis quibuslibet divino fulti adjutorio, SPE ILLIUS FINIS beati vocantur, QUO FINE BEATI ERUNT. Nam si in
eisdem tormentis, et alrocissimis doloribus semper essent cum QUIBUSLIBET
VIRTUTIBUS, COS esse miseros nulla SANA RATIO dubitaret."
However, I do not deny that the just in this life may be happy to some extent
because of the strength of their hope and faith, which renders these future goods
as present to their minds. For it is certain that when the hope of some good is
strong and lively, the good is brought closer to the mind and causes the mind to
enjoy it; thus the good makes the mind happy to some extent, since it is the
enjoyment of good, the possession of good, pleasure, that makes us happy.
It is therefore not necessary to tell men that sensible pleasures are not good,
and that they do not make those who enjoy them happy, because this is not true,
and at the time of temptation they recognize this to their misfortune. They must
"Cor. ((I IIS: 19).

•Episl. ad Macrdollim ISS. alias S2.

310

Nicolas Malebranche

be told that although these pleasures are good in themselves and capable of
making them happy in some respects, they should nevertheless avoid them for
reasons similar to those I have brought forward. But they should be advised that
they cannot avoid them through their own strength, because they desire to be
happy through an inclination they cannot conquer, which these passing pleasures
they must avoid in some way satisfy. Thus, they are certainly doomed unless
rescued by the delight of grace, which counterbalances the continual pull of
sensible pleasures. They must be told these things in order that they be distinctly
aware of their weakness and of their need for a liberator.
We must speak to men as Jesus Christ did and not as the Stoics, who knew
neither the nature nor the malady of the human mind. Men must be told unceasingly that it is in a sense essential for them to hate and despise themselves, and
that they must not search for settlement and happiness here below; that they must
carry their cross, or the instrument of their supplication, every day, and presently
lose their life in order to preserve it eternally. Finally they must be shown that
they are obliged to act in a manner completely contrary to their desires, so that
they may feel their impotence for good. For men invincibly want to be happy,
and one cannot be actually happy if one does not do what one wills. Perhaps
being aware of their present evils, and knowing their future ones, they will
humble themselves on earth. Perhaps they will cry to heaven, seek a mediator,
fear sensible objects, and have a salutary horror of everything that flatters the
senses and concupiscence. Perhaps they will thereby enter into that spirit of
prayer and penitence so necessary for obtaining grace, without which no
strength, no health, no salvation is to be expected.
II. Pleasure should not lead us to the lo1·e of sensible goods.
We are inwardly convinced that pleasure is good, and this inner conviction is
not false, for pleasure is indeed good. We are naturally convinced that pleasure is
the mark of good, and this natural conviction is certainly true, for whatever
causes pleasure is certainly quite good and worthy of love.
But we are not convinced that sensible objects, or even our souls, are capable
of producing pleasure in us; for there is no reason to believe this, and there are a
thousand reasons for not believing it. Hence sensible objects are not good, they
are not worthy of love. If they are useful for the preservation of life, we should
use them; but as they are not capable of acting in us, we should not love them.
The soul should love only what is good to it, what is capable of making it happier
and more perfect. It should therefore love only what is superior to it, for it is
obvious that it can derive its perfection only from what is superior to it.
But because we judge that a thing is the cause of some effect when it always
accompanies it, we imagine that sensible objects act in us, because at their
approach we have new sensations, and because we do not see Him who truly
causes them in us. We taste a fruit and at the same time we sense sweetness; then
we attribute this sweetness to the fruit; we judge that it causes it, and even that it
contains it. We do not see God as we see and touch this fruit; we do not even
think of Him, nor perhaps of ourselves. Hence we do not judge that God is the

The Search after Truth

311

true cause of this sweebless, nor that this sweebless is a modification of our soul;
we attribute both the cause and the effect to the fruit we eat.
What I have said of sensations related to the body should also be understood of
those which have no relation to it, such as are encountered in pure intelligences.
When a mind considers itself, it sees that nothing is wanting for its happiness
and perfection or it sees that it does not have what it desires. At the sight of its
happiness, it feels joy, and at the sight of its unhappiness, sadness. It immediately imagines that it is the perception of its happiness that produces this joy
in it because this sensation always accompanies this perception. It also imagines
that it is the perception of its unhappiness that produces this sensation of sadness
in it because this sensation follows the perception. The true cause of these
sensations, which is God alone, does not appear to it; the mind does not even
think of God, for God acts in us without our being aware of it.
God rewards us with a feeling of joy when we know we are in a state we ought
to be in, so that we will remain in it, so that our anxiety will cease, and so that we
may fully enjoy our happiness without leaving any other thing to take up the
capacity of our mind. But He produces a feeling of sadness in us when we are
aware that we are not in the state we ought to be in so that we will not remain in
that state, and so that we will anxiously seek out the perfection we lack. For God
continually urges us toward the good when we know we do not possess it; and He
stops us there when we see that we possess it fully. Hence it seems clear to me
that neither intellectual feelings of joy and sadness nor sensible feelings of joy
and sorrow are voluntary productions of the mind.
Thus, our reason should constantly recognize this invisible hand that fills us
with goods, and is hidden from our minds under sensible appearances. We
should adore and love it; but we should also fear it, since if it can fill us with
pleasures, it can also overwhelm us with pains. We should love it with a voluntary love, an enlightened love, a love worthy of God and ourselves. Our love is
worthy of God when we love Him because of our knowledge that He is worthy of
love; and this love is worthy of us because, being reasonable, we should love
what reason makes us know as worthy of our love. But we love sensible things by
a love unworthy of ourselves, and undeserved by them because, being reasonable, we love these things without any reason for doing so, since we do not
clearly see that they are worthy of love. On the contrary, we know that they are
not. But pleasure seduces us and makes us love them, the blind and inordinate
love of pleasure being the true cause of the false judgments of men in moral
subjects.

BOOK FOUR
Chapter Eleven

The lo1•e of Pleasure in relation to the S/Jemlati,•e sciences. I. How it pre1·ents us
from discovering the truth. II. Some examples. Ill. Clarification of Descartes's
proof for the existence of God.

That the inclination we have for sensible pleasures is badly governed is not only
the origin of the dangerous mistakes we fall into in moral subjects, and the
general cause of the disorder of our morals: it is also one of the principal causes
of the disturbance of our minds, and it imperceptibly involves us in very crude,
but less dangerous, errors in purely speculative subjects, because this inclinaaion
prevents us from bringing to things that do not affect us sufficient attention to
understand them and judge well of them.
I have already spoken in several places of the difficulty men find in applying
themselves to slightly abstract subjects, because the material I was then treating
also demanded it. I spoke of it toward the end of the first book in showing that,
since sensible ideas affect the soul more than pure ideas of the mind, the soul
more often applied itself to modes than to things themselves. I spoke of it in the
second book because, dealing with the delicacy of the brain fibers, I demonstrated the source of the flabbiness of cenain effeminate minds. Finally, I spoke
of it in the third book in speaking of the mind's attention, when it was necessary
to show that our soul is barely attentive to purely speculative things, but much
more attentive to things that affect it, making it feel pleasure or pain.
Our errors nearly always have several causes, all of which contribute to their
origin; hence it should not be thought that it is for want of order that we sometimes repeat nearly the same ones, and that we assign several causes to the same
mistakes; it is because they indeed have several causes. I am not speaking of real
causes, for we have often said that there is no other real and true cause but the
misuse of our freedom, which is due to our not always using it as much as we
can, as we have explained• from the very beginning of this work.
There should therefore be no complaint if, in order to make it fully understood
how, for example, the sensible modes with which we disguise things surprise us
"Ch. 2 (bk. I)

312

The Search after Truth

313

and make us fall into error, I have had to state in advance in the other books that
we are inclined toward pleasures, which it appears should be reserved for this
book, which deals with natural inclinations; and similarly with other things in
other places. The only harm that will come of it is that we shall have no need to
say many things here that we would have been obliged to explain if we had not
done so elsewhere.
All things in man are so closely dependent upon one another that we often fmd
ourselves overwhelmed by the number ofthings that must be said simultaneously
in order to explain our conceptions thoroughly. Sometimes we find ourselves
obliged not to separate things that are naturally joined to one another, and to go
against the order we have prescribed for ourselves when this order brings only
confusion, as-necessarily happends to some instances. However, with all this it is
never possible to make others experience everything we think. All we should
ordinarily attempt is to place the reader in such a state that he can discover for
himself, with pleasure and ease, what we ourselves have discovered with pain
and fatigue. And because one can discover nothing without attention, one should
especially study the means of making others attentive. That is what I have tried to
do, although I realize that I have executed it badly enough; and I admit my fault
the more willingly, as the admission should move those who will read this to
make themselves attentive through their own efforts, in order to improve it and in
order to penetrate to the bottom of subjects that undoubtedly are worthy of such
penetration.
The errors into which we are thrown by our inclination toward pleasures, and
in general toward everything that affects us, are infinite; because this inclination
dissipates the vision ofthe mind, because it incessantly applies it to the confused
ideas of the senses and the imagination, and because it leads us to judge all things
precipitously in the light of the single relation they have to us.
I. How the love of pleasure pre1•ents us from discovering the truth.
One sees the truth only when one sees things as they are, and one never sees
them as they are unless one sees them in Him, who contains them in an intelligible manner. When we perceive [ voyons] things in ourselves, we see them only in
a very imperfect manner; or rather we see only our sensations and not the things
we wish to see, and believe falsely that we do see.
Concentration is needed to see things as they are in themselves because at
present we become united with God only with trouble and effort. But to see
things in us, no concentration is necessary on our part because we sense what
affects us even in spite of ourselves. We do not naturally fmd any prevenient
pleasure in our union with God; pure ideas of things do not affect us; I mean that
they do not affect us sensibly and vividly. Thus, our inclination toward pleasure
does not direct us toward, or unite us with, God; on the contrary, it ceaselessly
detaches and removes us from Him. For this inclination continually leads us to
consider things by their sensible ideas, because these false and impure ideas
strongly affect us. The love of pleasure, and the actual enjoyment of pleasure,

314

Nicolas

Mal~branche

which awakens and fortifies the love of it, therefore constantly removes us from
truth, throwing us into error.
Thus, those who want to approach the truth in order to be illuminated by its
light should begin by depriving themselves of pleasure. They should carefully
avoid all that affects and pleasantly distracts the mind. For the senses and the
passions must be silent if one wishes to hear the word of truth, since removal
from the world and scorn for all sensible things are as necessary for perfection of
the mind as for conversion of the heart.
When our pleasures are great, when our sensations are lively, we are incapable
of grasping the simplest truths, and we do not even agree with common notions
unless they include some sensible material. When our pleasures or other sensations are moderate, we can understand some simple and easy truths; but if we
were entirely free from pleasures and sensations, we could easily discover the
most abstract and difficult truths known. For to the extent that we remove
ourselves from what is not God, we bring ourselves nearer to God Himself; we
avoid error and discover truth. But since the sin, since the advent of the deranged
love of prevenient, dominant, and victorious pleasure, the mind has become so
feeble that it can penetrate nothing, and so material and dependent upon its
senses that it cannot take hold of anything without a body, or pay attention to
abstract truths that do not affect it. It does not even perceive common notions
without difficulty; and often it judges, for lack of attention, that they are false or
obscure. It cannot distinguish the truth of things from their utility, or the relation
they have among themselves from that they have to it; and it often believes that
those truths which are the most useful to it, the most agreeable and which affect it
the most, are the truest. Finally, this inclination infects and distorts all the
perceptions we have of objects and, as a result, all the judgments we make about
them. Here are some examples.

II. Some examples.
It is a common notion that virtue is more estimable than vice, that it is better to
be sober and chaste than intemperate and sensuous. But the inclination toward
pleasure so strongly confuses this idea on certain occasions that we can catch
only a glimpse of it, and we cannot draw the conclusions necessary for the
conduct of life from it. The soul is so completely occupied with the pleasures it
wants that it assumes them to be innocent and seeks only the means to satisfy
them.
Everybody knows well that it is better to be just than to be rich, that justice
makes a man greater than does the possession of the most superb buildings.
which often do not so much demonstrate the greatness of their builder as they do
the greatness of his injustices and crimes. But the pleasure that men of no merit
derive from the vain ostentation of their false greatness sufficiently fills the tiny
capacity of their minds to hide and obscure from them such an evident truth.
They foolishly imagine that they are great men because they have great mansions.
Analysis or the Algebra of kinds is assuredly the most beautiful, i.e., the
most fruitful and the most certain, of all sciences. Without it the mind has neither

The Search after Truth

315

penetration nor scope; and with it it is capable of knowing nearly everything that
can be known with certitude and clarity. As imperfect as this science has been, it
made famous all those who have been instructed in it and who have known how
to use it. By means of it they discovered truths that appeared incomprehensible to
other men. It is so proportioned to the human mind that, without distracting its
attention with things irrelevant to what it seeks, it infallibly guides it to its goal.
In a word, it is a universal science and the key, as it were, to all other sciences.
Nevertheless, however estimable it is in itself, there is nothing either exciting or
channing about it to the majority of men for the single reason that it is not sensible. It
was completely forgotten for several centuries. There are still many people who do not
even know its name; and out of a thousand people. there are scarcely one or
two who know something about it. The most learned men who have revived it in
our time have hardly advanced it any further, and they have not treated it with the
order and clarity it merits. Being men like other men, they are in the end
disenchanted by these pure truths that are not accompanied by sensible pleasure.
And the restlessness of their will, corrupted by sin, the frivolity of their mind
(which depends on the agitation and circulation of the blood), has not allowed
them to be further nourished by these great, vast, fruitful truths, the immutable
and universal rules of all the fleeting and particular truths that can be known with
precision.
Metaphysics is a similarly abstract science that does not flatter the senses, and
to whose study the soul is not drawn by any prevenient pleasure; for the same
reason this science is very much neglected, and one often finds people foolish
enough to boldly deny common notions. There are even some who deny that we
can and should assert of a thing what is included in the clear and distinct idea we
have of it; that nothingness has no properties; that a thing cannot be reduced to
nothing without a miracle; that no body can move itself by its own forces; that an
agitated body cannot communicate to bodies with which it collides more motion
than it possesses, and other such things. They have never considered these
axioms from a viewpoint clear and focused enough to discover their truth clearly.
And they have sometimes performed experiments that convinced them falsely
that some of these axioms were not true. They have seen that in certain collisions
the bodies that were struck had more motion after than before being struck, and
that in others they had less. They have seen that often the simple touching of
some visible body was swiftly followed by great movements.• And this sensible
observation of certain experiments-of whose explanations they are ignorant has
made them conclude that natural forces can be both increased and destroyed.
Should they not have considered that motion can be propagated from visible to
invisible bodies when bodies in motion meet, or from invisible bodies to visible
ones on other occasions? When a body is suspended from a cord, it is not the
scissors with which one cuts the cord that gives motion to this body, it is an
invisible matter. When someone throws a live coal into a pile of gunpowder, it is
not the motion of the coal but an invisible matter that separates all the parts of this
powder, and that imparts to them a motion capable of exploding a house. There
"See lbe Laws of Million ia dw:Elucidarions [vol. 17(1)).

316

Nicolas Malebranche

are a thousand unknown ways in which invisible matter communicates its motion
to visible and heavy bodies. At least it is obvious that this cannot happen by
itself, because it is clear that the motor force of the bodies cannot naturally
increase or diminish.
Similarly, men see that wood thrown into a fire ceases to be what it is, and that
all the sensible qualities they notice there vanish; and from this men imagine they
have the right to conclude that a thing can return to the nothingness whence it
came. They cease to see the wood, and see only the few cinders that succeed it,
and from this they judge that the greatest part of the wood ceases to be, as if the
wood could not be reduced to particles they could not see. At least it is not as
evident that this is impossible as it is evident that the power which gives being to
all things is not subject to change, and that by the ordinary forces of nature what
exists cannot be reduced to nothing, just as what does not exist cannot begin to
be. But the majority of men do not know what·it is to enter into themselves in
order to hear the voice of truth there, by which they ought to judge all things.
Their eyes govern their decisions. They judge according to what they sense and
not according to what they conceive, for they sense with pleasure and conceive
with pain.
Ask all the men in the world whether one can be certain, without fear of error,
that the whole is greater than its parts, and I am sure that not one will be found
who will not give the appropriate answer right away. Then ask them if one can in
the same way, without fear of error, be certain of a thing one clearly conceives to
be included in the idea that represents it, and you will see that few will agree to
this without hesitation, that some will deny it, and the majority will not know
how to respond. And yet this metaphysical axiom, i.e.,that one can be certain of
something one clearly conceives to be included in the idea that represents it (or
rather, that everything one clearly conceives is precisely such as one conceives
it), is more evident than the axiom that states that the whole is greater than its
parts, because this latter axiom is not so much an axiom as a conclusion from the
first axiom. One can prove that the whole is greater than its parts by this first
axiom, but the first cannot be proven by any other. It is absolutely the first and
most fundamental axiom of all clear and evident knowledge. How is it then that
no one hesitates at this conclusion, while many people doubt the premiss from
which it is drawn, unless it is that the ideas of whole and part are sensible and that
one sees, so to speak, with one's eyes that the whole is greater than its part but
that we do not see with out eyes the lJUth of the first axiom of all the sciences?
As there is nothing in this axiom that naturally arrests and applies the mind, it
is necessary to wili to consider it; and even a little constancy and firmness is
needed in order to recognize clearly its truth. The strength of the will must make
up for sensible allurement. But men never set themselves to study objects that do
not flatter their senses; or, if they do, they do not make any effort in it.
For (to continue this same example), they think it evident that the whole is
greater than its part, that a mountain of marble is possible and that a mountain
without a valley is impossible, and that it is not equally evident that there is a
God. Nevertheless, we can state that all these propositions are equally evident,
since they are all equally removed from the first principle.

The Search after Truth

317

Here is the first principle:• one should attribute to a thing what one clearly
conceives to be included in the idea that represents it; we clearly conceive that
there is more magnitude in our idea of a whole than in our idea of its part; that
possible existence is contained in the idea of a mountain of marble; that impossible existence is part of the idea of a mountain without a valley, and that necessary
existence is included in the idea we have of God, i.e., in our idea of an infinitely
perfect being: therefore, the whole is greater than its parts; therefore, a mountain
of marble can exist; therefore, a mountain without a valley cannot exist; therefore, God or the infmitely perfect being necessarily exists. It is obvious that these
conclusions are equally removed from the first principle of all the sciences; they
are therefore equally evident in themselves. It is therefore as evident that God
exists as that the whole is greater than its part. But because the ideas of infinity,
perfection, and necessary existence are not sensible as are the ideas of whole and
part, we imagine that we cannot conceive what we do not sense; and although
these conclusions are equally evident, they are nevertheless not equally accepted.
There are people who try to persuade us that they do not have an idea of an
infinitely perfect being. But I do not know how they can bring themselves to
answer positively when they are asked whether an infmitely perfect being is
round or square or some similar thing; for they ought to say that they know
nothing about it if it is true that they have no idea of it.
There are others who agree that it is good reasoning to conclude that God is not
an impossible being from the fact that we see that the idea of God does not
include any contradiction or impossible existence; but they do not want us to
conclude by the same reasoning that God necessarily exists, on the basis of our
conceiving necessary existence in the idea that we have of Him.
Finally there are others who pretend that this proof of the existence of God
(which is Descartes's) is a pure sophism, and that the argument results in this
conclusion only if we assume it to be true that God exists, as if we had not proved
it. Here is the proof: one should attribute to a thing what one clearly conceives to
be included in the idea that represents it. This is the general principle of all the
sciences. Necessary existence is included in the idea that represents an infinitely
perfect being. They agree with this. And consequently one should say that the
infinitely perfect being exists. Yes, they say, assuming that it exists.
But let us make a similar reply to a similar argument, so that we can judge the
soundness of their answer. Here is a similar argument: one should attribute to a
thing what one clearly conceives to be included in the idea that represents it; this
is the principle. We clearly conceive that four angles are included in the idea that
represents a square, or, we clearly conceive that possible existence is included in
the idea of a marble tower; therefore, a square has four angles; therefore, a
marble tower is possible. I say that these conclusions are true, assuming that the
square has four angles, and that the marble tower is possible, just as they reply
that God exists, assuming that He exists, i.e., in a word, that the conclusions of
these demonstrations are true, assuming that they are true.
I would admit their point were I to argue as follows: one should attribute to a
"This reasoning is drawn &om Descancs"s M~dirations.

318

Nicolas Ma/ebranche

thing what one clearly conceives to be included in the idea that represents it; one
clearly conceives that necessary existence is included in the idea of an infinitely
perfect body; therefore. an infinitely perfect body exists; it is true, I say, that
were I to argue in this way. one would have reason to reply to me that the
argument did not prove the actual existence of an infinitely perfect body but only
that, assuming there were such a body. it would have independent existence. The
reason is that the idea of an infinitely perfect body is a fiction of the mind or a
complex idea, which therefore can be false or contradictory, as indeed it is; for
one cannot clearly conceive of an infinitely perfect body; a particular and fmite
being, such as a body. cannot be conceived as universal and infinite.
But the idea of God or of being in general, of being without limit, of infinite
being, is not a fiction of the mind. It is not a complex idea that includes some
contradiction; there is nothing simpler, although it includes everything that is or
can be. Now, this simple and natural idea of being or infinity includes necessary
existence; for it is evident that being (I do not say a such being) has its existence
in itself, and that being cannot actually (or really) not be, since it is impossible
and contradictory that true being be without existence. It could be that there were
no bodies, because bodies are such beings that participate in being and are
dependent upon it. But being without restriction is necessary; it is independent; it
derives what it is from nothing but itself; everything that is comes from it. If there
is anything, it is, since everything that is comes from it; but if there were nothing
in particular, it would be, because it is in itself and because it cannot be clearly
conceived as nonexistent. unless it is represented as a being in particular or as a
such being, that is, unless it is considered as a completely different idea than its
own. For those who do not see that God is usually do not consider being, but a
such being and consequently a being that can be or not be.

Ill. Elucidation of Descartes's proof for God's existence.
However, so that we shall be able to understand Descartes's proof for the
existence of God still more distinctly, and to reply more clearly to any criticisms
one could make of it, here is what it seems to me must be added to it. One must
remember that when we see a creature, we see it neither in itself nor of itself. for
we see it (as we proved in the third book) only through the perception of certain
perfections in God that represent it. Thus, we can see the essence of this creature
without seeing its existence, i.e., we can see its idea without seeing it; we can see
in God that which represents it without its existing. It is uniquely because ofthis
that necessary existence is not included in the idea that represents it, since it is
not necessary for it actually to exist in order for us to see it, unless we claim that
created objects are immediately visible, intelligible in themselves, and capable of
illuminating, affecting, and modifying intelligences. But it is not the same with
infinitely perfect being; one can see it only in itself. for nothing finite can
represent the infinite. Therefore, one cannot see God without His existing; one
cannot see the essence of an infinitely perfect being without seeing its existence;
one cannot conceive it simply as a possible being; nothing limits it; nothing can
represent it. Therefore, if one thinks of it, it must exist.

The Search after Truth

319

This reasoning appears conclusive to me. Yetlhere are people who supportlhe
proposition lhat lhe finile can represent lhe infinite; and lhat lhe modes of our
soul, although finite, are essentially representative of infinilely perfect being.
and generally, of all that we perceive, a gross error, which by its consequences
destroys the certitude of all the sciences, as is easy to prove. But it is so false that
the modes of the soul are representative of all beings lhat they cannot be representative of any, not even lhe being of which they are modes: for although we have
an inner sensation of our existence and of our actual modes, we do not know
them at all.
Certainly lhe soul has no clear idea of its substance, according to what I
mean• by clear idea. It cannot discover by examining itself whelher it is capable
of Ibis or that modification it has never had. It truly experiences its pain, but it
does not know it; it does not know how its substance must be modified in order to
suffer pain, and to suffer one pain rather than anolher. There is a great difference
between sensing and knowing itself. God, who continually acts in the soul,
knows it perfectly; He sees clearly, wilhout suffering pain, how the soul must be
modified to suffer pain, whereas the soul, on lhe other hand, suffers pain and
does not know it. God knows it without feeling it, and lhe soul feels it without
knowing it.
God knows the nature of the soul clearly because He finds in Himself a clear
and representative idea of it. God, as Saint Thomas says,b knows His substance
or His essence perfectly, and as a result He discovers all the ways in which
crealed things can participale in His substance. Hence His substance is truly
representative of the soul, because it contains its eternal model or archetype. For
God can only draw His knowledge from Himself. He sees in His essence the
ideas or essences of all possible beings, and in His volitions (He sees) their
existence and all its circumstances. But the soul is only darkness to itself; its light
comes to it from elsewhere. Of all the beings that it knows and can know, none is
a resemblance of its substance, and none participates in it. It does not contain
lheir perfections eminently. The modes of the soul lherefore cannot be, as in
God, representative of lhe essence or lhe idea of possible beings. It is therefore
neces581)' to distinguish the ideas lhat enlighten us, lhat affect us, and that
represent these beings, from the modes of our soul, i.e., from our perceptions of
lhem. And as the exislence of created things does not depend upon our wills but
upon that of the Creator, it is again clear that we cannot be assured of their
existence except by some kind of revelation, eilher natural or supernatural.
But in addition, if all beings were resemblances of our soul, how could it see
them in its supposedly representative modes, the soul that does not know its
substance perfectly, "secundum omnem modum quo cognoscibilis est," that
•See ch. 7, pl. 2, bk. 3, IUid the Elucidation relating to it [IOJ.
b"Deus essemiam suam perfecte cognoscit. Unde cognoscit cam secundum omnem modum quo
cognoscibilis est. Potest autem cognosci non solum secundum quod in se est, sed secundum quod est
partic:ipabilis, secundum aliquem modum similitudinis a creaturis. Una quaeque a!Rm creatura habet
propriam speciem secundum quod aliquo modo parti<:ipat divinae essentiae similitudinem. Sic igitw
in quantum Deus cognoscit suam essenliam ut sic imitabuken a tali creatura cognoscit cam ut propriam
rationem & ideam hujus creaturae; & similiter de aliis,"l. p. q. IS. an. 2. V. quaest. 14. an. 6.

320

Nicolas Malebranche

does not know how it is modified through its perception of objects-what am I
saying?-that confuses itself with the body, and often does not know which
modes belong to it; the soul that when moved, or affected by the efficacy of
ideas, experiences its modes or perceptions within itself (for where else would it
experience them?) but that will never discover clearly what it is, its nature, its
properties, all the modes of which it is capable, until the luminous and always
efficacious substance of the divinity reveals to the soul the idea that represents it,
the intelligible mind, the eternal model upon which it has been formed? But let us
try to clarify this matter further, to force the attentive mind to yield to this
proposition, which has seemed clear to me in and of itself: that nothing finite can
represent the infinite, and that therefore God exists, since we think of Him.
It is certain that nothingness or the false is not perceptible or intelligible. To
see nothing is not to see; to think of nothing is not to think. It is impossible to
perceive a falsehood, a relation of equality, for example, between two and two,
and five; for this or any like relation that does not exist can be believed, but
certainly cannot be perceived because nothingness is not perceptible. Properly
speaking, this is the first principle of all our knowledge; it is also the one with
which I began the Dialogues on Metaphysics, whose first two dialoques might be
read with profit here. For the principle generally accepted by the Cartesians, that
whatever is clearly conceived to be contained in the idea representing a thing can
be asserted of that thing, depends on it; and this principle is true only if we
assume that ideas are immutable, necessary, and divine. For if our ideas were
only our perceptions, if our modes were representative, how would we know that
things correspond to our ideas, since God does not think, and consequently does
not act, according to our perceptions but according to His own; and therefore He
did not create the world according to our perceptions but in accordance with His
ideas, on its eternal model that He finds in His essence. Now it follows from this
that nothingness is not perceptible, and that everything we see clearly, directly,
immediately, necessarily exists. I say what we immediately see, attest to, or
conceive; for to speak strictly, the objects we immediately see are very different
from those we see externally, or rather from those we think we see or look at; for
in one sense it is true that we do not see these latter, since we can see, or rather
believe we see, external objects that are not there, notwithstanding the fact that
nothingness is not perceptible. But there is a contradiction in saying that we can
immediately see what does not exist, for this is to say that at the same time we see
and do not see, since to see nothing is not to see.
But although something must be in order to be perceived, everything that is, is
not thereby perceptible in itself; for in order to be so, it must be able to act
immediately upon the soul, it must be able of itself to enlighten, affect, or modify
minds. Otherwise, our soul, which is purely passive so far as being able to
perceive, will never perceive it. For even if the soul is imagined to be in the
object and to penetrate it, as it is normally assumed to be in the brain and to
penetrate it, the soul could not perceive it, since it cannot even discover the
particles composing its brain, where it is said to make its principal residence.
This is because there is nothing perceptible and intelligible in itself except what
can act upon minds.

The Search after Truth

321

Nevertheless, let us assume these two false propositior.~: (1) that all reality can
be perceived by the supposed action of the mind, and (2) that the soul does not
have merely an inner sensation of its being and modes but that it knows them
perfectly. Provided only that you agree with me that nothingness is not perceptible, as I have just demonstrated, it is very easy to conclude from this that the
modes of the soul cannot represent the infinite. For we cannot see three realities
where there are only two, since we would see a nothingness, a reality that would
not be. We cannot see a hundred real things where there are only forty, for we
would see sixty real things that would not be at all. Therefore, we cannot see the
infmite in the soul or in its finite modes, for we would see an infmite that would
not exist. Now, nothingness is neither perceptible nor intelligible; therefore, the
soul cannot see in its substance or in its modes an infmite reality, for example,
that intelligible extension which one sees so clearly to be infmite that one is
certain the soul could never exhaust it. But to be able to represent the infmite is
not <merely> to be able to perceive it, or to be able to have a very slight or
infinitely limited perception of it, such as we have; it is to be able to perceive it in
itself, and consequently to contain it, so to speak (since nothingness cannot be
perceived) and to contain it in such a way that it is intelligible or efficacious in
itself, and capable of affecting the intelligent substance of the soul.
It is clear, then, that the soul, its modes, or anything fmite, cannot represent
the infinite, that we cannot see the infinite except in itself and in virtue of the
efficacy of its substance, that the infmite does not and cannot have an archetype,
or an idea distinct from it, that represents it, and that therefore if we think of the
infmite, it must exist. But certainly we do think of it; we have of it, I do not say
an understanding or a perception that describes and embraces it, but some perception of it, i.e., an infmitely limited perception, by contrast to a perfect
understanding.
It should be noted carefully that it takes neither more thought nor a greater
capacity for thinking to have an infmitely limited perception of the infmite than
to have a perfect perception of something finite, since all finite magnitude,
compared to or divided by the infinite, is to this fmite magnitude as this same
magnitude is to the infinite. This is evident by the same argument that proves that
1/1000 is to I as 1 is to 1,000; that two, three, or four miUionths is to two, three, or
four as two, three, or four is to two, three, or four million. For even if the zeros
are infinitely increased, it is clear that the proportion always remains the same.
This is because a fmite magnitude or reality is equivalent to an infinitely small
reality of the infmite, or in relation to the infinite; I say in relation to the infmite,
because the large and the small are so only relatively speaking. Hence, it is
certain a mode or finite perception can in itself be the perception of the infanite,
provided that the perception of the infinite is infanitely small in relation to an
infanite perception, or to the perfect understanding of the infmite.
To try to understand more distinctly how a finite mind can perceive the
infinite, let us imagine that the soul's capacity for perceiving it is, for example,
of four degrees, and that the idea of its hand or of a foot of extension affects it so
vividly with pain that the soul's entire capacity for thought is filled by it. It is
clear that if the idea of two feet of extension affects it with half this, its capacity

322

Nicolas Malebranche

for thought will suffice to perceive this extension. In the same way, if the
immediate object affecting it is a million times greater, but only affects it with a
force one-millionth of the former, its capacity for thought will suffice to perceive
it; and the product, so to speak, of the infinity of the object and the infinitely
small perception will always equal the soul's capacity for thought. For the
product ofthe infinite and the infinitely small is a finite and constant magnitude,
as is the soul's thinking capacity. This is evident, and it is the foundation of the
property of hyperbolas between asymptotes, the product of whose abscissae
increasing to infinity and the ordinates infinitely decreasing, is always equal to
the same magnitude. Now, the product of infinity and zero is certainly zero, and
our capacity for thinking is not zero; it is not null. It is therefore clear that our
mind, although finite, can perceive the infinite, but by virtue of a perception that,
though infinitely weak, is certainly quite real.
It must be noted above all that one should not judge the magnitude of objects
or the reality of ideas according to their strength and vivacity, or, to speak with
the schools, according to the degree of intention of the modes or perceptions by
which ideas affect our soul. The point of a thorn that pricks me, a glowing coal
that bums me, does not have as much reality as the countryside I see. Nonetheless, my capacity for thinking is filled more by the pain of the prick or by the
bum than by the sight of the countryside. In the same way, when my eyes are
open in the middle of a countryside, I have a sensible perception of a limited
extension that is much more vivid and that occupies my soul more than the
perception I have when I think of the extension with my eyes closed. But the idea
of extension that affects me through the sensation of various colors does not have
more reality than the one that affects me only by pure intellection even when my
eyes are closed; for through pure intellection I see extension infinitely beyond
that which I see with open eyes. It is therefore not necessary to judge, I do not
say the efficacy, but the reality of ideas according to the strength with which they
affect us; but it is necessary to judge the extent of their reality by what we
discover in them, however weak be the mode by which they affect us. however
feeble the perception we have of them. It is necessary to judge of their reality
because we perceive it, and because nothingness cannot be perceived. I say this
so it will be understood there is no contradiction in saying the infinite can be
perceived by a finite perceptual capacity, and to disabuse those who, deceived by
this supposed contradiction, maintain that we have no idea of the infmite, notwithstanding the inner sensation that teaches us that we actually think about the
infinite, or, to speak as others, that we naturally have the idea of God or of the
infinitely perfect being.
I could have proved that the soul's modes are not representative of the infinite
or of anything else, or that ideas are very different from our perceptions of them,
by proofs other than the ones I have just drawn from this common notion, that
nothingness is not perceptible. For it is clear that the soul's modes are changeable
but ideas are immutable; that its modes are particular, but ideas are universal and
general to all intelligences; that its modes are contingent, but ideas are eternal

The Search after Truth

323

and necessary; that its modes are obscure and shadowy, but ideas are very clear
and luminous (i.e., its modes are only obscurely, though vividly, felt, but ideas
are clearly known as the foundation of all the sciences); that these ideas are
indeed efficacious because they act in the mind, they enlighten it and make it
happy or unhappy, which is evident by the pain that the idea of the hand causes in
those who have had an arm cut off. But I have already written so much about the
nature of ideas in this and many other works that I think I have some right to
direct the reader to those places.
It is as evident, then, that there is a God as it is to me that I am. I conclude that
I am because I experience myself, and because nothing cannot be experienced. I
conclude in the same way that God exists, that the infinitely perfect being exists,
because I perceive it, and because nothing cannot be perceived, nor consequently
can the infmite be perceived in the finite.
But it is rather useless to propose these demonstrations to ordinary men. These
are demonstrations that might be called personal, because they are not generally
convincing to all men. This is because the majority, and sometimes even the
most learned or those who have read most, do not wish, or are unable, to pay
attention to metaphysical proofs, for which they usually have a sovereign contempt. It is necessary then, if one wishes to convince them, to produce more
intuitive proofs. And certainly these are not lacking; for there is no truth that has
more proofs than that of the existence of God. I produce this one only to show
that abstract truths, acting but little upon our senses, are taken for illusions and
chimeras; whereas crude and palpable truths, which are sensibly compelling,
force the soul to consider them, thereby persuading us that they are very real
because, since the sin, they make a much greater impression upon our mind than
do purely intelligible truths.
For the same reason there is not room for hope that ordinary men will ever
submit to that demonstration which proves that animals are insensible, to wit,
being innocent, as everyone agrees and I assume, if they were capable of feeling,
this would mean that under an infinitely just and omnipotent God, an innocent
creature would suffer pain, which is a penalty and a punishment for some sin.
Men are usually incapable of seeing the evidence for this axiom: "Sub justo Deo,
quisquam, nisi mereatur, miser esse non potest," which Saint Augustine" very
rightly uses against Julian in order to prove Original Sin and the corruption of our
nature. They imagine that there is no force or solidity in this axiom and in certain
others which prove that beasts do not feel because, as we have just said, these
axioms are abstract, they include nothing either sensible or palpable, and they
make no impression on our senses.
The actions and sensible movements that beasts make for the preservation of
their lives are the arguments that, although only probable, affect us more, and
consequently incline us more strongly to believe that they suffer pain when
someone strikes them and they cry out, than the abstract argument of the pure
"'pera perfecta c:ollll'a sec:undam Juliui rcaponsionem (blr.. I • c:h. 39).

324

Nicokls Malebranche

intellect, though very certain and very evident in itself. For it is certain that most
men have no other reason for believing that animals have souls than the sensible
perception of everything that beasts do to preserve their lives.
This• appears sufficiently obvious from the fact that the most men do not
imagine that there is a soul in an egg, although the transformation of an egg into a
chicken is infinitely more difficult than the mere preservation of the chicken once
it is formed. For just as it takes more intelligence to make a watch out of a piece
of iron than it does to make it run once constructed, so it would be necessary
rather to admit a soul into the egg in order to form a chicken from it than it would
be to make the chicken live once it is completely formed. But men do not
sensibly perceive the admirable manner in which a chicken is formed, as they
always sensibly perceive the way it seeks the things necessary for its preservation. Hence they are not disposed to believe there are souls in eggs because of
any sensible impression of the movements necessary to transform eggs into
chickens; but they assign souls to animals because of the sensible impression they
have of the external acts these animals perform for the preservation of their lives,
although the argument I have just given is more applicable to assigning souls to
eggs than to assigning them to chickens.
This second argument (that all souls being more excellent substances than
bodies, they would be misdirected ifthey were created only to inform bodies, and
if their only end were the enjoyment of bodies), this argument. I say. should be
convincing on the point that beasts do not have a soul for those who believe, on
the one hand, that beasts are without sin and, on the other, that God is wise and
that, being invincibly self-loving, He values those beings more who participate
most in His essence. Finally, it is evident that maner is capable only of the
modifications that can be deduced from the clear idea we have of its essence; and
thus to hold that beasts feel, desire, and know, although their souls are corporeal,
is to say what is inconceivable and what contains a manifest contradiction. But
men will eternally confound and confuse these arguments rather than admit
anything contrary to proofs merely probable, but most obvious and most sensible; and we shall be able to convince them fully only by opposing sensible proofs
to their sensible proofs and, as Descartes began to do in his treatise De I' homme,
by visibly showing them how all the parts of animals are merely mechanical, and
that they can be moved without a soul merely by the impression of objects and by
their particular constitution. For all the most certain and most evident arguments
of the pure understanding will never persuade them against the obscure proofs
they have through their senses. Indeed, one risks exposing oneself to the laughter
of superficial and inattentive minds if one pretends to prove to them, by moderately abstract arguments, that animals do not sense.
It must be remembered that the strong inclination we have for diversions,
pleasures, and generally for everything that affects our senses, throws us into a
great many errors because, the capacity of our minds being limited, this inclina•1 speak hcle according to the opinion of those who believe that the chicken is formed from the
eg, although it is perhaps only nourished by it.

Th~ S~arch aft~r

Truth

325

tion constantly distracts us from the clear and distinct ideas of the pure understanding needed for the discovery oftruth, and causes us to apply ourselves to
the false, obscure, and misleading ideas of our senses, which influence the will
more through the hope of good and pleasure than they illuminate the mind by
their light and evidence.

BOOK FOUR

Chapter Twelve

t

The effects that the thought of future goods and e1·ils is capable of producing in
the mind.
If it often happens that the slight pleasures and pains we actually feel, or even
expect to feel, greatly upset our imagination and prevent us from judging things
according to their true ideas, we must not imagine that the expectation of eternity
does not act upon our minds. But it is appropriate to consider what that expectation is capable of producing in them.
It must first be noted that the hope of an eternity of pleasures does not act as
strongly upon minds as does the fear of an eternity of torments. The explanation
of this is that men's love of pleasure is not as great as their hatred of pain.
Furthermore, through this inner sensation of their disorders, they know they are
deserving of hell, and they see nothing in themselves that deserves a reward as
great as that of participation in the felicity of God himself. Vohmtarily or not,
they feel that, far from deserving these rewards, they are deserving of the greatest
punishments; for their conscience never leaves them. But they are not constantly
convinced in the same way that God wills to show His mercy to sinners after they
have violated His justice against His Son. Thus, even the just fear an eternity of
torments more vividly than they hope for an eternity of pleasures. Therefore, the
vision of pain is more effective than that of reward; and the following is roughly
what it is capable of producing, not by itself but as principal cause.
It generates an infinity of scruples in the mind and fortifies them in such a way
that deliverance from them is nearly impossible. It extends faith, so to speak, to
the boundaries of prejudice, and causes us to render to imaginary powers the
worship due only unto God. It stubbornly entrenches the mind in vain or dangerous superstitions. It makes us ardently and zealously embrace human traditions
and practices useless for salvation, Jewish and Pharisaic devotions invented by
servile fear. Finally, it sometimes casts men into a blindness of despair, with the
result that, confusedly regarding death as nothingness, they brutally huny towald
their doom in order to be delivered from the mortal anxieties that agitate and
frighten them. Women, young people, and feeble minds are the most subject to
scruples and superstitions, and men are the most capable of despair.
326

The Search after Truth

327

It is easy to recognize the reasons for all these things; for it is obvious that the
idea of eternity being the greatest, the most terrible and most frightening of all
those that astonish the mind and strike the imagination, it is necessarily accompanied by a large following of ancillary ideas, which all have a considerable
effect upon the mind because of their relation to this great and terrible idea of
eternity.
Whatever is related to the infmite is not small; or, if it is small in itself, it
receives, through this relation, a limitless greatness that cannot be compared with
anything finite. Thus, whatever relates, or is even imagined to relate, to this
inevitable alternative of an eternity of torments or an eternity of delights, which
is proposed to us, necessarily frightens all minds capable of any reflection and
feeling.
Women, young people, and feeble minds, having (as I have already said
elsewhere) soft and flexible brain fibers, receive the deepest impressions from
this alternative; when they have an abundance of animal spirits and are more
capable of feeling than of accurate reflection, they receive, because of the vivacity of their imagination, a very large number of false impressions and ancillary
ideas bearing no natural relation to the principal idea. Nevertheless, this relation,
although imaginary, never ceases supporting and strengthening these false impressions and ancillary ideas to which it has given birth.
Litigants deeply involved in a major lawsuit whose procedures they do not
understand often have unjustified concerns, because they fear that certain things
for which the judges have no concern and about which the lawyers have no fear,
will harm them. Because the matter is of great consequence to them, the disturbance it produces in their brain spreads and is communicated to remote traces not
naturally related to it. Such is also the case with the scrupulous; they irrationally
create subjects of fear and anxiety for themselves. Instead of examining the will
of God in the Sacred Scriptures and consulting with those whose imaginations are
not wounded, they constantly think of an imaginary law that the inonlinate
impulses of fear have engraved in their brains. And although they are inwardly
convinced of their weakness, and although God does not demand certain duties
of them that they prescribe for themselves (since they hinder their serving Him),
they cannot help preferring their imagination to their mind and submitting to
certain confused opinions that frighten them and make them fall into error, rather
than to the evidence of reason, which reassures them and returns them to the true
path of their salvation.
There is often a great deal of virtue and charity to be found in persons afflicted
with scruples; but there is very much less in those attached to certain superstitions, whose principal occupation is certain Jewish and Pharisaic practices. God
wills to be adored in spirit and in truth; he is not content with facial expressions
and external civilities affected by genuflecting in His presence, and by praising
Him with a movement of the lips in which the heart has no part. Men are content
with these marks of respect only because they cannot penetrate the heart; for men
are even unjust enough to wish to be adored in spirit and in truth. God therefore
demands both our minds and our hearts: He made it only for Himself and He

328

Nicolas Malebranche

conserves it only for Himself. But there are many men who, unhappily for them,
refuse God the things to which He has all manner of right. They have idols in
their hearts, which they adore in spirit and in truth, and to which they sacrifice all
that they are.
But because the true God threatens them in the secret recesses of their conscience with an eternity of tonnents to punish their excessive ingratitude, and
because, in spite of this, they do not want to abandon their idolatry, they take it
into their heads to perfonn some externally good worlts. They fast, as do others;
they give alms; they say prayers. They continue such practices for a while, but
because they are painful to those lacking in charity, they usually abandon them in
order to embrace certain insignificant practices or easy devotions that accord with
self-love and necessarily subvert the entire morality of Jesus Christ, but in a way
that is imperceptible to them. They are faithful, ardent, and zealous defenders of
these human traditions that unenlightened people persuade them are most useful,
and that the idea of eternity, which frightens them, constantly represents to them
as absolutely necessary for their salvation.
Such is not the case with the righteous. They hear, as do the impious, the
warnings of their God; but the confused clamor of their passions does not prevent
them from hearing His counsels. The false luster of human traditions does not
dazzle them to the point of not sensing the light of truth. They place their
confidence in the promises of Jesus Christ, and they follow his precepts; for they
know that the promises of men are as vain as their counsels. Nevertheless. it can
be said that this fear that the idea of eternity causes in their minds sometimes
produces such a great disturbance in their imaginations that they dare not condemn these human traditions outright, and they often approve them by their
example, because they have some appearance• of wisdom in their superstition
and in their false humility, as do these Pharisaic traditions of which Saint Paul
speaks.
But what is especially noteworthy here, and which does not concern the
disorder of morals as much as it does that of the mind, is that the fear of which we
have just spoken often extends the faith as well as the zeal of those struck with it
to include things that are false as well as unworthy of the holiness of our religion.
There are many people who believe, but with an unflagging and obstinate faith,
that the earth is immobile at the center of the universe; that animals feel genuine
pain; that sensible qualities are spread over objects; that there are fonns or real
accidents distinct from matter, and an infinity of such false or uncertain opinions,
because they imagine that it would be contrary to the faith to deny them. They are
startled by the expressions in Sacred Scripture, which are spoken to be heeded,
not to instruct us in physics (and consequently are set in ordinary ways of
speaking). They believe not only what the mind of God would teach them but
also all the opinions of the Jews. They do not see that Joshua, for example,
speaks before his soldiers even as Copernicus, Galileo, and Descartes would
speak to ordinary men, and that, even had he been of the opinion of these
"Col. 2:22-23.

The Search aftu Truth

329

philosophers, he would not have commanded the earth to stand still, since he
could not have explained to his anny, in words they could have understood, the
miracle God wrought for His people. Do not those who believe that the sun is
immobile say to their servants, their friends, even to those who share their view,
that the sun rises and sets? Do they presume to speak differently from all other
men even when it is not their main intention to philosophize? Did Joshua understand astronomy perfectly? Or, if he did, did his soldiers? Or, if he and his
soldiers were well instructed in it, can it be said that they wanted to philosophize
at a time when they were thinking only of fighting? Therefore, Joshua ought to
have spoken as he did even if he and his soldiers had believed what is presently
held by the ablest astronomers. However, the words of this great general, "Sun,
stand still upon Gibeon" [Josh. 10: 12-14) and what is said afterwards, that the
sun stopped moving according to his command, persuades many people that the
view that the earth moves is not only dangerous but absolutely heretical and
untenable. They have heard it said that some pious people, for whom it is fining
to have a great deal of respect and deference, condemn this view; they know
confusedly something of what happened to a learned astronomer of our own
centwy because of this subject, and this seems sufficient to them for believing
stubbornly that faith extends to this opinion. A certain confused opinion, excited
and upheld by an impulse of fear of which they are hardly aware, causes them to
take up a defiant attitude toward those who follow reason in these things within
the province of reason. They regard them as heretics. They listen to them only
with anxiety and some mental pain, and their secret apprehensions generate in
their minds the same reverence for, and even submission to, these opinions (and
for many others that are purely philosophical) as for the truths that are the object
of faith.

BOOK FOUR

Chapter Thirteen

t

I. Tlr~ third natural inclination, which is our friendship for other men. II. It
inclines us to appro1·~ the thoughts of our friends and to deceil•e them by false
praise.
Of all our inclinations, taken in general and in the sense explained in the first
chapter, there remains only the one we have for those with whom we live and for
all the objects around us, of which I shaJI say but little because this concerns
morals and politics rather than our present topic. As this inclination is always
joined to the passions, it might be more appropriate to speak of it only in the
foJlowing book; but in this, order is not of such great consequence.

I. The third natural inclination. which is our friends/rip for other
men.
In order to understand the cause and the effects of this natural inclination, we
must know that God loves all His works and that He joins them closely to one
another for their mutual preservation. For, loving the works He produces (since it
is His love that produces them), He also constantly imprints a love for His works
in our hearts, because He constantly produces in our hearts a love similar to His
own. And in order that the natural love we have for ourselves not nullify and
weaken too much that which we have for things external to us but, on the
contrary, that these two loves God has placed in us should uphold and strengthen
one another, He has joined us in such a way with everything around us, and
especially to beings of our own species, that their ills naturally afflict us, their joy
pleases us, and their grandeur, their abasement, their decline, seem to augment
or diminish our own being. New honors for our relatives and friends, new
acquisitions by those most closely related to us, the conquests and victories of
our prince, and even the recent discoveries of the New World, seem to add
something to our substance. Being tied to all these things, we rejoice in their
grandeur and scope; we would even have. this world be unbounded. The view of
certain philosophers, that the stars and vortexes are infinite, not only seems
worthy of God but appears most agreeable to man, who feels a secret joy in being
330

The Search after Truth

331

a pan of the infinite, because, as tiny as he is in himself, it seems to him that he
becomes like the infinite by expanding into the infmite beings around him.
It is true that our union with all the bodies turning in these great spaces is not
very close. Hence it is not perceptible to most men, and there are those who have
so little interest in the discoveries made in the heavens that we might well believe
they are not united to them by nature did we not also know that this is either from
lack of awareness or because they are too closely tied to other things.
The soul, although united to the body that it animates, does not always sense
all the movements occurring in it; or if it senses them, it does not always consider
them. Since the passion agitating the soul is often greater than the sensation
affecting it, the soul seems to hold more closely to the object of its passion than
to its own body; for it is principally through the passions that the soul is directed
outside, and feels that it is effectively linked to everything around it. In the same
way, it is principally by sensation that it is directed into its body, and recognizes
that it is united to all the body's components. But just as we cannot conclude that
the soul of an impassioned man is not united to his body because he risks death
and is not interested in the preservation of his life, so we should not imagine that
we are not naturally linked to all things because there are some things for which
we show no concern.
Do you wish, for example, to know whether men are linked to their prince and
country'? Search out those who know the interests of both, and are not absorbed
in their own particular affairs, and you will see how great their ardor is for news,
their anxiety over battles, their joy at victories, their sadness at defeats. You will
then see clearly that men are closely linked to their prince and to their country.
Similarly, would you like to know whether men are linked to China, Japan, the
planets, and the fixed stars'? Then search out, or imagine to yourself, some
individuals whose country and family enjoy a sound peace, who do not have any
particular passions, and who do not really feel the union that attaches them to
things closer to us than the heavens, and you will recognize that if they have any
awareness of the grandeur and the nature of these stars, they will rejoice should
any stars be discovered. They will contemplate them with pleasure; and if they
are sufficiently skillful, they will willingly take the trouble to observe them and
to calculate their movements.
Those involved in the press of business hardly care whether some comet
appears or an eclipse occurs; but those not so closely tied to things near them
make a considerable fuss over these sorts of events because, indeed, there is
nothing to which we are linked, although we are not always aware of it-just as
we are not always aware that our souls are united, I do not say to our arm and
hand but to our heart and brain.
The strongest natural union that God has established between us and His works
is that which binds us to the people with whom we live. God commanded us to
love them as we love ourselves; and in order to strengthen our voluntary love of
them, He constantly supports and fortifies it by a natural love He impresses in us.
For this reason He has established certain invisible bonds that oblige us as if

332

Nicolas Malebranche

necessarily to love them, to watch over their preservation as we do our own, and
to reganl them as necessary parts of the whole that we together compose, and
without which we could not subsist.
There is nothing more admirable than these natural relations found among the
inclinations of the minds of men, among the movements of their bodies, and
between these inclinations and movements. This whole hidden concatenation is a
marvel that cannot be sufficiently admired and could never be understood. At the
sight of some evil that surprises us, or that seems insurmountable by our own
power. we let out a great cry, for example. This cry, often uttered mechanically
without thinking, unfailingly reaches the ears of those close enough to give the
help we need. The cry penetrates them, and is heeded by people of whatever
nation or rank; for this cry belongs to all languages and all conditions, as indeed
it should. It agitates the brain, instantly changes the entire bodily disposition of
those struck by it, and even makes them run to help without thinking. But it is not
long before it acts upon their minds and forces them to want to help and to think
of ways to aid him who uttered this natural prayer, always providing that this
prayer, or rather this command, is just and in accord with the rules of society. For
an improper cry, uttered without cause or from an unjustified fear, produces
indignation or mockery instead of compassion in those who would help because,
in crying out with no reason, one abuses things established by nature for our
preservation. This improper cry naturally produces aversion, and the desire to
avenge the wrong done to nature, i.e., to the order of things, if he who uttered it
without reason did so voluntarily. But it should produce only the passion of
scorn, mixed with some compassion, without aversion and without a desire for
vengeance, if it is fright, i.e., the false appearance of an urgent need, that caused
the cry-for the fearful need scorn to reassure and correct them, and the weak
need compassion to help them-nothing better ordained can be conceived.
I do not claim to explain by one example which mechanisms [ressorts] and
relations the Author of nature placed in the brains of men and in all the animals to
maintain the harmony and union necessary for their preservation. I merely reflect
on these mechanisms so that we might carefully consider and seek them, not how
they operate or how their operation is communicated by air, light, and all the tiny
bodies around us (for all that is nearly incomprehensible and is not necessary
here), but in order that we should at least be able to recognize their effects.
Through various observations we can recognize the ties that bind us to each
other, but we cannot know with any precision how this occurs. It is not difficult
to see that a clock marks the hours, but it takes time to understand the reasons;
and there are so many different mechanisms in the brain of the smallest animals
that there is nothing like it in the most complex machines.
If it is not possible to understand perfectly the mechanisms of our machine,
neither is it absolutely necessary to understand them. But in order to conduct
ourselves, it is absolutely necessary to know well the effects these mechanisms
are capable of producing in us. It is not necessary to know how a watch is made
to use it; but if one wishes to use it to regulate one's time, it is necessary at least
to know that it marks the hours. Yet there are people who are so little capable of
reflection that we might almost compare them to purely inanimate machines.

Th~ S~arch aft~r

Truth

333

They do not sense the mechanisms within themselves that are released at the sight
of objects; they are often agitated without perceiving their own impulses; they are
slaves without being aware of their bonds. In short, they are conducted in a
thousand different ways without recognizing the hand of Him who conbOis them.
They think they are the sole authors of all the motion that they undergo and, not
distinguishing what happens in them as a result of a free act of their will from
what is produced in them by the impressions of bodies around them, they believe
that they guide themselves when they are being guided by some other. But this is
not the place to explain these things.
The relations that the Author of nature has placed among our natural inclinations in order to unite us with one another seem still more worthy of our study
and inquiries than those among bodies, or among minds in relation to bodies. For
they are ordered in such a way that the inclinations that seem most opposed to
society are the most useful to it when they are slightly moderated.
For example, the desire all men have for grandeur tends by itself toward the
dissolution of all societies. Nevertheless, this desire is tempered by the order of
nature in such a way that it works to the good of the state much more than other
weak and languid inclinations. For it gives rise to emulation, excites to virtue,
sustains courage in the service of our country, and we would not win so many
victories if soldiers and especially officers did not aspire to glory and command.
Thus, all those composing annies, working only for their panicular interests,
nevertheless procure the good of the entire country. This demonstrates that it is
most advantageous for the public good that all men have a secret desire for
greatness, provided it be moderated.
But if all the individuals should seem to be what they really are, if they should
say frankly to others that they want to be the principal part of the body they
compose and never the least, this would not be the means of joining them
together. Not all the members of a body can be its head and heart; there must be
feet and hands, small as well as great, people who obey as well as those who
command. And if each says openly that he wants to command and never obey, as
indeed each of them does, it is obvious that every body politic would be destroyed, and that disorder and injustice would reign everywhere.
Therefore, it was necessary for those who are most intelligent and most fitted
to become the noble parts of this body and to command others, to be naturally
civil, i.e., to be led by a secret inclination to show others, through their manners,
their courteous and honorable speech, that they think themselves unworthy of
consideration, that they believe those to whom they speak are deserving of all sorts
of honors, and that they have great esteem and veneration for them. Finally, in
default of charity and love of order, it has been necessary for those who command others to have the art of deceiving them by an imaginary abasement that
consists only in civilities and speech, in order that they might enjoy without
being envied, that preeminence which is necessary in all bodies. For in this way
all men possess in some way the greatness they desire-the great really possess
it, and the insignificant and weak possess it only through imagination, being
persuaded to some extent by the compliments of others that they are not regarded
as what they are, namely the least among men.

334

Nicolas Malebranche

From what we have just said, it is easy to conclude in passing that it is a most
grievous fault against civility to speak of oneself frequently. especially in a
flattering way, even though one has all sorts of good qualities, because it is not
pennissible to speak to those with whom one is conversing as if one regarded
them as beneath oneself. except in special sunoundings and when there are
external and perceptible signs that elevate one above them. For in the end,
contempt is the ultimate insult; it is the one most capable of rupturing society;
and naturally we should not hope that a man whom we have made aware that we
consider him beneath us can ever be joined to us, because men can never stand
being the meanest part of the body they compose.
The inclination that men have for making compliments is therefore quite
appropriate for counterbalancing the one they have for esteem and elevation, and
for softening the internal pain felt by those who are the meanest parts of the body
politic. And it cannot be doubted that the mixture of these two inclinations has
good effects in the maintenance of society.
But there is an extreme corruption in these inclinations, as well as in friendship, compassion, good will, and the other inclinations that tend to unite men.
What would support civil society is often the cause of its disunity and ruin; and,
not to depart from my subject, it is often the cause of the communicatiof' and
entrenchment of enor.
II. Tlris inclination leads us to approw! of the thoughts of our friends
and to decei1·e them by false praise.

Of all the inclinations necessal)' for civil society. those that most throw us into
enor are friendship. favor, gratitude, and all the inclinations that incline us to
speak of others with too much flattel)' in their presence.
We set no bounds to our love in the person of our friends; together with them
we love all the things that pertain to them in any way. And as they nonnally
demonstrate sufficient passion in the defense of their opinions, we are inclined to
believe them unthinkingly. to approve them, and even to defend them with
greater obstinacy and passion than they do themselves. This is because they
would often seem to be ill-mannered in the heated defense of their opinions,
whereas we cannot be criticized for defending them. In them, this would be
self-love; in us, it is generosity.
We bear affection for other men for several reasons. for they can please and
serve us in various ways. The similarity of their temperaments, inclinations,
functions, airs, ways, virtues, goods, the affection or esteem they show us, the
favors that they have done for us or that we hope they will do for us, and several
other particular reasons cause us to love them. Therefore, if it should happen that
one of our friends, that is to say. some person who has the same inclinations as
we, who is well-rounded, speaks in an agreeable manner. whom we believe to be
virtuous or of significant station, who shows affection and esteem for us, who
has done for us some favor. or from whom we hope to receive one or finally. who
loves us for some other particular reason -if it happens. I say. that this person
advances some proposition, we immediately allow ourselves to be persuaded
without using our reason. We support his opinion without troubling ourselves

The Search after Truth

335

about whether it is consistent with the truth, and often even in opposition to our
own conscience, according to the obscurity and confusion of our minds, the
corruption of our hearts, and according to the advantages we hope to draw from
our false generosity.
It is not necessary to provide particular examples of these things here, for one
hardly ever finds oneself in a group even for a single hour without noticing
several of them if one wishes to reflect a little about it. Approval and laughter, as
is commonly said, are only rarely on the side of truth, but almost always on the
side of the people one loves. The speaker is obliging and civil; therefore, he is
right. If what he says is merely probable, it is regarded as true; and if what he
puts forth is absolutely ridiculous and foolish, it will become at least very
probable. This is a man who loves me, who esteems me, who has done for me
some favor, who has the disposition and powerto do so again, who supported my
views on other occasions; I would therefore be an ingrate and a fool if I were
opposed to him, or even if I failed to applaud him. Thus do we make sport with
the truth, malting it serve our own interests and embracing each other's false
opinions.
An honest man should not find fault with anyone for instructing and enlightening him when it is done according to the rules of civility: and when our friends
are shocked when we modestly show them that they are mistaken, they must be
pennitted to love themselves and their mistakes, since that is what they want and
since we do not have the power to command them or to change their minds.
But a true friend ought never to approve the errors of his friend, for in the end
we must consider that we cause them to be even more mistaken than we think by
defending their opinions indiscriminantly. Our applause only inflates their hearts
and confirms them in their errors. They become incorrigible; in the end they act
and make decisions as though they were infallible.
Why is it that the richest, noblest, most powerful, and generally all those who
are raised above others, quite often believe themselves to be infallible, and
comport themselves as though they were much more reasonable than those of a
low or mediocre station, unless it is because we indifferently and loosely approve
all their thoughts? Thus, the approbation we tender our friends gradually makes
them believe that they are more intelligent than others, which makes them vain,
bold, imprudent, and capable of falling into the grossest errors without being
aware of it.
This is why our enemies often do us better service and enlighten our minds
much more through their opposition than do our friends through their approval,
because our enemies force us to be on guard, and pay attention to the things we
put forth, which alone suffices to make us recognize our aberrations. But our
friends merely lull us to sleep, giving us false confidence that makes us vain and
ignorant. Men should therefore never admire their friends and yield to their
opinions through friendship, and likewise they should never oppose those of their
enemies because of enmity. But they should get rid of their tendencies toward
flattery and contradiction in order to become sincere, and to approve clarity and
truth wherever they find it.
We should also bear in mind that most men are inclined toward flattery, or

336

Nicolas Malebranche

toward paying us compliments, because of a sort of natural inclination to appear
witty, to draw the good will of others toward themselves, and because they hope
for some reward in return, or finally, because of a kind of malice and mockery.
And we should never permit ourselves to be confused by anything they say to us:
do we not see every day that people who do not know one another nevertheless
praise each other to the skies the first time they meet and talk? And what is more
common than seeing people give grandiloquent praise and express admiration by
extraordinary gestures for a person who has just spoken in public, even in the
presence of those with whom they have just mocked that person? No matter how
many times someone cries out, pales with admiration, or is astonished at the
things he hears, it is not a sound proof that the speaker utters marvels, but rather
that he speaks to flatter, that he has friends, or pemaps enemies, who are
diverting themselves with him. It is because he speaks in an engaging manner, or
is rich or powerful; or, if you will, it is a sufficiently good proof that what he says
is based upon the confused and obscure notions of the senses, [which are
nonetheless) quite affective and agreeable -or because he has a lively imagination, since praise is given to friendship, riches, honors, to what seems to be true,
and very rarely to the truth.
One might expect that having treated the inclinations of minds in general, I
should now descend into the exact details of all the particular impulses they feel
upon the perception of good and evil; i.e., that I should explain the nature of
love, hatred, joy, sadness, and all the intellectual passions, whether general or
particular. simple or complex. But I am not engaged in explaining all the various
impulses of which minds are capable.
I am quite willing to have it known that my principal design in all I have
written to date about the search after truth has been to show men their weakness
and ignorance, and that we are all subject to error and sin. I have said it, and I say
it again, so it may be remembered; I never planned to treat the basic nature of the
mind. But I have been obliged to say something about it in order to explain errors
at their source, to explain them in an orderly way; in a word, to make myself
intelligible. And if I have crossed the boundaries I set myself, it is because I had,
it seemed to me, new things to say that seemed consequential to me, which I even
believed might be read with pleasure. Pemaps I was mistaken, but I had to have
this presupposition in order to have the courage to write them; for what is the
point of speaking with no hope of being heard? It is true that I have said many
things that seem to belong less to the subject I am treating than to that of the
soul's particular impulses. I admit this, but I do not consider myself obliged to
anything when I set up an order for myself. I established an order to guide
myself, but I hold that I am allowed to tum my head as I walk, if I find something
thctt deserves to be considered. I even hold that it allows me to rest in certain
places along the way, provided I do not lose sight of the road I must follow.
Those who do not wish to pause with me are free to pass on; they are allowed to
do so; they need only tum the page. But, should they be annoyed, let them know
that many people find that the resting places I choose make the road smoother
and more pleasant.

BOOK FIVE: THE PASSIONS
Chapter One

t

The nature and origin of the passions in general.
The mind of man has two necessary or essential relations, which are quite
different from one another: the one to God, the other to its body. As a pure spirit
[pur esprit), it is essentially joined to the Word of God, to eternal truth and
wisdom, i.e., to sovereign reason, for only through Ibis union is it capable of
thought, as we have seen in the third book. As a human mind [esprit humain), it
has an essential relation to its body, for it is due to the mind's union with the
body that it senses and imagines, as we have explained in the first and second
books. The mind is termed sense or imagination when its body is the natural or
occasional cause of its thoughts, and it is called understanding when it acts by
itself-or rather, when God acts in it and when His light illuminates it in various
ways, with no necessary relation to what is occurring in the body.
The same is true of man's will. As a will, it depends essentially on the love
God bears for Himself, and on the eternal law-in a word, on the will of God.
Only because God loves Himself do we love anylhing, and if God did not love
Himself, or if He did not continuously impress upon man's soul a love like His
own, i.e., the impulse of love that we feel toward the good in general, we would
love nothing, we would wiU nothing, and as a result, we would be without a wiU,
since the wiD is only the impression of nature that leads us toward the good in
general, as we have already said a number of times.
But the will, insofar as it is the will of a man, depends essentially on the body,
for only because of motion in the blood, or rather in the animal spirits, does it
feel excited by any of the sensible emotions. I have therefore called natural
inc:linations all the soul's impulses that we have in common with pure intelli·
gences, as well as some of those in which the body has a role but of which it is
only indirectly the cause and end, as I explained in the preceding book. Here I
call passions all the emotions that naturally affect the soul upon occasion of
extraordinary motion in the animal spirits. These sensible emotions will be the
topic for this book.
Although the passions are inseparable from the inclinations, and although men
are capable of a certain sensible love or hatred only because they are capable of a
337

338

Nicolas Malebranche

spiritual love or hatred, yet I thought that in order to avoid confusion it was
proper to treat them separately. If you consider that the passions are much
stronger and livelier than the natural inclinations. that they ordinarily have different objects, and that they are always produced by other causes, you will see that
my separating things that by their nature are inseparable is not entirely unreasonable.
Men are capable of sensation and imagination only because they are capable of
pure intellection, since the senses and the imagination are inseparable from the
mind; yet no one finds anything amiss in treating these two faculties of the soul
separately, though they are by nature inseparable.
Finally, the senses and the imagination differ no more from the pure understanding than do the passions from the inclinations. Thus. it was necessary to
separate these latter two faculties, as the three former ordinarily are, in order the
better to distinguish what the soul receives from its Author by way of relation to
the body from what it has from Him independently of this relation. The only
inconvenience naturally generated by this separation of two things that are by
nature joined will be-as often happens in such cases-the necessity of repeating something that already has been said.
Although he is composed of several parts, man is a whole, and the union
formed by his parts is so close that he cannot be affected in one place without the
whole being disturbed. All his faculties are linked together and so structured that
it is impossible to explain one of them without saying something about the
others. Thus, while trying to establish an orderly plan for the purpose of avoiding
confusion, I find myself forced to repeat things. But it is better to repeat than to
confuse, because our first duty is to be intelligible, and in this case the best I can
do is to repeat without boring the reader.
The passions of the soul are impressions from the Author of nature that incline
us toward loving our body and all that might be of use in its preservation -just as
the natural inclinations are impressions from the Author of nature that primarily
lead us toward loving Him as the sovereign good and our neighbor without regard
for our body.
The natural or occasional cause of these impressions is the movement of the
animal spirits that are dispersed throughout the body in order to produce and
maintain in it a disposition appropriate to the object we perceive, so that the mind
and body might be of mutual help in dealing with it. For it is through this
continuous action by God that our volitions are followed by all those movements
in the body designed to carry them out, and that the movements of our body that
are mechanically excited in us at the sight of some object are accompanied by a
passion of our soul that inclines us to will what seems to be useful to the body.
It is this continuous and efficacious impression of the will of God on us that
binds us so closely to one part of matter, and ifthis impression of His will should
cease for but a moment, we would immediately be freed from our dependence
upon the body and all the changes it undergoes. For I cannot understand how
certain people imagine that there is an absolutely necessary relation between the
movements of the spirits and blood and the emotions of the soul. A few tiny

Th~ S~arch aft~r

Truth

339

panicles of bile are rather violently stirred up in the brain-therefore, the soul
must be excited by some passion, and the passion must be anger rather than love.
What relation can be conceived between the idea of an enemy's fauks, or a
passion of contempt or hatred, on the one hand, and the corporeal movement of
the blood's pans striking against cenain parts of the brain on the other? How can
they convince themselves that the one depends on the other, and that the union or
connection of two things so remote and incompatible as mind and mauercould be
caused and maintained in any way other than by the continuous and all-powerful
will of the Author of nature?
Those who think that bodies of necessity and by themselves communicate their
motion at the moment of their impact believe something having a certain plausibility. For in the final analysis, this prejudice• or error has a cenain basis: bodies
seem to be essentially related to bodies. But the mind and the body are two kinds
of being so contrary to one another that those who believe that the soul's emotions necessarily follow the movement of the spirits and blood believe something
without the faintest plausibility. Certainly, only our own inner experience of the
union of these two beings and an ignorance of God's continuous operations on
His creatures could make us imagine a cause of this union other than the always
efficacious will of God.
It is difficult to determine for sure whether this relation or connection between
the thoughts of man's mind and the movement of his body is a punishment of sin
or a gift of nature, and some people believe it rash to embrace one of these views
rather than the other. We know that before his sin man was not the slave but the
absolute master of his passions and that with his will he could easily arrest the
agitation of the spirits causing them. But I can hardly convince myself that the
body of the first man did not urge his soul to look for things conducive to the
preservation of his life. I can hardly believe that before his sin Adam did not find
fruit pleasant to his sight and delicious to his taste according to what Scripture
says on the matter, or that this remarkable hannony of the passions and senses, so
precisely designed for the preservation of the body, should be a corruption of
nature rather than its initial state.
At the present time nature is undoubtedly corrupted-the body acts too forcefully on the mind. Instead of humbly representing its needs to the mind, the body
tyrannizes it and tears it away from God, to whom it should be inseparably
united, and it unceasingly applies the mind to the search after sensible things that
might be of use in its preservation. After the Fall, the mind became. as it were,
material and terrestrial. The relation and close connection it had with God was
lost, i.e., God withdrew from it as much as He could without losing and annihilating it. A thousand disorders have been the consequence of the absence of
Him who preserves it in order. and without producing a longer list of our
miseries, I grant that since his fall man is corrupt in all his parts.
But man's fall has not destroyed the work of God. What God first put in man
can always be found in him. and His immutable will. which creates the nature of
"See below. bk. 6, pt. 2. ch. 3. "On method ...

340

Nicolas Malebranche

each thing, has not been changed at all by the inconstancy and fickleness of
Adam's will. All that God willed then, He wills yet; and because His will is
efficacious, He produces what He wills. Man's sin was indeed the occasion of
that exercise of His will that produces the order of grace. But grace is not
contnuy to nature -the one does not overthrow the other because God does not
struggle against Himself and never regrets anything; and since His wisdom has
no limits, His works will have no end.
The exercise of God's will producing the order of grace, then, is added to that
producing the order of nature in order to restore it, not to alter it. In God there are
only two general volitions, and everything on earth governed by law depends on
one or the other. It will be seen in what follows that the passions are well
governed if they are considered only in relation to the preservation of the body,
although they may deceive us in certain rare, particular cases that the universal
cause has not willed to correct. It must be concluded, then, that the passions
belong to the order of nature since they cannot belong to the order of grace.
True, if we consider that the first man's sin changed the union of soul and body
with regard to [their order o~ dependency, and has deprived us of the help of an
omnipresent God who is always ready to defend us, we might say that sin is the
cause of our attachment to sensible things, because sin has removed us from
God, through whom alone we can be delivered from their servitude.
But without pausing further to inquire about the first cause of the passions, let
us investigate their scope, nature, causes, end, use, defects, and all that they
include.

BOOK FIVE
Chapter Two

t

The union between the mind and sensible objects, or the strength and scope of
the passions in general.
If all the readers of this work would take the trouble to reflect a little on what they
sense in themselves, it would not be necessary to pause here to show our dependence on sensible objects. I cannot say anything on this matter that everyone does
oot know as well as I do, provided they give it a little thought. This is why I
would prefer to say nothing about it. But because experience teaches me that men
often forger themselves so much that they do nor think aboul what they sense,
and do not inquire into the explanation of what takes place in their minds, I think
I should say a few rhings here that might help them to think about these matters. I
hope that even those who already know these things will not be bored with
reading aboul them, for although we find no pleasure in simply hearing about
what we already know, we always find pleasure in hearing about what we both
know and sense.
Thal most honorable sect of philosophers, whose views people are slill proud
to embrace, would have us believe that our happiness depends only on ourselves. • The Stoics never stop telling us that we should rely only on ourselves,
that we should not be distressed at the loss of our honor, our goods, our friends,
our relatives, that we should always be calm and without rhe least concern,
whatever may happen; chat exile, injuries, insults, sickness and even death are
not evils, and that we should not fear or flee from them. In shon, they tell us an
infinity of such things that we are led to believe as much for the reason that our
pride makes us love independence as because reason instructs us that indeed the
greater part of the evils that really afflict us would not be capable of afflicting us
if everything were in order.
But God has given us a body, and by this body has joined us to all sensible
things. Sin has subjugated us to this body and by it has made us dependent on all
sensible things. It is the order of nature and the will of the Creator that all the
•Tunc bearum csrc IC judic:a, cum sibi ex tc gaudium omnc nascctur: cum in his quae homines
cripiunl, opcant, custodiunt, nihil invcneris. non dic:o quod malis, sed quod vclis." Sen. Et•· 124.

341

342

Nicolas Malebranche

beings He has created should depend on one another. We are to some extent
joined to the entire universe, and it is the first man's sin that has made us
dependent on all those beings to which God had but joined us. Thus, there is now
no one who is not both joined and subjugated to his body and through his body to
his relatives, friends, city, prince, country, clothes, house, land, horse, dog, to
the entire earth, the sun, the stars, to all the heavens.
It is therefore ridiculous to tell men that it is up to them to be happy, wise, and
free, and to advise them seriously not to be upset at the loss of their friends or
goods is to mock them. For just as it is ridiculous to advise men not to feel pain
when they are struck or not to take pleasure in eating while hungry, so the Stoics
are wrong; or perhaps they are joking with us, when they exhon us not to be
afflicted at the death of a father, the loss of our goods, exile, prison, and other
such things, nor to be delighted with good success in our business, for we are tied
to our country, our goods, our parents, and so on, by a natural union that does not
now depend on our will.
I grant that reason teaches that we ought to suffer exile without sadness, but
this same reason teaches us that we should not feel pain when our ann is cut off.
The soul is superior to the body, and, according to the light of reason, its
happiness or unhappiness should not depend on the body. But experience sufficiently shows us that things are not as reason says they should be, and it is
ridiculous to philosophize against experience.
Christians do not philosophize in this way. They do not deny that pain is an
evil, that there is pain involved in being separated from things to which we are
joined by nature, and that it is difficult to rid ourselves of the slavery to which sin
has reduced us. They agree that it is a disorder for the soul to depend on its body;
but they recognize that it does depend on the body, and in such a way that it can
be freed from its dependence only through the grace of JESUS CHRIST: "I feel in
my body a law that wars against the law of my mind, making me a slave to the
law of sin that is in my members. Unhappy man that I am, who will deliver me
from this body of death? The grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord will be
my deliverance" [Rom. 7:23-25]. The Son of God, His apostles, and all His true
disciples ask us above all to be patient, because they know that the desire to live
righteously involves great suffering. In shon, true Christians or real philosophers
say nothing that disagrees with common sense or experience; but all of nature
continually undennines the views, or the pride, of the Stoics.
Christians know that to be freed at all from their present state of dependence
they must strive to abstain from all those things they cannot possess without
pleasure or be deprived of without pain, and that this is the only way to preserve
the peace and freedom of mind that they have received through the grace of their
Liberator. The Stoics, on the other hand, following the false ideas of their
chimerical philosophy, imagine that they are wise and happy and that one need
only think about vinue and independence in order to become vinuous and independent. Common sense and experience assure us that the best way of not being
hun with the pain of a pinprick is not to prick oneself. But the Stoics say, go

The Search after Truth

343

ahead and prick me, and through the strength of my mind and with the aid of my
philosophy, I will so separate myself from my body that I shall not be bothered
by what happens to it. I have conclusive proofs that my happiness in no way
depends on the body, and that pain is not an evil, and you will see from the look
on my face and from the firm bearing of the rest of my body that my philosophy
makes me invulnerable.
Their pride sustains their courage, but it does not prevent them from actually
suffering pain with uneasiness, and from being miserable. Thus, the union they
have with their body is not destroyed, nor does their pain vanish; rather it is a
matter of the union they have with other men (strengthened by the desire for their
esteem) undermining to a certain extent the union they have with their own
bodies. The sight of their associates looking at them arrests the flow of the spirits
accompanying pain and erases the appearance that pain imprints on their face; for
if no one were looking at them, this look of determination and freedom of mind
would soon vanish. Thus, the Stoics to a certain extent undo the union they have
with their body only by making themselves greater slaves to other men, to whom
they are tied by the passion for glory. It is a certain truth, then, that all men are
tied by nature to every sensible thing, and that through sin they are dependent on
them. We see this clearly enough through experience, though reason seems to
disagree, and practically all of men's actions are conclusive, visible proofs of it
This union, which is common to all men, is not of equal extent or strength in
all men. For as this union depends on the mind's knowledge, it might be said that
we are not tied to objects we have no knowledge of. A peasant in his cottage
takes no part in the glory of his prince and country, but only in the glory of his
own and neighboring villages, because his knowledge extends no further.
First, the soul's union with the sensible objects we have seen and tasted is
much stronger than its union with those it has only imagined or heard about. We
are more closely tied to sensible things by sensation, because sensation almost
always produces much greater traces in the brain and excites more violent motion
in the spirits than does the imagination alone.
Second, this union is not as strong in those who continually struggle against it
in order to devote themselves to the good of the mind as it is in those who follow
the impulses of their passions and let themselves be subjugated to them, for
cupidity increases and strengthens it.
Finally, men's different occupations and stations in life, as well as the different disposition of their spirits, make a considerable difference in the sensible
union they have with terrestrial good. Great men depend on more things than do
others, and their slavery is of greater extent. The general of an army depends on
all his soldiers because they all hold him in esteem. Often it is this very slavery
that produces his valor, and the desire for the esteem of those who have him in
view often forces him to sacrifice other, more reasonable, and more pressing
desires. The same is true of all superiors and those in places of importance in the
world. Often their vanity spurs their virtue, because the love of glory is generally
stronger than the love of truth and justice. I am speaking here of the love of

344

Nicolas Malebranche

glory, not as a simple inclination, but as a passion, because this love can indeed
be sensible and because it is often accompanied by very strong and violent
disturbances in the animal spirits.
Differences in age and sex are additional principal causes of the difference in
men's passions. Children do not like the same things that grown men and old folk
do; or they do not like them with as much strength and constancy. Women are
often involved only with their family and neighborhood, whereas men are involved with their whole country-it is up to them to defend it, and they enjoy
great responsibility, honors, and authority.
There are such great differences in the occupations and circumstances in which
men find themselves that they cannot all be explained. The disposition of the
mind of a married man is not the same as that of a single man. Thinking about his
family occupies him almost entirely. Religious have neither a mind nor a heart of
the same bent as men in the world, nor even as ecclesiastics; they are tied to
fewer things, but naturally are more closely attached to them. We might go on
speaking in general about the states men find themselves in, but we could not
explain in detail all the minor involvements that differ for almost every individual
person, for it happens often enough that men have particular involvements completely contrary to those they should have in relation to their condition. But
although we might give a general account of the different characteristics of mind
and the different inclinations of men and women, of old folk and youngsters, of
the rich and the poor, of the learned and the ignorant, and finally of different
sexes, different ages, and different occupations, still these things are too well
known to everyone who lives in this world and thinks about what he sees to fatten
this book with them. We need only open our eyes to be soundly and pleasantly
instructed in these matters. For those who prefer to read about these things in
Greek rather than learning about them by reflecting upon what happens right in
front of their eyes, they can read book two of Aristotle's Rhetoric. I think that
this is his best work because in it he says few things about which one could be
mistaken and seldom risks a proof of what he asserts.
It is evident, then, that this sensible union between the mind of men and
whatever is related to the preservation of their life or of the society of which they
are considered members is different in different people, since it is of greater extent
in those of greater knowledge, better circumstances, higher station, and whose
imagination is of wider scope, and is limited but stronger in those who are more
involved with the senses, who have a livelier imagination and who more blindly
follow the impulses of their passions.
Frequent thought about the almost infinite ways in which men are tied to
sensible objects is of great use, and one of the best ways of becoming knowledgeable in these matters is to study and observe ourselves. Through the experience of what we perceive there, we instruct ourselves with complete certainty
about all the inclinations of other men, and we have fairly certain knowledge of a
large part of the passions to which they are subject. But if we add to this
experience the knowledge of the particular circumstances men find themselves
in, and a knowledge of the judgments belonging to each of the passions that we

The Search after Truth

345

shall discuss in what follows, we perhaps shall have less difficulty in guessing
most of their actions than astronomers do in predicting eclipses. For though men
are free, they very rarely use their freedom against their natural inclinations and
violent passions.
Before finishing this chapter, l must point out that one of the laws concerning
the union of the soul and body is that all the soul's inclinations, even those it has
for goods that are unrelated to the body, are accompanied by disturbances in the
animal spirits that make these inclinations sensible; <this is so> because given
that man is not a pun: spirit, he cannot have an entirely pure inclination unmixed
by some passion, whether great or small. Thus, the love of truth, justice, virtue,
or of God Himself is always accompanied by motion in the spirits that makes this
love sensible, although we are not aware of this because we almost always have
other, livelier sensations-just as our knowledge of spiritual things is always
accompanied by traces in the brain that makes this knowledge livelier, though
generally more confused. It is true that we often do not realize that we an: to
some extent using our imagination while we are conceiving an abstract truth. The
reason for this is that these truths have no images or traces established by nature
to represent them, and that all the traces they do arouse have no relation to them
other than that established by chance or the will of man. For arithmeticians, and
even the analysts, who deal only with abstract things. make great use of their
imagination in order to fix their mind's perception on their ideas. The numbers,
letters of the alphabet, and other figures they see or imagine are always joined to
the ideas they have of things, although the traces formed by these characters have
no relation to them and thus cannot make them false or indistinct. This enables
them to discover by an orderly use of numbers and leners very difficult truths that
could not otherwise be discovered.
Given that the ideas of things perceivable only by the pure mind can be linked
to traces in the brain, and that the sight of objects we love, hate, or fear through
natural inclination can be accompanied by motion in the spirits, clearly the
thought of eternity, the fear of hell, and the hope for eternal bliss (although these
are objects that do not strike the senses) can excite violent passions in us.
We can therefore say that we are bound in sensible fashion not only to everything related to the preservation of life but also to spiritual things, to which the
mind by itself is immediately linked. It even happens quite often that faith,
charity, and self-love make this union with spiritual things stronger than the one
we have with all sensible things. The souls of the true martyrs were in closer
union with God than with their bodies, and those who die in order to affirm a
false religion they hold to be true show that the fear of hell has greater power over
them than the fear of death. Often there is so much heated obstinancy on both
sides in wars of religion and in the defense of superstitions that some passion must
undoubtedly be involved-and even a passion firmer and more constant than all
others, because it is sustained by the appearance of truth. as much in those who
are in enor as in those who are right.
We an: bound by our passions to everything that seems to be either good or bad
for the mind as well to everything that seems to be either good or bad for the

346

Nicolo.s Malebranche

body. Everything we can know to be related to us is capable of exciting us; and
none of the things we know is unrelated to us. We always take some interest in
even the most abstract truths when we know them because there is at least this
relation between them and our mind, that we know them. They are ours, as it
were, by virtue of our knowledge of them. We feel we are wounded when they
are attacked, and if we are wounded, certainly we are moved and made uneasy.
Thus, the passions hold such vast and extensive sway that nothing can be conceived with regard to which it might be said that all men are free from their
dominance. But let us now take a look at their nature and attempt to discover
everything they include.

BOOK FIVE
Chapter Three

A particular explanation of all the changes happening to the body and the soul
during the passions.
Seven things can be distinguished in each of our passions, except for wonder,
which is only an imperfect passion.
The first thing is the mind's judgment about an object, or rather, its perception, distinct or confused, of the relation an object has to us.
The second is the actual determination of the will's impulse toward this object,
assuming that the object is, or appears to be, a good. Before the mind perceives
the object's relation to us, either the soul's natural impulse is undetermined, i.e.,
it tends toward good in general, or else it is determined in some other direction by
the knowledge of some other particular object. But as soon as the mind perceives
the relation this new object has to it, the general impulse of the will is immediately restricted to what the mind perceives. The soul is drawn to this object
by its love in order to experience it and to enjoy its good through the sensation of
delight the Author of nature gives it as a natural reward for its seeking the good.
It judges that the object is a good on the basis of an abstract consideration that
does not affect it; but it remains convinced of it because of the efficacy of
sensation, and the livelier the sensation, the more it is attached to the good that
seems to produce it.
But if this particular object is viewed as evil, or as capable of depriving us of
some good, no new determination of the will's impulse occurs, but only an
increase in the impulse toward the opposite good, which increase is as great as
the evil appears dreadful. For in fact we hate only because we love, and the
external evil is judged evil only in relation to the good of which it deprives us.
Thus, since evil is considered as the privation of good, to flee evil is to flee the
privation of good, i.e., to tend toward the good. No new determination of the
will's natural impulse occurs, then, when an object is encountered that displeases
us, but only a sensation of pain, disgust, or bitterness that the Author of nature
inflicts on the soul as a natural punishment for its being deprived of the good.
Reason alone is not enough to move it-this painful and distressing sensation is

347

348

Nicolas Malebranche

needed to arouse it.• Thus, for all the passions, the soul's impulses toward the
good are but impulses of love. But because we are affected by different sensations according to the different circumstances accompanying both our perception
of the good and the soul's impulses toward the good, we confuse these sensations
with the soul's emotions and imagine as many different impulses in the passions
as there are different sensations.
Now it should be pointed out here that pain is a real and true evil, and that it is
no more the privation of pleasure than pleasure is the privation of pain, for there
is a difference between not feeling pleasure or being deprived of the sensation of
pleasure and actually suffering pain. Thus. not every evil is an evil just because it
deprives us of good, but, as I have explained, only that evil which is external to
us and which is not a mode in us. But since we ordinarily mean by goods and
evils good and evil things and not sensations of pleasure and pain, which are
rather the soul's natural signs for distinguishing good from evil, we seemingly
might say without fear of equivocation that evil is but the privation of good, and
that the soul's natural impulse away from evil is the same as its impulse toward
good. For in the end, given that every natural impulse is an impression by the
Author of nature, who acts only for Himself, and who can tum us only toward
Himself, the true impulse of the soul is always essentially the love of good and
only accidentally flight from evil.
It is true that pain may be considered an evil, and in this sense the impulse of
the passions it excites is not real, for we never will pain; and if we positively will
the absence of pain, we do so only because we positively will the preservation or
perfection of our being.
The third thing we can note in each of our passions is the sensation accompanying them-a sensation of love, aversion, desire, joy, or sadness. These
sensations always differ from one passion to another.
The fourth thing is a new determination ofthe flow ofthe spirits and the blood
toward the external and internal parts of the body. Before we see the object of a
given passion, our animal spirits are dispersed throughout the entire body in
order to preserve all its parts generally; but when a new object is present, this
entire balance is upset. Most of the spirits are driven into the muscles of the arms,
legs, and face and all the exterior parts of the body in order to suit it to the
dominating passion, and to give it the bearing and motion necessary to acquire
the good or flee the evil presenting itself. But if a man's strength is not sufficient
to his needs, these same spirits are distributed in such a way that they cause
certain words and cries to be uttered mechanically, and they spread out over his
face and the rest of his body a certain appearance capable of exciting in others the
same passion by which he is moved. For since all men and all animals are in
communion through their eyes and ears, when someone is in a state of agitation,
he necessarily disturbs everyone who sees or hears him, and he naturally makes
"Befme <Orisinal> Sin. this sensation was n01 a punishment but only a warning, because, as I
have ..n:ady said, Adam then could arrest .r will the motion of the anim.J spirits causing pain. Thus,
if he feh pain. he himself willed it, or r.rher, he did not feel pain because he willed not to feel it.

The Search after Truth

349

an impression on their imagination that disturbs them and interests lhem in his
preservation.
As for the rest of the animal spirits, they violently descend into the heart,
lungs, liver, spleen, and other viscera, to enlist their aid and to speed them in
quickly supplying the spirits necessary to preserve the body in the extraordinary
action it takes in acquiring some good or fleeing some evil.
The fifth lhing is the sensible emotion of the soul, which feels itself moved by
lhe unexpected flow of spirits. This sensible emotion of the soul always accompanies Ibis particular movement of lhe spirits in order lhat the soul may be
involved in everylhing affecting the body-just as motion in the spirits is stirred
up as soon as the soul is moved toward some object. Since lhe soul is joined to
lhe body and lhe body to the soul, lheir motions are reciprocal.
Sixlh are the different sensations oflove, aversion, joy, desire, sadness caused
not by lhe intellectual perception of good or evil, like those just mentioned, but
by the different disturbances that the animal spirits cause in the brain. These
latter sensations are much more lively.
The sevenlh is a certain sensation of joy, or rather of inner delight, lhat fixes
lhe soul in its passion and assures it that it is in the proper state wilh regard to the
object it is considering. This inner delight accompanies all the passions-those
springing from the perception of some evil as well as from the perception of some
good, sadness as well as joy. This delight makes all our passions pleasant, and
leads us to consent to them and give ourselves up to them. Finally, it is this
delight lhat must be overcome by the delight of grace and lhe joy of failh and
reason. For as joy of mind always results from the certain knowledge that we are
in the best possible state with regard to the things we perceive, so lhe delight of
the passions is a natural consequence of our confused sensation lhat we are in lhe
best possible state wilh regard to the lhings we sense. Now lhe false delight of
our passions, which makes us slaves to sensible goods, must be overcome by joy
of mind and lhe delight of grace.
Everything we have just mentioned is found in each of the passions, unless
they are excited by confused sensations and lhe mind perceives nolhing good or
bad that might be causing them; for in that case, the first three lhings are not to be
encountered.
We also see that alllhese things are involuntary, that they are in us wilhout our
doing, and even, since the Fall, in spite of us, and lhat only lhe consent of our
will truly depends on us. But it seems appropriate to explain lhese things at
greater length, and to illustrate them with a few examples.
Let us suppose that some man is being insulted, or that because he has an
imagination that is strong and lively or that is aroused by some circumstance such
as sickness or a reaction to grief and sadness, he is sitting at home imagining that
someone (who is not even thinking about him) is ready and willing to cause him
harm. The sensible perception or lhe imagining of lhe relation between his
enemy's actions and his own intentions will be the first cause of his passion.
It is not even absolutely necessary lhat this fellow actually receive, or imagine
receiving, some Insult, or imagine encountering opposition to his intentions in

350

Nicolas Ma/ebranche

order that the impulse of his will should receive some new direction; it is enough
that he should think this with the mind alone, completely independently of the
body. But as this new direction would be not a direction of passion but a very
weak and languid pure inclination, it must be assumed that he feels his intentions
strongly opposed, or that he imagines they will be, rather than making some
other supposition on which the senses and the imagination have little or no role in
his knowledge.
The second thing to be considered in the passion of this fellow is an increase in
the soul's impulse toward the good, which his real or imagined enemy would
prevent him from possessing, and this increase is as great as the supposed
opposition appears to him strong. He immediately hates his enemy only because
he loves the good, and his hatred is as great as his love is strong, because the
impulse of his will in the passion of hatred is only an impulse of love, since the
soul's impulse toward the good is not different from its impulse to flee the
privation of good, as we have already said.
The third thing is the sensation appropriate to the passion in question, in this
case a sensation or feeling of hatred. The impulse of hatred is the same as that of
love, as each of us is capable of knowing from his own experience. Impulses are
actions of the will; sensations are modifications of the mind. The will's impulses
are the natural causes of the mind's sensations,and these sensations of the mind
in tum support the determination of the will's impulses. In the fellow of our
example, the sensation of hatred is a natural consequence of his will's impulse
that is excited by the perception of evil, and this impulse is then supported by the
sensation it causes.
What we have just said about this man could happen to him even if he had no
body; but because he is composed of two parts that are naturally joined, the
impulses of his mind are communicated to his body and those of his body are
communicated to his mind. Thus, this new determination of his will's impulse
naturally produces a new determination of the motion of the animal spirits, which
differs for each ofthe passions, although the impulse of the soul is almost always
the same.
The spirits are therefore driven into the arms, legs, and face to provide the
body with the disposition necessary for the passion, and to spread on the face the
look of an injured man in relation to the circumstances of the injury and the worth
or influence of the two men involved. This flood of spirits is all the more heavy,
strong, and quick as the good is, or appears, greater, and the opposition is
stronger as the brain is more forcefully struck.
If, then, the person we are talking about receives some injury only in his
imagination, or an injury that is real but slight, and that causes no great disturbance in his brain, the flow of animal spirits will be weak and languid, and
perhaps will not be great enough to alter the body's ordinary natural disposition.
But if the injury is atrocious and occurs while his imagination is aroused, there
will be a great disturbance in the brain and the spirits will be dispersed with such
force that they will almost immediately form on his face and body the look and
bearing of the passion dominating him. If he is strong enough to prevail, his air

The Search after Truth

351

will be proud and menacing. If he is weak and unable to resist the evil about to
overwhelm him, his appearance will be humble and submissive. His groans and
tears naturally arouse impulses of compassion in onlookers and even in his
enemy, and from them they extract help that he could not expect from his own
resources. It is true that if the spirits and the fibers of the brain of the onlookers
and of the enemy of this unhappy man are already disturbed by a motion that is
both violent and contrary to the one breeding compassion in the soul, his groans
will only increase this motion and his misery will be inevitable, and this is the
case as long as he maintains the same look and bearing. But nature has provided
well for him, for at the prospect of losing a great good, the face naturally takes on
aspects of rage and despair so lively and unexpected that they disarm the most
impassioned men and, as it were, immobilize them. This terrible and unexpected
view of death 's trappings painted by the hand of nature on the face of an unhappy
man arrests the vengeance-provoking motion of his enemy's spirits and blood; at
this moment of favourable supplication, nature is retracing the humble and submissive look on the face of the unhappy man, who begins to have hope on
account of his enemy's immobility and the change in his air, and the animal
spirits of his enemy receive a determination they could not have had a moment
before. As a result of this, he is mechanically taken by impulses of compassion,
which naturally incline his soul to accede to motives of charity and mercy.
It should be noted here that the soul has no part in this mechanical activity,
which is solely the natural and necessary effect of the admirably wise construction of our bodies. For God in His infinite wis\iom placed in them all the springs
or principles of action needed for their preservation. They would soon be destroyed if they depended on our care and vigilance, whatever our knowledge of
what takes place in them might be. It is true that sensations and impulses of the
soul always accompany disturbances in the brain's fibers and the flow of animal
spirits, but they are not the cause of these disturbances. For besides the fact that
we cannot conceive how a sensation of the soul could move a body, it is certain
that when the soul is moved by some passion, not only is it not thinking that there
are animal spirits, muscle, and nerves in its body, or about their use-it does not
even know what bearing it should give to its body or what look it should form on
its face. It is not even aware of this look, though it is actually formed, unless a
mirror is present or a friend tells it about it. Finally, it is certain that the soul
cannot often prevent the operation of its machine, however it might resist, and
that the soul can make it operate in a different way only when it has the power of
vividly imagining another object whose open traces <in the brain> make the
animal spirits take another course. This is the only means the soul has of arresting
the effects of its passions. It is clear, therefore, that although the soul is necessarily present to the operation of its machine, and although it is moved by its
machine as a result of the laws concerning its union with the body, it has no part
at all in its different movements, of which it is in no way the true cause.
It follows from what I have just said that the reasons generally given to prove
that beasts have a soul prove nothing at all or else just the opposite of what they
were intended to prove. Dogs cry out, they say, when they are injured; therefore,

352

Nicolas Malebranche

they have a soul. According to what I have just said, they should conclude from
dogs' crying out that they have no soul, for a cry is a necessary effect of their
machine's construction. When a man in full health fails to cry out when he is
injured, it is a sign that his soul is resisting the operation of its machine. If he had
no soul and if his body were in the right state, certainly he would always cry
when injured. When our arm is to be bled, we all feel it withdraw mechanically
when it is pricked-unless the soul is there to resist. Now the movement of the
diaphragm and of several other muscles required for crying out partially depends
on the soul as much as those of the arms do. Thus, when a man is injured and
does not cry out or shrink back, it is because he has a soul that opposes the action
of its machine. The opposite case with beasts does not prove, then, what it is
intended to prove.
But, they continue, animals catch their prey and act with as much and more
adroitness than do men. I concede that their machine operates even better than
does ours; but that is because nothing interferes with its action. This is so because
they have no soul, and, as a result, no impulse contrary to those excited in them
by the presence of objects as a result of the remarkable construction of their body
by Him whose wisdom knows no limits. An extreme effect of prejudice it is to
propose as a proof an opinion that is basically more appropriate to destroying it
than establishing it.
I would be straying too far from my topic were I to linger any further with the
defenders of the bestial soul; I would do better here to try to show them the cause
of their prejudice. First, we do not now and never shall know precisely the
particles of which the brain is composed (and still less their functions), or their
different connections: on one side to the organs that receive impressions from
objects, and on the other to all the parts of our body; second, our soul cannot
exist without actually sensing itself; for these reasons, the soul has trouble in
anributing to the construction of its body, which is actually unknown to it and
which it does not consider, the effects that really depend on it. The soul is led to
judge that only it is their cause, because only it is actually present to the body and
because it cannot exist without thinking about itself. This prejudice is further
confirmed by the fact that some impulses take place in us that depend on our will,
and of which we consequently take ourselves to be the true cause. For from this
we judge that it is our soul that preserves life in the body, and that generally
produces in it all the impulses that tend toward the preservation of life. Thus,
since we see that animals act as we do to preserve themselves and their species,
we anribute to them a soul that we unjustifiedly believe to be the principle in us
of all our movement. And because we naturally humanize all causes, and furthermore because a soul that does not will, think, and sense is unthinkable, we
judge that our dog knows and loves us, and feels pain like our own when injured.
As God has created the dog especially for man, He placed in the dog, in order
that man might naturally team up with his dog, a disposition to make certain
contortions and movements of the head, back, and tail, which though they are of
themselves in no way related to the soul's thoughts, naturally engender in man
the thought that his dog loves and cares for him. These, it seems to me, are the

353

Tht! Sau'Ch aftt!r Tntth

main causes of our prejudice that beasts have a soul, a prejudice that is very
dangerous in view of its consequences, as I have proved elsewhere.•
Let us glorify God and let us recognize that in His limitless wisdom He placed
in all the animals every principle of action necessary for the preservation of their
life and for the propasation of their species, and that even in the first animaJsb
and the first plants He placed infinitely small embryos that He foresaw would
grow and develop as a result of the laws of motion in such a way as to preserve
their species for all time. We shall then not indiscretely limit the wisdom of the
Creator, which we verbally admit to be infinite, but which our mind infmitely
degrades by our natural tendency toward humanizing it as well as by our tendency to judge that what we cannot comprehend is absolutely impossible for
Him. Also, we shall not fall into the opposite error of attributing to creatures
what cannot belong to them. For indeed, to give souls to beasts for the reason that
their actions are marked by skiD and intelligence is an extreme neglect of God
that attributes to his work the wisdom of the workman. When we carefully
examine what takes place at each instant in human and animal bodies, we
discover in them such a great variety of precise and regular motion that we cannot
believe a finite mind could understand them or control them for a moment; and if
the supposed soul of beasts caused and regulated the operation of their machine
upon perception of objects, they surely would have an infinitely greater mind
than ours. For without taking account of the infinite movements that take place in
us independently of us, our soul is not even the true cause of those that follow our
volitions. We will to speak or sing but we do not even know what muscles must
be moved to do either.
Undoubtedly everything God has created is marked by intelligence. We sow a
grain of wheat upside down, and the root grows reversing itself toward the earth
and the stem toward the air, and this indicates intelligence; the stem at first grows
joints in order to fonify itself against the stresses of the wind, and this indicates
foreknowledge of a future event; toward the bottom these joints are closer to one
another than toward the top, because according to the rules of mechanics, the
stress of the wind that it must resist is greater at the bottom; the stem is hollow
because in order to remain secure it must greatly decrease its weight without
decreasing its strength at all or only a linle. All these and an infmity of other
movements that are invisible and perhaps unknown to pure intelligences indicate
an infmitely great mind. But cenainly, neither a grain of wheat nor anything else
from the world of chimeras that a fenile imagination could add to it in order to
make it grow could forsee the future stresses of the wind or have natural knowledge of mechanics. This grain of wheat and its way of growing and producing
othen like itself show the infmite wisdom of the Creator; let this be an occasion
for our admiration and adoration, but let us not attribute to the work, or to souls
and chimerical forms, the least pan of what can belong only to the workman. I
shall now return to the topic.
"Difense COffin f

GCCIUDI.

th M. th Ia

~See lbe Jut Eluc:i~Wioa of Ibis

wort. -

Viii~

lllld above, bit. 2. c:h. 4.

the end.

354

Nicolas Malebranche

A man in passion cannot without a great abundance of spirits produce or
preserve in his brain a lively enough image of his misery or a disturbance strong
enough to give his body a strained bearing. Hence, the corresponding nerves in
the body of this person receive upon the perception of some evil the jolts and
agitations required to make the humors, which produce the spirits passion demands, flow into all the vessels leading to the heart. For since the animal spirits
are dispersed in the nerves leading to the liver, spleen, pancreas, and to all the
viscera in general, they agitate and disturb them, and by means of their agitation
they extract the humors that these parts maintain for the needs of the machine.
But if these humors always flowed into the heart in the same way, if they
received a similar fermentation from it at different itmes, and if the spirits formed
from them also flowed into the brain, such quick changes would not be seen in
the impulses of the passions. The sight of a magistrate, for example, would not
instantaneously stop the outbursts of an enraged person seeking vengeance, and
his face flushed with blood and spirits would not immediately become deathly
pale for fear of some punishment.
Thus, in order to prevent these humors that are mixed with blood from always
entering the heart in the same way, there are nerves surrounding its arteries that,
being contracted and relaxed by the impression produced in the spirits by perception of the object and the power of the imagination, open and close the way to
these humors. And to prevent the same humors from receiving a similar agitation
and fermentation in the heart at different times, there are other nerves that cause
its beating; and given that these nerves are not equally agitated with the different
movements of the spirits, they do not force the blood into the arteries with the
same strength. Other nerves spread through the lungs distribute air to the heart by
contracting and relaxing the branches of the canal used in breathing, and in this
way regulate the fermentation of the blood with regard to the circumstances of
the predominant passion.
Finally, in order to regulate the flow of spirits more accurately and more
quickly, there are nerves surrounding the arteries both of those leading to the
brain as well as of those carrying the blood to all the other parts of the body. As a
result of this, the disturbance in the brain accompanying the unexpected perception of some state of affairs that calls for a change in the prevailing passions
suddenly determines the flow of spirits toward the nerves surrounding these
arteries so that through their contraction the blood's passage to the brain might be
closed and that by relaxing them passage might be opened to the blood spread out
in all the other parts of the body.
When the arteries carrying the blood toward the brain are open and all the
others spread throughout the rest of the body are tightly tied off by these nerves,
the head should be full of blood and the face inflamed. But when some state of
affairs changes the disturbance in the brain causing this disposition in these
nerves, the closed arteries are loosened and those in the brain are tightly constricted. Then the head is devoid of blood, a pallor spreads across the face, and
the little blood leaving the heart that the aforementioned nerves let pass in order
to maintain life descends almost entirely to the lower parts of the body. The brain

The Search after Truth

3SS

then lacks animal spirits, and the rest of the body is seized with weakness and
trembling.
In order to give a detailed explanation and proof of all the things we have just
said it would first be necessary to provide a general survey of physics and then a
very precise account of the human body. But these two sciences are and always
will be too imperfect to maintain the precision that I would want-besides
which, if I were to push this matter any further I would soon be led away from
my present topic; for here it is enough that I should give a rough and general idea
of the passions, provided that that idea not be false.
These disturbances of the brain and movements of the blood and spirits are the
fourth thing found in each of our passions, and they produce the fifth, which is
the sensible emotion of the soul.
At the moment when the animal spirits are forced from the brain into the rest of
the body to produce in it the motion appropriate to sustain passion, the soul is
driven toward the good it perceives, and the soul is the more driven as the spirits
leave the brain with greater force because the same disturbance agitates the soul
and the animal spirits.
The soul's impulse toward the good is all the greater as its perception of the
good is more sensible; and the movement of the spirits leaving the brain to be
distributed throughout the rest of the body is all the more violent as the disturbance of the brain's fibers caused by the impression of the object or by the
imagination is stronger. Thus, with this same disturbance of the brain malting the
sight of the good more sensible, the soul's emotion during passion must increase
in direct proportion to the movement of the spirits.
These emotions of the soul are not different from those that follow immediately upon the intellectual perception of the good that we have spoken about
except they are livelier and stronger because of the union of the soul and body,
and because the perception producing them is sensible.
The sixth thing to be found is the sensation of passion, a feeling of love,
aversion, desire, joy, or sadness. The sensation is not different from the one we
have already spoken about, except it is livelier because the body has a great part
in it. However, it is always followed by a certain sensation of delight that makes
all our passions pleasant for us. This is the last thing found in each of our
passions, as already indicated.
The cause of this Iauer sensation is as follows. Upon perceiving the object of
the passion or some new state of affairs, part ofthe animal spirits are forced from
the head toward the exterior parts of the body in order to give it the bearing
demanded by the passion, while other spirits descend violently into the heart,
lungs, and viscera, and draw from them the necessary assistance, as we have
already sufficiently explained. Now it never happens that, with the body in the
state proper to it, the soul does not receive a great deal of satisfaction, and it
never happens that, with the body in a state contrary to its own good and
preservation, the soul does not suffer a great deal of pain. Thus, when we follow
the impulses of our passions and do not arrest the flow of the spirits that the
perception of the object of passion causes in our body (in order to place it in its

356

Nicolas Malebranche

proper state in relation to the object), the soul through the laws of nature receives
this sensation of delight and inner satisfaction because the body is in the state in
which it belongs. On the other hand, when the soul following the rule of reason
arrests the flow of spirits and resists the passions, it suffers pain in proportion to
the hann that may thereby happen to the body.
For just as the soul's reflection on itself is necessarily accompanied by mental
joy or sadness and then by sensible joy or sadness when in the performance of its
duty and in its submission to God's commands it realizes that it is in its proper
state, or when giving way to its passions it is affected by the remorse that informs
it that it is in an improper state -so the flow of spirits excited for the good of the
body is accompanied by sensible joy or sadness and then by mental joy or
sadness, depending on whether the flow of animal spirits is hindered or encouraged by the will.
But there is this noteworthy difference between the intellectual joy accompanying the clear knowledge of the soul's proper state and the sensible pleasure
accompanying the confused sensation of the body's proper state. Intellectual joy
is stable, without remorse and as immutable as the truth causing it, whereas
sensible joy is almost always accompanied by sadness of mind or remorse of
conscience, is unsettled, and is as inconstant as the passion or the agitation of the
blood producing it. Finally, the former is almost always accompanied by very
great sensible joy when it is a consequence of knowing some greater good
possessed by the soul, whereas the latter is almost never accompanied by any joy
of the mind, though it might be a consequence of something very good for the
body but contrary to the good of the soul.
It is nonetheless true that without the grace of Jesus Christ, the delight the soul
takes in yielding to its passions is greater than that which it experiences while
following the rules of reason, and it is this delight that is the source of all the
disorders that have resulted from Original Sin and that would make us all slaves
of our passions if the Son of God had not delivered us from their servitude
through the delight of His grace. For in the final analysis, what I have just been
saying in behalf of joy of the mind against sensuous joy is true only among
Christians, and it would be absolutely false coming from the mouth of Seneca,
or even Epicurus, or any of the seemingly most reasonable philosophers, because
the yoke of Jesus Christ is sweet only to those who belong to Jesus Christ, and
His burden seems light to us only when His grace helps us cany it.

BOOK FIVE
Chapter Four

t

That the pleasures and impulses of tire passions inmll'e us in error with regard to
good, and that they must be resisted continuously. The way to combat licentiollsness.
None of the things we have just explained concerning the passions in general are
free; they are in us independently of us, and only the consent of our will depends
wholly on us. The perception of some good is naturally followed by an impulse
of love, a sensation of love, a disturbance of the brain and movement of the
spirits, a new emotion of tbe soul that increases the first impulse of love, a new
seusation of love that increases the first sensation of love, and finally by a
sensation of delight that rewards the soul because its body is in its proper state.
All these things take place in the soul and in the body naturally and mechanically,
i.e., without the soul having any part in them, while only our consent is truly
ours. This consent must be regulated and kept free in spite of all the efforts of the
passions. Only to God should it subjugate its freedom; it should surrender only to
the voice of tbe Author of nature, to inner certainty, to the secret reproaches of
reason. Consent should be given only when we clearly see that ill use would be
made of our freedom were we not to will consent -this is the f~mdamental rule to
be observed in order to avoid error and sin.
Only God makes us see clearly that we should yield to what He wishes of us;
therefore, we should be slaves of Him alone. There is no certainty in the charms
and endearments, in the threats and tenor that the passions cause in us; they are
only confused and obscure sensations to which we should not yield. We must
wait until a purer light illumines us, until this time of passion passes away and
God speaks. We must withdraw into ourselves and there sean:h out Him who
never leaves us and who enlightens us always. He speaks quietly but in a distinct
voice; He does not enlighten a great deal but His light is pure. No, His voice is as
strong as it is distinct, and His light is as intense and as brilliant as it is pure. But
our passions continually draw us away from ourselves, and by their clatter and
shadows they prevent us from being instructed by His voice and illumined by His
light. He speaks even to those who do not beseech Him, and those whom the
passions have led farthest astray nonetheless hear some of His words-but pow-

357

358

Nicolas Malebranche

erful, threatening and terrible words, more piercing than a double-edged sword, 8
which reach the inner recesses of the soul and which discern the thoughts and
impulses of the heart; for evecything is visible to His eyes, and He does not fail to
see the behavior of sinners without severely reproaching their conscience for it.
We must therefore enter into ourselves and draw nearer to Him. We must beseech Him, listen to Him, and obey Him; for if we listen to Him, we shall never
be deceived, and if we obey Him always, we shall never be subjugated to the
inconstancy of the passions and the miseries due to sin.
We must not imagine as do certain daring minds whom the dominance of the
passions has reduced to the condition of beasts and who, having despised the
Law of God for so long, seem basically to know nothing but their own vile
passions-we must not, I say, imagine as do these men of flesh and blood that to
follow God and to obey the voice of the Author of nature is to follow the
impulses of these passions and to obey the secret desire of our heart. This is the
ultimate blindness; according to Saint Paulb it is the temporal punishment for
impiety and idolatcy, i.e., it is the punishment for the greatest of crimes. Indeed,
so great is this punishment that, instead of appeasing the wrath of God, it
continuously exacerbates and increases it until that terrible day when this justified wrath will strike out against these sinners.
Nonetheless, their arguments do not lack a certain plausibility: they seem to
confonn to common sense, they are agreeable to the passions. and all of Zeno's
philosophy undoubtedly would not be able to overthrow them. We must love the
good, they say; pleasure is the sign that nature has attached to the good; by means
of this sign, which cannot be deceptive since it comes from God, we distinguish
it from evil. We must flee from evil, they continue; pain is the sign that nature
has attached to evil; and by means of this mark, which cannot be deceptive since
it comes from God, we distinguish it from good. We enjoy pleasure when we
give ourselves over to passion; we feel pain when we resist it. Therefore, the
Author of nature wills that we abandon ourselves to our passions and that we
never resist them, since the pleasure and the pain He makes us feel in these
instances are certain proofs of His volitions concerning us. Therefore, to follow
God is to follow the desires of the heart, and to obey His voice is to yield to the
instinct of nature that leads us to satisfy our senses and passions. This is the way
that they reason and become entrenched in their vile views. This is the way that
they tl}' to hide the secret reproaches of their reason; and as punishment for their
crimes, God allows them to be dazzled by these false lights. Deceiving lights that
blind them instead of enlightening them, but that blind them in such a way that
they do not perceive it and do not even wish to be cured of their blindness! God
lets them follow their evil ways, He abandons them to the desires of their heart,
to their shameful passions, to the unworthy actions of men, as Sacred Scripture
says, so that having been fattened on their debauches, they may be sacrificial
victims of His wrath for all eternity.
"Heb. 4 (: 12),
bRom. I [ :18-32).

The Search after Truth

359

But the knot of the difficulty they propose must be undone. Having been
unable to undo the knot, Zeno's group immediately cut it by denying that pleasure was a good and pain an evil. But this evasion is veey cavalier for philosophers, and I do not think that it would change the opinion of those who know
through experience that intense pain is a great evil. Thus, Zeno and all pagan
philosophy is unable to resolve the difficulty proposed by the Epicureans, and
recourse must be had to another more solid and more enlightened philosophy.
It is true that pleasure is good and pain evil, and that the pleasure and pain that
the Author of nature has attached to the use of cenain things makes us judge
whether they are good or evil. It is true that we must make use of good things and
avoid the bad and must almost always follow the impulses of the passions. But
though all this is true, it concerns only the body. We must almost always give
free reign to our passions and desires in order to preserve our body and to prolong
our animal existence. The senses and the passions were given to us only for the
good of the body. Sensible pleasure is the mark that nature has attached to the use
of cenain things in order that without having to bother with a rational examination we might use them for the preservation of the body -but not in order that we
might love them. For we must love only what we clearly recognize through
reason to be our good, the true cause of our happiness.
We are rational, and God who is our good does not wish to give us a blind
love, an instinctive love, a forced love, as it were, but a love by choice, an
enlightened love, a love that subjects our mind and hean to Him. He leads us to
love Him by revealing through the light accompanying the delight of His grace
that He is our good; but He leads us to the good of the body only through instinct
and a confused sensation of pleasure, because the good of the body does not
deserve the attention of our mind or the exercise of our reason.
Furthermore, we are not our body; it is a thing belonging to us, but without
which, speaking in an absolute sense, we are able to subsist. The good of our
body is therefore not our good. Bodies can be the good only of bodies. We may
use them for our own body, but we must not attach ourselves to them. Our soul
also has its own good, to wit, that good which alone is above it, which alone
preserves it, and which alone produces sensations of pleasure and pain in it. For
in the end all the objects of our senses are by themselves incapable of being
sensed, and only God can inform us of their presence through the sensations He
gives us of them. And this is what the pagan philosophers failed to understand.
We can and must love what is capable of making us sense pleasure, granted.
But it is for this reason that. we must love only God, because only God can act in
our soul and because sensible objects can do no more than move our sense
organs. But what difference does it make, you will ask, where these pleasant
sensations come from? I only want to enjoy them. Ingrate, take a look at the hand
heaping goods upon you! You exact unjust rewards from a just God; you would
have Him reward you for the crimes you commit against Him, and at the same
time you commit them. You use His immutable will, which is the order and law
of nature, to exton favors from Him that you do not deserve, for with criminal
skill you produce motion in your body that forces Him, as a result ofthe laws He

360

Nicolas

Mal~branche

has established concerning the union of the body and soul, to make you enjoy all
kinds of pleasures. But death will corrupt this body, and God, whom you have
made serve your unjust desires, will mock you when His tum comes and then
will make you serve His own just wrath.
I grant that it is a vexing thing that the possession of bodily goods should be
accompanied by pleasure and that the possession of the soul's good should often
be joined to pain and misery. You might think that this is a poor arrangement,
reasoning that since pleasure is the mark of good as pain is the mark of evil, we
should receive infinitely more delight in our love of God than in using sensible
things, seeing that God is the true, or rather the only, good of the mind. This will
certainly be the case some day, and there is some likelihood that it was so before
Original Sin-at least we are sure that before Original Sin the performance of
duty involved no experience of pain.
But God has withdrawn from us since the Fall of the first man. He is no longer
our good by nature but only through grace, for we no longer naturally experience
delight in His love; far from leading us to love Him, He sends us away from Him.
If we follow Him, He rebuffs us; if we run after Him, He strikes us; if we are
obstinate in our pursuit, He continues to maltreat us and makes us suffer severe
sensible pain. But when, having been left to tread the hard and painful way of
virtue without having been supported by the enjoyment of good or fortified by
any nourishment, we do feast on sensible goods, He attaches us to them by the
enjoyment of pleasure, seemingly wishing to reward us for turning our back on
Him in order to run after false goods. Finally, it seems that since the Fall, God no
longer wills that we love Him, think about Him, or regard Him as our only good.
Only through the delight provided by the grace of our mediator Jesus Christ do
we sensibly perceive that God is our good. For given that pleasure is the sensible
mark of good, we perceive that God is our only good because through the grace
of Jesus Christ our love of God involves pleasure.
Thus, given that the soul does not recognize its good either through clear
perception or through sensation without the grace of Jesus Christ, it takes the
good of the body for its own good, loves it, and attaches itself to it still more
closely with its will than it had ever been attached by nature's initial arrangement. For, since the good of the body is the only one that can now be sensed, it
necessarily acts on man with greater force, the brain is more vividly struck by it,
and as a result is affected more in sensing and imagining it. The animal spirits are
more greatly agitated by it, and, as a result, the will loves it more fervently and
with greater pleasure.
Before the Fall, the soul could erase the brain's images of bodily good that
were too lively and make the sensible pleasure accompanying these images
disappear. With the body under the mind's dominance, the soul could instantaneously arrest the disturbance in the brain's fibers and the agitation of the
spirits merely by considering its duty. But since the Fall this is no longer in its
power. These traces of the imagination and movements of the spirits no longer
depend on it and, as a necessary consequence, the pleasure attached to these
traces and movements by the order of nature becomes the sole master of the

The Search after Truth

361

heart. Mao cannot long resist this pleasure with his own resoun:es; only grace can
overcome it completely. Reason alone cannot, because, in short, only God as
Author of grace can, as it were, overcome Himself as Author of nature, or,
rather, can mollify Himself as avenger of Adam's disobedience.
The Stoics, who had only a confused understanding of the disorders caused
by Original Sin, could not respond to the Epicureans. For their ultimate happiness was only an idea, since there is no felicity without pleasure and they did not
enjoy pleasure in genuinely virtuous actions. They did feel some joy in following
the rules of their imaginary virtue because joy is a natural consequence of our
soul'slmowledge that it is in the best state it can be in. This joy of the mind was
able to keep up their courage for a while, but it was not strong enough to resist
pain or oven:ome pleasure. Secret pride and not joy was the source of their
bearing; when they were no longer in public view, they lost their wisdom and
strength as quickly as kings in theater plays lose their grandeur.
Such is not the case with Christians who closely observe the rules of the
gospel; their joy is secure because they know with certainty that they are in the
best state they can possibly be in. Their joy is great because the good they enjoy
through faith and hope is infinite. For the hope of a great good is always
accompanied by great joy, and this joy is as vivid as the hope is strong because
strong hope, causing the good to be imagined as present, necessarily produces
joy and even the sensible pleasure always accompanying the presence of good.
Their joy is not an apprehensive joy because it is based on the promises of God,
confirmed by the blood of His Son, and supported by inner peace and the
unutterable delight of charity that the Holy Spirit spreads in their heart. Nothing
can separate them from their true good as long as they enjoy it and take pleasure
in it through the delight of grace. The pleasures of bodily goods are neither as
great nor as genuine and pure as those that they feel in loving God. They Jove
contempt and pain, they thrive on disgraces, and the pleasure they fmd in God
when they scom all others to unite themselves to Him is so fierce that they are
transported and made to speak an entirely new language; and they glory, even as
did the Apostles, in their miseries and in the abuse they have suffered. But as for
the Apostles, according to Scripture,• they left the Sanhedrin filled with the joy
that they had been judged worthy to suffer disgrace for the name of Jesus. Such is
the mental attitude of true Christians when they have received the ultimate insults
in defense of the truth.
Given that Jesus Christ came to reestablish the order upset by sin, and given
that order demands that the greatest goods be accompanied by the most genuine
pleasures, clearly things must occur in the way we have just indicated. But
besides reason we also have experience, for as soon as someone merely resolves
to scom everything in favor of God, he is ordinarily moved by a pleasure or inner
joy that makes him sense that God is his good as clearly as he knows it.
True Christians assure us every day that the joy they have in loving and serving
God alone cannot be expressed, and surely they should be believed about what
•Acts 5:41.

362

Nicolas Malebranche

takes place within themselves. The impious, on the other hand, are constantly
afflicted with mortal anxieties, and those the world shares with God also share
the joy of the just and the anxieties of the impious; they complain of their
miseries, and they too should be believed that their laments are not without
foundation. God afflicts men in the bottom of their heart when they love something other than Him, and this affliction is the cause of true misery. He infuses a
great deal of joy into their minds when they attach themselves only to Him, and it
is this joy that causes genuine happiness. Great riches and the bestowal of honors
are external to us; they cannot heal us of God's affliction. Poverty and scorn are
also external to us, and they cannot afflict us when God defends us against them.
From what we have just said, it is clear (I) that the object of our passions is not
our good; (2) that we must follow their impulses only for the preservation of our
life; (3) that sensible pleasure stands to our good as our sensations stand to the
truth, and that just as our senses deceive us with regard to the truth, our passions
deceive us with regard to the good; (4) that we should yield to the delight of grace
because it leads us with certainty to the love of true good, that it is not followed
by the secret reproaches of reason as are instinct and the confused pleasure of the
passions, and that it is always accompanied by a secret joy in proportion to the
state we are in; (5) that finally, since only God can act on the mind of man, man
can find no happiness outside of God. unless it is supposed that God rewards
disobedience or commands us to love more what in fact deserves to be loved
least.

BOOK FIVE
Chapter Five

That the mind's perfection consists in its union with God through its knowledge
oftruth and love of,•irtue, whereas its imperfection springs only from its dependence on the body because of the disorder of its senses and passions.
The least reflection suffices to see that the good of the mind is necessarily
something spiritual. Bodies are inferior to the mind, they cannot act on it through
their own powers, they cannot even be immediately related to it, and fmally they
are not intelligible by themselves. They therefore cannot be its good. Spiritual
things, on the other hand, are by their nature intelligible, they can be immediately related to the mind; they therefore can be its good, given that they are
superior to the mind. For in order for something to be the mind's good it is not
enough for it to be spiritual like the mind, it must also be superior to it. It must be
able to act on the mind, enlighten it, reward it; otherwise, it can make the mind
neither happier nor more perfect, and as a result, it cannot be its good. Of all
intelligible or spiritual things, only God is in this way superior to the mind; it
therefore follows that only God is, or can be, our true good. Therefore, we can
become happier and more perfect only through the possession of God.
Everyone is convinced that knowledge of truth and love of virtue make the
mind more perfect, that mental blindness and disorders of the heart make it more
imperfect. Knowledge of truth and love of virtue, therefore, cannot be anything
other than the mind's union with God and a kind of possession of God, whereas
mental blindness and disorders of the heart cannot be anything other than the
mind's separation from God and its union with something below it, i.e., with the
body. since only this union can make it unhappy and imperfect. Thus, to know
God is to know the truth or to know things according to the truth, and to love God
is to love virtue or to love things to the extent to which they are worthy of love, or
according to the rules of virtue.
The mind is, as it were, between God and body, between good and evil,
between that which enlightens it and that which blinds it, that which sets it in
order and that which disrupts it, between that which can make it perfect and
happy and that which can make it unhappy and imperfect. When it discovers
some truth or sees things as they are in themselves, it sees things in God's ideas,
363

364

Nicolas Malebranche

i.e., with a clear and distinct perception of what represents them. For, as I have
already said, man's mind does not contain in itself the perfections or ideas of all
the beings that it can perceive; it is not universal being. Thus, it does not see in
itself things that are different from itself. It is not instructed or enlightened
through its own resources, for its own perfection and enlightenment do not
depend on it-it needs the immense light of eternal truth to be enlightened. Thus,
when the mind knows the truth, it is united to God, and, to a certain extent,
knows and possesses God.
But not only might we say that the mind that knows the truth to a certain extent
also knows God who contains the truth, we might even say that to a certain extent
it knows things as God knows them. Indeed, this mind knows their true relations,
which God also knows. This mind knows them in the perception of God's
perfections that represent them, and God, too, knows them in this way. For God
neither senses nor imagines, but sees in Himself, in the intelligible world He
contains, the material and sensible world He has created. The same is true of a
mind that knows the truth; it neither senses nor imagines-sensations and phantasms represent only false relations to the mind, and whoever discovers the truth
perceives it only in the intelligible world to which the mind is joined and in which
God Himself sees it, for the material and sensible world is not intelligible by
itself. Everything the mind clearly sees, then, it sees in the light of God even as
does God Himself, although it sees them only in a way that is very imperfect and
therefore different from the way in which God sees them. Thus, when the mind
perceives the truth, not only is it joined to God, not only does it possess God and
to a certain extent see God, but it also in a sense perceives the truth as God
perceives it.
Likewise, when we love according to the rules of virtue, we love God. For
when we love according to these rules, the impression of love that God continuously produces in our heart in order to incline us toward Him is neither diverted
by free will nor converted into self-love. All the mind then does is to freely
follow this impression that God gives it. Now, since God never gives it an
impression that does not lead toward Him, since He acts only for Himself, to love
according to the rules of virtue is clearly to love God.
But not only is this to love God, it is also to love as God loves. God loves only
Himself-He loves His creations only because they are related to His perfections, and He loves them to the extent to which they have this relation -in the
fmal analysis God loves Himself and the things He has created with the same
love. To love according to the rules of virtue is to love God alone and to love
Him in all things; it is to love things to the extent to which they participate in the
goodness and the perfections of God, since this is to love them to the extent to
which they are worthy of love; finally, it is to love with the impression of the
same love by which God loves Himself, for it is God's self-love and everything
related to it that animates us when we love as we should love. We love, therefore, as God loves.
It is clear, therefore, that knowledge of truth and love of virtue together
constitute our entire perfection, since they are the ordinary consequences of our
union with God and give us possession of Him to the extent to which we are

The Search after Truth

36S

capable of it in this life. Mental blindness and derangement of heart, on the other
hand, together constitute our entire imperfection. They too are the consequences
of a union of our mind with our body, as I have proved in several places while
showing that we never know bulb or love tnJe good when we follow the impressions of our senses, imagination, or passions.
These things are clear. Yet men, all of whom fervently desire the perfection of
their being, hardly bother about strengthening the union they have with God and
work constantly to strengthen and extend the one they have with sensible things.
The cause of such an extreme disorder cannot be explained at too great a length.
The possession of good must naturally produce two effects in its possessor. It
should make him more perfect and at the same time happier; but this does not
always happen. I grant the mind cannot actually possess some good and at the
same time not be more perfect; but it can actually possess some good without
being happier. 1bose who best know the bulb and most love the goods worthiest
of love are always more perfect than those in a state of blindness and disorder,
but they are not always happier. The same is true of evil-it should make us
imperfect and unhappy; but although it always makes men more imperfect, it
does not always make them unhappier, or it does not make them unhappy to the
extent to which it makes them imperfect. Virtue is often hard and distasteful and
vice easy and pleasant, and it is mainly through faith and hope that the righteous
are buly happy while the wicked revel in their pleasures. This should not be the
case, but it is. Sin has caused this disorder, as I have just explained in the
preceding chapter, and it is this disorder that is the main cause not only of all our
heart's derangements but also of our mind's blindness and ignorance.
This disorder convinces our imagination that the body can be the mind's good
because, as I have already said several times, pleasure is the sensible mark or
sign of good. Now of all the pleasures that we enjoy here below, the most
sensible are those that we imagine we receive through the body. Without much
thought we therefore judge that the body can be, and in fact is, our good. For it is
very difficult to fight natural instinct and to resist the persuasion of sensationindeed, we do not even think about them. We do not think about the disorder of
sin. We do not consider that bodies can act on the mind only as occasional
causes, that the mind cannot immediately or by itself possess anything corporeal
and cannot unite itself to an object except through its knowledge and love, that
only God is above it and can reward or punish it though sensations of pleasure or
pain, or can enlighten or move it-in a word, only He can act on it. These truths,
though very clear to attentive minds, are not as convincing as the deceptive
experience of sense impressions.
When we consider something as pan of ourselves or ourselves as pan of
something else, we judge that our good consists in being joined ID it, we have a
love for it, and our love increases as the thing in question seems to be a greater
part of the whole that we make up together with it. Now there are two kinds of
proofs that convince us that something is pan of ourselves: the instinct of sensation and the evidence of reason.
Through the instinct of sensation, I am persuaded that my soul is joined to my
body, or that my body is part of my being; I have no evidence for this. I do not

366

Nicolas Malebranche

know it through the light of reason, but only through the pain or pleasure I sense
when objects strike me. Our hand is pricked, and we feel pain in it; therefore, our
hand is part of ourselves. Our clothing gets tom, and we do not feel anything;
therefore, our clothing is not part of ourselves. Our hair can be cut but not tom
out without pain. This bothers philosophers; they do not know what to say, but
their dilemma proves that even the wisest of men judge by means of the instinct
of sensation rather than by the light of reason as to whether something is part of
themselves. For were they to judge the matter by the light of reason and its
evidence, they would soon realize that the mind and the body are two entirely
contrary kinds of beings, that the mind cannot by itself join itself to the body, and
that only through the union it has with God is the soul hurt when the body is
struck-as I have explained elsewhere. Only through the instinct of sensation,
therefore, do we regard our body and all sensible things to which we are joined as
part of ourselves, i.e., as parts of what thinks and senses in us, for what is not
cannot be known with the evidence of reason, which never reveals anything but
the truth.
But with intelligible things just the opposite is the case, for by the light of
reason we recognize the relation that we have with them. Through the mind's
clear vision we discover that we are united to God in a closer and more essential
way than we are to our bodies, that without God we are nothing, that without
Him we can know nothing, do nothing, will nothing. and sense nothing, that He
is our all, or that with Him we make a whole-if it may be so expressed-of
which we are an infinitely small part. The light of reason reveals to us a thousand
reasons for loving only God and scorning bodies as unworthy of our love. Not
through the instinct of sensation are we persuaded that God is our all-unless it is
through the grace of Jesus Christ, which in certain people causes this sensation in
order to help them overcome the opposite sensation by which they are joined to
the body. For God as the Author of nature leads minds to His love through
enlightened knowledge and not by instinctive knowledge. From what we can tell,
only since the Fall has God as the Author of grace added instinct and prevenient
delight to illumination because our light is now greatly diminished and is incapable of leading us to God, and because the strain of pleasure or of the contrlll)'
instinct continuously weakens it and makes it ineffective.
Thus. we discover through the light of the mind that we are united to God and
to the intelligible world He contains, and through sensation we come to believe
that we are joined to our body, and through our body to the sensible world that
God has created. But as our sensations are more lively and more frequent, affect
us more, and are even stronger than our illuminations, we should not be surprised
that our sensations excite us and awaken our love for all sensible things, while
our illuminations dissipate and vanish without arousing any desire in us for the
truth.
It is true that many people believe that God is their true good, love Him as their
all, and fervently desire to increase and strengthen their union with Him. But
very few know with certainty that to know the truth is to be joined to God as far
as nature allows, that to contemplate the true idea of things is in a way to possess

Th~ s~arch aft~r

Truth

367

God Himself, and that the abstract perception of certain universal and immutable
truths, which determine all particular truths, is achieved by the mind that attaches
itself to God and rejects the body. Metaphysics, pure mathematics, and all the
universal sciences that determine and contain the particular sciences as the
universal being contains all particular beings seem chimerical to almost
everyone-to the pious as well as to those who have no love for God. Consequently, I hardly dare claim that in applying itself to these sciences the mind
applies itself to God in the purest and most perfect way of which it is capable,
and that it is in perceiving the intelligible world that these sciences have as their
object that God Himself knows and produces the sensible world that bodies
depend on for their life as minds depend on the intelligible.
Those who follow only their sense impressions and the impulse of their
passions are incapable of experiencing the truth because it does not please them.
Even the good people who continuously oppose their passions when they present
false goods to them do not always resist their passions when they conceal the
truth from them or when they make the truth undesirable to them, because one
can be good without being very enlightened. In order to be pleasing to God, it is
not necessary to know exactly that our senses, imagination, and passions always
represent things to us other than as they are, for indeed it does not appear that
Jesus Christ and His apostles ever intended to advise us of the many errors that
Descartes has discovered in this area.
There is quite a difference between faith and understanding, between the
gospel and philosophy. Even the densest of men are capable of faith, but very
few of them are capable of pure knowledge of certain truths. Even to the simplest
of people, faith represents God as the Creator of heaven and earth. and this is
enough to lead them to love and serve Him. Reason does not consider Him only
with regard to His works (God was as He is before He created); it tries to
envisage Him in Himself, or through that great and vast idea of infinitely perfect
being that He contains. The Son of God, who is the wisdom of God or eternal
truth, was made man and became sensible to make Himself known to crude and
carnal men. He wished to instruct them by means of what was blinding them; He
wished to lead them to His love, to free them from sensible goods by means of
the same things that were enslaving them. Dealing with fools, He used a kind of
foolishness to make them wise. Thus, the good people and those who have the
most faith are not always the most intelligent. They can know God through faith
and love Him with the help of grace without knowing that He is their all in the
way in which philosophers can understand this, and without the thought dawning
on them that abstract knowledge of truth is a kind of union with Him. We should
not be surprised, then, to find so few people working to strengthen their natural
union with God through knowledge of truth, since to do this an unending battle
must be waged against the impressions of the senses and passions in a way quite
different from that known to the virtuous; for the most pious are not always
convinced that the senses and the passions deceive in the ways we have explained
in the preceding books.
Only those sensations or thoughts in which the body has some part are the

368

Nicolas Malebranche

immediate cause of the passions, because only the disturbance of the brain's
fibers excites any specific disturbance in the animal spirits. Thus sensations are
the only sensible proofs of our dependence on certain things for which they excite
our love. Now we do not sensibly perceive our natural union with God when we
know the truth-we do not even think about Him, for He is and works in us in
such a recondite and insensible way that we are unaware of Him. Our natural
union with God, therefore, does not excite our love for Him. But such is not the
case with the union we have with sensible things. All our sensations reaffirm this
union, for bodies are visible when they act in us; their action is in no way hidden.
Our own body is even more present to us than our mind, and we consider it the
best part of ourselves. Hence, the union we have with our body, and through it
with all sensible objects, excites a fervent love in us that increases this union and
makes us depend on things infinitely below us.

BOOK FIVE
Chapter Six

The most general errors of the passions: some particular examples.
Part of the task of morals is to discover all the particular errors in which our
passions involve us concerning the good; it is up to it to combat inordinate love,
to restore the integrity of the heart, and to regulate morality. But our main goal
here is to control the mind and discover the causes of our errors with regard to
truth; thus, we shall not pursue any further the things we have just mentioned,
which are concerned only with the love of true good. We shall move on to the
mind by way of the heart only because the heart is its master. We are looking for
the truth in itself and not in relation to us, and we shall consider the relation it has
to us only because this relation causes self-love to disguise the truth and hide it
from us; for we judge all things according to our passions, and, as a result, we are
deceived in all things, since judgments of passion are never in agreement with
judgments of truth.
This is what we learn from the fine words of the venerable Saint Bernard:•
"Love and hate," he says, "lcnow not how to judge according to the truth. But
would you hear a judgment according to truth? 'I judge only as I hear,' not as I
hate or love or fear. Here is a judgment of hatred: 'we have a law, and according
to our law He must die.' Here is a judgment of fear: 'if we let Him canyon in this
way, the Romans will come and destroy our city and nation.' Finally, here is a
judgment of love (David speaking of his parricidal son): 'spare my son Absalom.''' Our love, hatred, and fear make us judge only falsely; only the pure
light of the truth enlightens our mind, and only the distinct voice of our common
master makes us judge solidly provided that we judge only what he says to us and
as he tells us-"sicut audio, sic judico." But now let us see how our passions
seduce us, so that we may more easily resist them.
1 "Amor sicut nee odium, veritatis judicium ne~eit. Vis judicium veritatis audirc? 'Sicut audio, sic
juclico': non sicut odi, non sicut uno, non sicuttuneo." John S:JO. "'Estjudicium odii, ut illud: 'Nos
leaem habemus It secundum leaem nostnm debet mori." John 19:7. "Est It timoris, ut illud: 'Si
dimittimus ewn sic, venient Romani, It tollent nostrum IO<:um It aentem." John 11:48. "Judicium
vero amoris, ut David de filio parricide. 'Pircite,' inquit, 'puero Absalom." Secundo Reg. 18:5. St.
Bem. Dt' grad. lrumilitati.r. [pc. I. ch. 4).

369

370

Nicolas Malebranche

The passions are so closely related to the senses that, after what we said in the
first book, it will not be difficult here to explain how they involve us in error. The
general causes of the errors of our passions are exactly like those causing the
errors of our senses.
As we have already shown in the first book, the most general cause of the
errors of our senses is that we attribute sensations to external objects or to our
body that in fact belong to our soul, that, for example, we place colors on the
surface of bodies, scatter light, sounds, and odors through the air, and locate pain
and tickling sensations in the parts of our body that undergo changes as a result of
the motion of bodies they encounter.
Roughly the same thing must be said of our passions. We rashly attribute all
the dispositions of our heart, our goodness, our affability, our malice, our bitterness, and all the other qualities of our mind to the objects causing, or seeming to
cause, them. When we think about the object generating some passion in us, it
appears to us as somehow containing in itself what it arouses in us-just as
sensible objects seem to us to contain the sensations their presence excites in us.
When we love someone, we are naturally led to believe that he loves us, and we
find it somewhat difficult to imagine that he intends to harm us or oppose our
wishes. But if hatred follows our love, we cannot believe he wishes good for us;
we interpret all his actions in the worst way, and we are always apprehensive and
suspicious, although his only thought might be to help us. Finally, we incorrectly
attribute to the person exciting some passion in us all the dispositions of our
heart-just as we rashly attribute the qualities of our mind to the objects of our
senses.
Moreover, as we believe that all men receive the same sensations as we do
from the same objects, so we believe that all men are moved by the same
passions and for the same reasons as we are, given that we believe them to be
moved by them at all. We think they love what we love and desire what we
desire, and from this our jealousies and secret aversions are generated-if the
good we seek cannot be entirely possessed by many people, for just the opposite
happens when several people can possess a good without dividing it, such as with
the sovereign good, science, virtue, and so on. We also think they hate, avoid,
and fear the same things we do, and from this are generated the involvements and
plots, secret or public depending on the state and nature of the object they hate,
by means of which we hope to free ourselves from our miseries.
Thus, we attribute to the objects of our passions the emotions they produce in
us, and we believe all other men, and sometimes even beasts, to be moved by
them as we are. But besides this, we even more rashly judge that the cause of our
passions. which is often only something imaginary, is really in some object.
When we are moved by a passionate love for someone, we judge that everything
about him deserves to be loved. His grimaces are pleasant, his ugliness is not
offensive, his clumsy and unpolished actions are quite correct, or at least natural.
If he never speaks, it is because he is a sage; if he is never silent, it is because he
is very intelligent; if he talks about everything, it is because he is a man of great

The Search after Truth

371

experience; if he continually interrupts others, it is because of his fiery and
vivacious nature; if he is always ready to preen himself, it is because he deserves
it. This is how passion conceals and disguises our friends' shortcomings while
emphasizing their least advantages.
But if this friendship, which like all passions is based only on the agitation of
the blood and animal spirits, begins to cool for lack of bodily heat or spirits to
sustain it, or if some distraction or false relation alters the brain's disposition, the
hatred replacing love will not fail to make us imagine all the defects to which we
direct our aversion in the object of our passion. We shall then find in this same
person qualities just the opposite of those we had admired in him beforehand. We
shall be ashamed to have loved him; and the now dominant passion will not fail
to justify itself and ridicule the one whose place it has taken.
The influence and injustice of the passions are not limited to the things we
have just spoken about-they extend infinitely further. Our passions conceal not
only their main object from us but also everything to which they have any
relation; not only do they make us love all the qualities of our friends but also
most of the qualities of our friends' friends. They hold even greater sway among
those whose imagination is stronger and of greater scope, for their passions' hold
on their mind is so vast and of such great scope that their limits cannot be
determined.
The things I have just discussed are such widespread and fertile sources of
error, prejudice, and injustice, that it is impossible to take note of all their
consequences. Most of the truths, or rather the errors restricted to certain places,
times, communities, and families, are its consequences. What is true in Spain is
false in France; what is true in Paris is false in Rome; what is certain among the
Dominicans is uncertain among the Franciscans; what is indubitable among the
Franciscans seems to be in error among the Dominicans. The Dominicans feel
themselves obliged to follow Saint Thomas, and why? Often it is because the
holy doctor was a member of their order. The Franciscans, on the other hand,
stand by the opinions of Scotus, because Scotus was a Franciscan.
Such is the case with truths and errors limited to certain times. Two thousand
years ago the earth turned; then it remained immobile until recently, when it has
again begun to tum. They used to bum Aristotle; a provincial council approved
by the pope wisely prohibited the teaching of his physics. He was then immediately held in esteem and now again begins to fall into disrepute. There are
views now being taught in the schools that had been rejected as heresies and
whose proponents were excommunicated as heretics by certain bishops. Because
the passions cause these factions among people, the truths or errors produced by
the factions are as inconstant as the ultimate cause that excites them. For exam·
pie, men are indifferent with regard to the earth's mobility and the form of
corporeity;a but they are not indifferent with regard to these views when they are
held by people whom they hate. Thus. hatred, sustained by some confused
"Spelmann, Council <!f Englurul. 1287.

372

Nicolas Malebranche

feeling of piety, breeds the kind of indiscreet zeal that grows wann, begins to
bum, and finally produces those events whose exaggeration is not apparent to
everyone until long after they have taken place.
We find it hard to imagine that the passions extend so far, but that is because
we fail to realize that our passions extend to everything that can possibly satisfy
us. Perhaps Haman did not wish to hann the entire Jewish people, but Mardochai, who was a Jew, failed to worship him; so that his vengeance might be
spectacular, the whole nation had to be destroyed.
A legal contest takes place between two men to decide who owns a piece of
land; they ought to produce only their titles and say only what is related to their
case or what might improve it. Yet they never fail to slander one another,
contradict each other's statements, contest trivial points, and complicate their
case with an infinity of pointless details that obscure the main issue. In short, the
influence of each of the passions is as great as the mental scope of those moved
by them-i.e., if we think that something is in any way related to the object of
our passions, the passions move us with regard to that object. Here is a description of the process.
The traces of objects in the brain are so closely connected that the flow of
animal spirits cannot call up any of them with any urgency without others being
raised at the same time. The main idea of the thing we are thinking about,
therefore, is necessarily accompanied by a great number of ancillary ideas that
increase as the impression of the animal spirits becomes more urgent. Now this
impression of the spirits cannot fail to be urgent in the case of the passions
because the passions always force a great deal of spirits with great urgency into
the brain so that traces of ideas representing their object might be preserved.
Thus, the impulse of love or hatred extends not only to the main object of passion
but also to all objects seen as having some relation to this object, because the
soul's impulse in passion follows the mind's perception, just as the motion of the
animal spirits in the brain follows the traces in the brain -both those that call up
the main idea of the object of passion as well as those related to this idea.
We should not be surprised, then, if men's hatred or love goes to such lengths,
or if their actions are very strange and unexpected. There is a specific reason for
each of these things, though we might not know it; their ancillary ideas are not
always like ours and must therefore remain concealed from us. Thus, there is
always some specific reason why they carry on in a way which seems outrageous
to us.

BOOK FIVE
Chapter Seven

Of the individual passions, beginning with wonder and its ill effects.
Everything I have said until now about the passions has been rather general, but
there is no difficulty in drawing specific conclusions from it. We need only
reflect both on what happens in ourselves and on the actions of others in order to
discover more of these truths at a single glance than could be explained here at
great length. Yet so few people make any effort to enter into themselves or even
think about doing so that to arouse them and catch their attention, we must now
descend somewhat into particulars.
When we strike or touch ourselves, we seem almost insensible; but when we
are merely touched by others, we receive sensations lively enough to arouse our
attention. In short, we do not tickle ourselves or even think about doing so, and
were we to, we would be unlikely to succeed. It is for roughly the same reason
that it never occurs to the mind to touch or probe itself, that it dislikes doing so
and is generally incapable of recognizing or sensibly perceiving all the parts of its
soul, unless affected and made sensible of them by others. Thus, in order to make
it easier for certain minds to know themselves, we must discuss specific passions
and thereby inform them of each of their component parts by means of what
affects them.
Those who read what follows should nonetheless be warned that they will not
always feel that I am talking about them, and that they will not always see
themselves as subject to the passions and errors I shall disucss, since not all the
particular passions are the same in all men.
All men have the same natural inclinations that are unrelated to the body. And
when their body is perfectly disposed, even those related to the body are held in
common. But different bodily constitutions and frequent changes in the body
cause an infinite variety among our particular passions. Yet if we add to the
variability of the body's constitution the unsettled state generated by objects,
which make quite different impressions on people from different occupations and
ways of life. it is clear that one may feel oneself greatly affected by certain things
in a part of one's soul and remain altogether insensible to many others. Thus, it
would be a mistake always to judge what others must be feeling on the basis of
what we feel.
373

374

Nicolas Malebranche

I have no fear of being mistaken when I claim that all men wish to be happy.
for I am utterly certain that Chinese and Tartars, angels and even devils, and in
short all minds, have an inclination toward happiness. I even know that God will
never produce a mind lacking this desire. It is not experience that teaches me
this-I have never even seen a Tartar or a Chinese-nor is it the inward testimony of my consciousness, which only teaches me that I wish to be happy; only
God can give me the inner conviction that all other men as well as the angels and
devils wish to be happy. Only He can assure me that He will never give being to
any mind that is indifferent to happiness, for who else but He could positively
assure me about what He does and even about what He thinks? And, as He can
never deceive me, I can have no doubts about what He teaches me. I am therefore
certain that all men wish to be happy because this inclination is natural and does
not depend on the body.
Such is not the case with the individual passions. If I am enthusiastic about
music, dancing, or hunting, or if I like sweets and good food, I can conclude
nothing from this about other men •s passions. Undoubtedly pleasure is agreeable
to everyone, but not everyone finds pleasure in the same things. Love of pleasure
is a natural inclination; this love does not depend on the body; therefore, it is
common to all men. But the love of music, dancing, or hunting is not universal,
because the body's disposition on which it depends differs in all men, and so all
the passions depending on it are not always the same.
The general passions such as desire, joy. and sadness are midway between the
natural inclinations and the particular passions. Like the inclinations, they are
general, but they are not as strong, because the cause that produces and sustains
them is not equally active. There is an infinite variation in the degree to which the
animal spirits are agitated, in their quantity and consistency, and in their relation
to the brain's fibers.
Thus, it often happens that others are not in the least affected by our talk about
particular passions; but when they are affected by it, they are greatly moved. Just
the opposite is the case with the general passions and inclinations: talk about
them always has an effect, though so weak and languid as to be hardly felt. I
mention these things in order that the truth of what I say may be judged, not on
the mere basis of an opinion about what I have already said and shall say, but
through a consideration of the nature of the passions I am discussing.
Should we decide to treat all the particular passions or to distinguish them
according to the objects that excite them, we clearly would never finish and we
would always be saying the same thing. We would never finish because the
objects of our passions are infinite, and we would always be saying the same
thing because we would always be dealing with the same topic. The particular
passions we have for poetry. history. mathematics, for hunting and for dancing
are but the same passion, for the passions of desire and joy at what pleases us, for
example, are not different, although the specific objects that please us might be
different.
The passions should not be listed, therefore, according to their objects, which
arc infinite, but only according to the principal relations they can have with us. In

The Search after Truth

375

this way it will be seen, as we shall explain below, that love and hatred are the
two parent passions and that the only general passions they produce are desire,
joy, and sadness, that the particular passions are composed only of these three
primitive passions, and that they are compounded to the extent to which the
principal idea of good or evil exciting them is accompanied by a greater number
of ancillary ideas, or that the good and evil in question are more specified in
relation to us.
If you will remember both what was said about the connection of ideas• and
that during great passion the animal spirits, which are then very agitated, awaken
in the brain all the traces having any relation to the object exciting us, you will
see that there are passions differing in an infinity of ways that have no specific
name, and that they can be explained in no other way than by saying that they are
inexplicable.
If the primitive passions the combination of which produces all the others
could not vary in degree, there would be no difficulty in determining how many
passions there are. But the number of passions compounded out of other passions
must be infinite because with a single passion having an infinite number of
degrees, it can combine with others in an infinite number of ways. As a result of
this, it is possible that there have never been two men moved by the same
passion, if by the same passion is meant the entire combination of equal impulses
and similar sensations aroused in us by the presence of some object.
But as variation in degree involves no qualitative change, we can conclude that
the number of passions is finite, because the circumstances accompanying good
and evil are finite. But let us now explain our passions in detail.
When we see something for the first time, or when after seeing it several times
in a given setting we see it in a different setting, we are surprised by it and
wonder at it. Thus, a new idea or a new connection of old ideas causes an
imperfect passion in us that precedes all the others and is termed wonder. I call
this passion imperfect because it is in no way excited by either the idea or the
sensation of good.
When the brain is struck in places in which it has never been struck before, or
when it is struck in an entirely new way, the soul is sensibly affected and
therefore closely attends to whatever is novel in its object; because of this,
merely by tickling the soles of the feet, a very intense sensation is excited in the
soul, more through its novelty than through the strength of the impression. There
are still other reasons for the soul's attention to novelties, but I have accounted
for them while discussing the natural inclinations; here the soul is being considered only in relation to the body, and in this context, extraordinary agitation of
the animal spirits is the cause of its attention to novelties, for the ordinary
agitation of the animal spirits arouses our attention but very little.
Wonder by itself involves the consideration of things only as they are in
themselves. or as they appear; here we do not view them in relation to ourselves,
or regard them as either good or evil. For this reason. the spirits are not distrib"Bk. 2. ch. :'i.

376

Nicolas Malebranche

uted in the muscles to dispose the body for the pursuit of good or the flight from
evil, and do not agitate the nerves leading to the heart and to the other viscera in
order to hasten or delay the fermentation and motion of the blood, as happens in
all the other passions. All the spirits move toward the brain in order to trace in it a
lively and distinct image of the new object so that the soul might consider it and
recognize it-but the rest of the body remains, as it were, immobile and in the
same state. As there is no emotion in the soul, neither is there any movement in
the body.
Should the objects of our wonder appear great, our wonder is always followed
by esteem and sometimes veneration. When they appear small, on the other
hand, it is always accompanied by scorn and sometimes disdain.
The idea of greatness produces a great deal of motion in the spirits in the brain,
and the trace representing it is preserved for a long time. A great deal of motion
in the spirits likewise excites the idea of great size in the soul and fixes the mind's
attention on the consideration of this idea.
The idea of smallness produces little motion in the spirits in the brain, and the
trace representing it is not preserved for very long. Little motion of the spirits
likewise excites an idea of smallness in the soul, and hardly fixes the mind's
attention on the consideration ofthis idea. These things deserve to be well noted.
When we consider ourselves or something joined to us, our wonder is always
accompanied by some passion that moves us. But we are moved only in the soul
and in the spirits leading to the heart, because as there is no good to be pursued
nor any evil to be avoided, the spirits are not distributed in the muscles to dispose
the body to some action.
Viewing the perfection of one's own being or of something belonging to it
naturally produces pride or esteem for one's self, scorn for others, joy, and several
other passions. Viewing one's own grandeur produces haughtiness; viewing
one's strength, valor, or boldness and viewing any other worthwhile quality
naturally produces another passion that will always be a kind of pride.
The contemplation of some imperfection in one's being or in something belonging to it, on the other hand, naturally produces humility, scorn for one's self,
respect for others, sadness, and several other passions. The contemplation of
one's insignificance produces abasement, of one's weakness, timidity, and the
contemplation of any disadvantageous quality naturally produces another passion
that will always be a kind of humility. But this humility, as well as the pride I
have just spoken of, is really neither a virtue nor a vice. Both are only passions or
involuntary emotions that nonetheless are quite useful to civil society, and, in
certain instances, are absolutely necessary for the preservation of the life or
goods of those who are moved by them.
It is necessary, for example, to be humble and timid, and even to give external
evidence of one's mental disposition by a humble bearing and by a respectful or
timorous appearance, when one is in the presence of a person of high quality or
of a man who is haughty and powerful; for it is almost always advantageous to
the body's welfare for the imagination to humble itself when perceiving sensible
grandeur and for it to give external indication of its internal veneration and

The Search after Truth

371

submission. This occurs naturally and mechanically, with the will having no role
and often in spite of its resistance. Even such beasts as dogs, which must submit
to those with whom they live, generally have their machine disposed in such a
way that they assume the appearance they must in relation to those around them,
for this is absolutely necessary for their preservation. The reason why birds and
several other animals do not have the bodily disposition to assume this appearance is that they have no need to submit to those whose wrath they can escape
through flight, or on whom the preservation of their life does not depend.
I cannot overemphasize the fact that all the passions excited in us by the sight
of some external object mechanically produce their particular facial expression in
those struck by them, i.e., an appearance that by its impression mechanically
disposes everyone seeing it to those passions and actions useful to the good of
society. Even wonder when caused in us only by the sight of something that is
external to us and that can be viewed by others, produces an expression upon our
face that mechanically arouses the wonder of others, and that even acts on their
brain in such a highly regulated way that the spirits it contains are forced into the
muscles of their face to form an expression on it very much like our own.
This communication of the soul's passions and of motion in the animal spirits
(to join men together in relation to good and evil and to make them exactly like
one another not only in their mental disposition but also in the condition of their
body) is all the more considerable as the passions are more violent, because the
animal spirits are then more violently agitated. Now this must be so, because
when goods or evils are greater or more present, we must attend to them more,
and we must join more closely with others in order to flee or pursue them. But
when the passions are more moderate, as is usually the case with wonder, their
communication is imperceptible and they do not produce any expression, by
means of which they are usually communicated. As there is nothing urgent, they
have no cause to affect the imagination of others or to distract them from their
occupations, which are perhaps more urgent than the causes of these passions.
Nothing is more marvelous than this arrangement of our passions and this
disposition of our bodies with regard to objects surrounding us. All that mechanically takes place in us is worthy of the wisdom of Him who has created us. And,
as God has made us capable of all the passions that move us mainly in order to
link us to all sensible things for the preservation of society and of our sensible
being, His plan is so faithfully carried out in the construction of His work that we
cannot fail to wonder at its construction and design.
Nonetheless, our passions and all the imperceptible bonds by which we are
bound to everything around us are often, through our own fault, important causes
of our errors and disorders; for we do not use our passions as we should, we give
them free reign and are even ignorant of the limits we should place on their
influence. Thus, even the passions such as wonder that are very weak and move
us least are strong enough to plunge us into error. Here are several examples of
this.
When men, and especially those with an active imagination, consider the best
side of themselves, they are almost always very satisfied with themselves, and

378

Nicolas Malebranche

their inner satisfaction never fails to increase when they compare themselves to
others whose imagination is not so active. Moreover, there are so many people
who wonder at or admire them and so few who resist them with any success or
commendation (for who commends reason in opposition to a strong and lively
imagination?). Finally, the facial expression of those who listen to them is so
obviously one of submission and respect as well as of admiration for each new
word they profer that they begin to admire themselves, and their imagination,
which magnifies all their good points, makes them extremely content with themselves. For if we cannot see a man moved by some passion without receiving an
impression of that passion or without in some way taking part in his sensations,
how would it be possible for those who are surrounded by a great number of
admirers not to accede to a passion that flatters self-love so agreeably.
Now this high esteem in which people of strong and lively imagination hold
themselves and their qualities swells their courage and causes them to assume a
dominant and decisive bearing. They listen to others only with scorn, they
answer them only by jeering, they think only in relation to themselves. As they
regard the mind's attention-so necessary for the discovery of truth-as a kind
of slavery, they are altogether undisciplined. Pride, ignorance, and blindness will
always go hand in hand. Strong minds, or rather proud and haughty minds, do
not wish to be disciples of the truth; they enter into themselves only to contemplate and admire themselves. Thus, he who resists the proud shines in the
midst of their shadows without enlightening them.
On the other hand, there is a certain disposition in the animal spirits and blood
that gives us a too low opinion of ourselves. The scarcity, sluggishness, and
fineness of the animal spirits combined with the coarseness of the brain's fibers
makes our imagination weak and languid. Furthermore, the perception, or rather
the confused sensation of this weakness or sluggishness of our imagination, leads
us into a kind of vicious humility that might be termed spiritual baseness.
All men are capable of truth, but not all of them appeal to Him who alone is
capable of imparting it. The haughty tum toward themselves and listen only to
themselves, and the falsely humble tum to the haughty and bow before whatever
they decide. Both listen only to men. The mind of the haughty is ruled by the
fermentation of their blood, i.e., by their imagination; the mind of the falsely
humble submits before the dominant bearing of the haughty. Thus, both are
subjected to vanity and lies. The haughty man is rich and powerful, has a huge
following, and measures his grandeur by the size of his following and his power
by the strength of the horses pulling his coach. The falsely humble man, having
the same mind and the same principles, is miserable, poor, weak and languid,
and imagines that he is practically nothing because he possesses nothing. Yet we
are not the same as our following and so far from it being the case that a great
deal of blood and spirits or vigor and impetuosity of the imagination lead us to
the truth, that on the contrary, there is nothing that turns us away from it more.
Rather. it is the dullards, if I may so term them, the cold and languid minds who
arc best capable of discovering the most well-founded as well as the most hidden
truths. With quieter passions, they are able to listen to the truth that teaches them

The Search after Truth

379

in the innennost recesses of their reason; but unhappily for them, they do not
listen attentively to its words. The truth speaks without show and in a low voice,
whereas only a great deal of noise arouses them. Nothing whose appearance to
the senses is not great or spectacular convinces them; they enjoy being dazzled.
Rather than listening to the truth itself, they prefer to give ear to those philosophers who spell out nothing but their dreams and visions, and who assure them,
like the false prophets, that the truth has spoken to them when in fact it has not
spoken to them at all. For more than four thousand years, human pride has fed
them lies without any .resistance from them; they even honor these lies and
preserve them as holy and divine traditions. The God of truth has seemingly left
them, they no longer think about Him or consult Him; they no longer meditate,
and they mask their laziness and unconcern with the false appearance of a holy
humility.
It is true that we are unable to discover the truth by ourselves; but we can
always do so with Him who enlightens us, and we can never do so with even the
concerted help of all men. Even those who best know the truth cannot reveal it to
us unless we ourselves ask Him whom they have asked and unless He heeds our
appeal as He has heeded theirs. Men, therefore, should not be taken at their
word, for they are all deceivers; but we should believe Him who is unable to
deceive and to whom we must always appeal. We should place no trust in those
who speak only to the ears, who instruct only the body, and who act on at most
the imagination. But our undivided attention and sincere belief must be given to
Him who speaks to the mind and whose instruction is so penetrating as to
enlighten and fortify the inner man against the unceasing wiles and ill treatment
of the outer man. I repeat these things so often because I think they deserve
serious thought. God alone must be honored-only He is able to radiate light in
us, just as only He is able to produce pleasure in us.
It sometimes happens that the animal spirits and the rest of the body are well
disposed toward hunting, dancing, racing, and generally toward all those exercises in which the strength and agility of the body is most apparent. This disposition is common among young people and especially among those whose body is
not yet completely developed. Children are unable to stay still and are always
moving about when they are given their way. Since their muscles are not yet
developed or even completely fonned, God, who as the Author of nature regulates the soul's pleasures in relation to the good of the body, has them find
pleasure in exercise in order that their body might be strengthened. Thus, while
the flesh and fibers of the nerves are still soft, the paths that the animal spirits
must take to produce all the various kinds of movement are traced out and
preserved and no humors accumulate to ferment them or cause decay.
The confused sensation that young people have of their bodily disposition
makes them enjoy feeling its strength and agility. They admire themselves when
they can exercise control over its movements or when they can perform extraordinary feats, and they even desire the presence of spectators and admirers. Their
passion for physical exercise gradually takes a deep hold on them, and this is one
of the main causes of the ignorance and brutality of men. For. besides the time

380

Nicolas Malebranche

lost in these activities, the little use made of the mind causes the main part of the
brain, whose flexibility produces the mind's force and vivacity, to become entirely inflexible, and the animal spirits to have difficulty in spreading out in the
brain in the way necessary for us to choose our thoughts.
This leaves the greater part of the nobility and those who wage war incapable
of applying themselves to anything. All their reasoning is cavalier, as the saying
goes, and if you attempt to tell them what they do not want to hear, rather than
there being some thought about a proper response, their animal spirits insensibly
flow into the muscles that raise the arm. Almost without thinking they respond
with a blow, or with some menacing gesture, because the spirits, agitated by the
words they hear, are led into those places to which they are accustomed by
exercise. The sensation they have of their body's strength entrenches them in
these insolent ways, and the respectful air of their listeners foolishly emboldens
them to say foolish things in a haughty and brutal way. They even think that they
have spoken well because the fear and prudence of others have been favorable to
them.
It is impossible to have studied anything, or to have mastered any science, and
not realize this; one cannot be an author or a doctor and not remember it. But this
realization alone naturally produces such a great number of defects, even in the
minds of many people, that it would be better for them not to have the quality for
which they are honored. Since they imagine it to be their best part, they always
contemplate it with great pleasure, they publicize it as much as possible, and,
finally, they would have it give them the right to judge everything without
examination. If one is uncircumspect enough to contradict them, they first try to
suggest, carefully and with an air of gentleness and charity, just who they are and
the right they have to decide. But if one is then bold enough to resist them, and if
they have no further response, they then openly state their opinion of themselves
and of those who resist them.
All our inner sensations of some advantage we possess naturally swell our
courage. A cavalier who feels that he is well armed and has a good horse, and
who does not lack for blood or spirits, is ready to undertake anything; his
disposition is such as to make him bold and daring. This is also true of a man of
learning. When he thinks himself learned and the boldness of his heart has
corrupted his mind, he becomes, so to speak, bold and daring against the truth.
Sometimes he wages a headstrong battle against the truth without recognizing it,
and sometimes, having recognized it, he betrays it. Relying on his false learning,
he is always ready to maintain either the affirmative or the negative on any
question, depending on whether he is moved by a spirit of contradiction.
Such is not the case with those who do not pride themselves in their grasp of
science; they are not so headstrong. Rarely do they speak if they do not have
something to say, and it even happens frequently enough that they remain silent
while they should speak. They do not have the reputation or the external trappings of science that lead one into speaking without knowing what one is talking
about; they are able to be silent. But the learned are afraid to remain silent, for
they know well that they will be scorned if they are quiet, even when they have

The Search after Truth

381

nothing to say, and that they will not always be scorned though they should utter
only foolishness, provided that their utterances should sound scientific.
What enables men to think also enables them to attain truth; but neither honors
nor riches, nor degrees, nor false learning enables them to think; rather, it is their
nature that does so. Men are made for thinking because they are made for the
truth. Even bodily health does not enable men to think well; all it can do is to
obstruct thought less than does sickness. Our body helps us to a certain extent to
sense and imagine, but it in no way helps us to understand. For while we are
unable to meditate attentively without the help of the body in resisting the
continuous efforts of the senses and the passions, which upset and dissipate our
meditation (because we are now able to overcome the body only by means of the
body), yet it is obvious that the body can neither enlighten the mind nor produce
in it the light of understanding. For every idea that reveals the truth comes from
the truth itself. What the soul receives through the body is only for the body. and
when it turns toward phantasms, it sees only illusions and phantasms, i.e., it does
not see things as they are in themselves, but only the relations they can have with
the body.
The idea of greatness or smallness that we have of ourselves might be a
frequent occasion of error for us, but the impression made by the idea that we
have of external objects related to us is no less dangerous. We have just said that
the idea of greatness is always accompanied by a great deal of motion in the
spirits and that this motion is always accompanied by an idea of greatness, and
that the idea of smallness, on the other hand, is always accompanied by very little
motion of the spirits and that this motion is always accompanied by an idea of
smallness. From this premise the conclusion is easily drawn that the things that
produce a great deal of motion in our spirits must naturally appear greater to us,
i.e., stronger, more real, and more perfect than other things, for by greatness I
mean all these things and several others. Thus, if we judge them according to the
motion of the spirits and not according to the pure idea of truth, sensible goods
must appear to us greater and more solid than those that are not sensed. A great
house, a magnificent retinue, fine furniture, offices, honors, riches, all appear
greater and more real than virtue and justice.
When the mind's clear perception compares virtue to riches, virtue is preferred; but when the eyes and the imagination are used and these things are
judged only according to the disturbance they excite in our spirits, riches are
preferred without fail to virtue.
This is the basis for our belief that things that are spiritual, or that are not
sensed, are practically nothing, that our mind's ideas are less worthy than the
objects they represent, that air and water have less reality and substance than
metals and glass, that the space between the earth and the firmament is void, and
that the bodies filling it do not have as much reality and solidity as the sun and
stars. In short, if we fall into an infinity of errors concerning the nature and
perfection of things, it is because we base our reasoning on this false premise.
Given that a great deal of motion in the spirits and, consequently, a strong
passion always accompanies a sensible idea of greabless, and given that little

382

Nicolas Malebranche

motion in the spirits and, consequently, a weak passion accompanies a sensible
idea of smallness, a great deal of our attention and too much of our time is
occupied by everything that excites a sensible idea of greatness, and anything
yielding only a sensible idea of smallness receives our neglect. Those great
bodies, for example, that revolve above our heads have always greatly impressed
men. At first they were adored on account of their size and brilliance. Other,
bolder minds examined their motion, with the result that stars have been the
object either of study or of veneration of many people down through the centuries. It might even be said that the fear of those imaginary influences that still
affect astrologers and weaker minds is a kind of adoration that a humbled imagination pays to the idea of greatness representing the celestial bodies.
The human body, on the other hand, which is infinitely more admirable and
more deserving of our attention than all that can be known about Jupiter, Saturn,
and the other planets, is practically unknown. The sensible idea of particles of
dissected flesh has nothing magnificent about it, and even causes disgust and
horror. As a result of this, it has been only in recent times that intelligent men
have considered anatomy as a science worthy of their attention. There have been
princes and kings who have boasted of being astronomers. The greatness of the
stars seemed to agree with the greatness of their dignity; but I do not think that
any of them have so honored the knowledge of anatomy, or the dissection of a
heart or a brain. The same thing is true of many other sciences.
Rare and extraordinary things produce greater and more perceptible motion in
the spirits than things seen everyday; we wonder at them, and consequently we
assign an idea of greatness to them-and hence they excite passions of esteem
and respect in the spirits. Here we have the source of the confusion in many
people's reason: many of them are so taken with what remains to us of antiquity,
with what comes from far off, or with what is rare and out of the ordinary that
their mind is like a slave to these things, for the mind dares not judge or place
itself above what it reveres.
Granted, truth lies in no great danger from people's Jove of the medals, arms,
and apparel of ancient people, or of those of the Chinese or savages. It is not
altogether useless to know a map of ancient Rome, or of the roads of Tonking to
Nanking, although it would be of greater use for us to know the roads from Paris
to St. Germain or Versailles. Finally, there is nothing wrong with people wanting
to know the true history of the war between the Greeks and Persians, or between
the Tartars and the Chinese, or with their having a great liking for Thucydides or
Xenophon or whomever you like. But we cannot allow admiration of antiquity to
dominate reason, or to prohibit the mind from examining the views of the
ancients in such a way that those who discover and demonstrate their falsity are
viewed as rash and presumptuous.
Truths are for all time. If Aristotle discovered any truths, they can be
discovered as well today. The views of this author must be proved as they may,
for if his views were sound in his own time, they are still so now. To attempt to
prove truths of nature through human authority is mere illusion. You might
perhaps prove that Aristotle had certain thoughts on certain subjects, but it is not

The Search after Truth

383

very reasonable to read Aristotle or any other author with a great deal of care and
trouble only to learn historical views and to teach them to others.
I cannot remain calm at the thought that certain universities that were founded
for no other purpose than to pursue and defend the truth have become cliques that
boast of studying and defending the views of certain men. Only with indignation
can I read the books that issue daily from philosophers and physicians, in which
quotations are so frequent that I would take them more as the writings of theologians or canon lawyers than as philosophical or medical treatises. For I cannot
allow reason and experience to be abandoned in favor of blind submission to the
fictions of Aristotle, Plato, Epicurus, or any other philosopher.
Yet I would perhaps remain calm and silent before such extreme behavior if I
were not harmed by it, i.e., if these gentlemen did not war against the truth,
which alone I feel obliged to espouse. But admiration for the ancients' reveries
inspires them with a blind zeal against newly discovered truths, with the result
that they discredit them without knowing them and oppose them without understanding them; and, through the strength of their imagination, they spread
these same prejudices among the minds and hearts of their admirers.
Since the only basis for their judgments of newly discovered truths is the
esteem that they have for their favorite authors, and since those whom they have
met and spoken with do not have the great and wonderful appearance that the
imagination attaches to ancient authors, they are unable to hold them in esteem.
For as the idea we have of men living in our century is not accompanied by an
extraordinary motion affecting the mind, it naturally arouses nothing but scorn.
Painters and sculptors never represent the philosophers of antiquity as ordinary
men; they give them a huge head with a broad and high forehead and a magnificently full beard. This is a sure proof that the common man has naturally formed
a similar idea of them, for painters depict things as they see them, following the
natural impulses of the imagination. Thus, the ancients are almost always regarded as altogether exceptional men. But the imagination represents men of our
time, on the other hand, as similar to those we see every day; and since it
produces no extraordinary motion in the spirits, it excites nothing but contempt
and indifference for them in the soul.
I have met Descartes, said one of these learned men who admire only antiquity; I knew him, I spoke with him several times, and he was an honest man
and no fool, but he had no exceptional talents. This fellow had a low opinion of
Descartes' philosophy because he spoke with the man for a few minutes and
failed to notice anything about him that smacked of the wonderfully great appearance which warms the imagination. He even pretends to give a proper
answer to this philosopher's arguments (which actually confuse him a little) by
saying haughtily that he used to know him. I wish that these types could see
Aristotle otherwise than as he has been depicted and converse with him for an
hour, provided that he did not speak to them in Greek but in French, and without
making himself known until after they had declared their opinion of him.
Things marked by novelty (either because they are new in themselves, or
because they appear in a new order or a new location) agitate us a great deal.

384

Nicolas Ma/ebranche

since they affect the brain in areas that are more sensible because less exposed to
the flow of spirits. Things that are perceptibly marked by greatness also agitate us
a great deal, for they excite a great deal of motion in our spirits. But things that
are simultaneously characterized both by greatness and novelty not only agitate
us, they overwhelm us with the disturbances they produce in us.
Those, for example, who speak only in paradoxes are admired, for everything
they say has a novel character. Those who speak only in well-turned phrases and
who carefully choose their words for effect are respected, for what they say
appears to be marked by greatness. But those who combine both novelty and
effect, the great and the uncommon, almost never fail to overwhelm the common
man, even when what they say is asinine. This pompous nonsense, insani
fu/gores, the false lights of those who rant on in this way, almost always succeed
in dazzling weaker minds; they catch their imagination unawares with such a
vivid impression that they are overwhelmed and actually honor the power that
knocks them down and blinds them, and they admire as shining truths confused
sensations that cannot even be expressed.

BOOK FIVE
Chapter Eight

t

A continuation of the same subject. Of the good use that can be made of wonder
and the other passions.
Each of the passions has two notable effects: it applies the mind, and wins over
the heart. Insofar as they apply the mind, the passions can be very helpful in
knowing the truth provided we know how to use them; for applying the mind
produces light, and light reveals the truth. But insofar as they win the heart, the
passions always have a bad effect because they win over the heart only by
corrupting reason and representing things to it not as they are in themselves or
according to the truth but according to their relation to us.
Of all the passions, wonder least affects the heart. For we are agitated by
seeing things as good or evil, whereas seeing things as new, great, or extraordinary, with no other relation to us, hardly affects us. Thus, the wonder that arises
when we realize the greatness or excellence of something we have just begun to
consider corrupts reason a great deal Jess than any of the other passions, and it
might even be put to great use toward knowing the truth, provided that great care
is taken to prevent it from being followed by other passions, as it almost always
is.
In wonder, the animal spirits are forced toward those parts of the brain representing the new object as it is in itself; there they make distinct traces that are
deep enough to be preserved a long time. Consequently, the mind has a sufficiently clear idea of the object and easily remembers it. Hence, it is undeniable
that wonder is very useful to the sciences since it applies and illumines the mind.
Such is not the case with the other passions; they apply the mind, but they do not
illumine it. They apply it because they arouse the animal spirits whose flow is
necessary for the formation and preservation of traces; but they do not illumine it,
or they iJiumine it with a deceptive light because they move these same spirits in
such a way that they represent objects only according to their relation to us and
not as they are in themselves.
Nothing is more difficult than applying oneself for any length of time to
something that fails to excite our wonder, since then the animal spirits are not so
easily led into those parts of the brain necessary to represent it. Although our
385

386

Nicolas Malebranche

attention may be called for, it is not forthcoming, or at least not for any length of
time, however we may be convinced in the abstract (which in no way agitates the
spirits) that the thing in question deserves our attention. We must trick our
imagination in order to stir our spirits, and we must represent the subject we wish
to think about in a novel way so that an impulse of wonder might be excited in us.
We see people every day who have no taste for study; nothing appears more
troublesome to them than the application of their mind. They are convinced that
they must study certain things, to which they direct all their energy; but their
efforts are wasted, for they accomplish little and immediately give up. True, the
animal spirits obey the orders of the will, and we can become attentive if we
wish. But when the volition that commands is a volition of pure reason unsustained by some passion, it is so weak and languid that our ideas are more like
phantasms that we can barely make out and that quickly disappear. Our animal
spirits receive so many secret directives from the passions, and are so inclined
both by nature and by habit to carry them out, that they are easily diverted from
the new and difficult channels into which the will would lead them. As a result of
this, it is mainly in these instances that we need a special grace in order to know
the truth, because with our own resources alone we cannot long resist the body's
weight, which burdens the mind, or if we can, we never accomplish everything
of which we are capable.
But when we are aroused by an impulse of wonder, the animal spirits naturally
flow into the traces made by the object exciting it. They clearly represent this
object to the mind, and they perform whatever is required in the brain in order to
produce light and certainty without the will exhausting itself in controlling the
unruly spirits. Thus, those capable of wonder are better suited for study than
those who are not; they are nimble-minded whereas the others are dense.
Nonetheless, when wonder becomes excessive to the point of stupefaction, or
when it no longer involves a rational curiosity, it produces a very bad effect. The
animal spirits are then entirely occupied in representing the object according to
its aspect we are wondering at. We do not think about its other facets that might
also be considered. The animal spirits do not flow into the various parts of the
body to perform even their ordinary functions, but instead impress such deep
traces of the objects they represent that they rupture enough of the brain's fibers
to make the idea that they have excited indelible.
It is not enough that wonder should arouse our attention, it must also make us
inquisitive; it is not enough that we should have considered one aspect of an
object-to know it fully we must be inquisitive enough to examine all its aspects;
otherwise we have no basis for a solid judgment. Thus, when wonder does not
lead us to conduct a complete examination of things, or when it prevents us from
doing so, it is altogether useless in knowing the truth. In these cases, it stocks the
mind only with probabilities and leads us into rash judgments about everything.
It is not enough to wonder simply for the sake of wondering; we must wonder
in order then to examine more easily. The animal spirits naturally aroused in
wonder arc made available to the soul to be used in more distinctly representing
its object and for knowing it better. This is nature·s way, for wonder should lead

The Search after Truth

387

to inquisitiveness and inquisitiveness to knowledge of the truth. But the soul is
unable to use its own powers. It prefers the pleasant sensation it receives from the
abundance of spirits affecting it that are aroused by the object of its awareness. It
prefers simply to perceive its wealth than to dissipate it through use, and in this it
is like the misers who prefer to keep their money rather than use it for their needs.
Men are generally pleased to be affected by any given passion. They not only
pay to be touched with sadness by the presentation of some tragedy; they also pay
prestidigitators in order to be impressed by their wonders, and surely they cannot
be said to do so in order to be deceived. This inner delight we feel while engaged
in wonder is thus the main reason why we linger in that state without putting it to
the use that nature and reason prescribe to us, for this inner delight attaches
people so closely to the objects of their wonder that they become angry when
shown the vanity of it. An afflicted man so enjoys his sadness that he becomes
vexed when we try to cheer him. The same is true of those engaged in wonder;
they seem to be offended when an attempt is made to show them that there is no
basis for their wonder because they feel the secret pleasure they receive from
their passion diminish as the idea causing it is removed from their mind.
The passions always seek their own justification, and they imperceptibly persuade us that we are right in following them. The pleasure and delight they cause
the mind (which must judge them) to feel compromises it in their favor. What
follows is roughly the way they might be said to make the mind reason. We
should judge things only according to the ideas we have of them, and of all our
ideas the most sensible are the most real since they act on us with greatest force.
They, therefore, ought to be the basis for our judgments. Now the object of my
wonder contains a sensible idea of greatness; I must therefore judge it according
to this idea, for greatness must arouse my esteem and love. Thus, I am right in
pausing over this object and busying myself with it. Indeed, the pleasure I feel
upon viewing the idea representing this object is a natural proof that it is to my
benefit to think about it; for, in short, I seem to become greater myself when I
think about it, and my mind seems to have greater scope when it embraces so
great an idea. The mind ceases to be when it no longer thinks about something;
and if this idea were to vanish, it seems to me that my mind would vanish with it,
or that it would become smaller and more confined if it attached itself to a smaller
idea. The preservation of this great idea, therefore, involves the preservation of
the greatness and perfection of my being; therefore, my wonder is justified.
Indeed, if I were to receive my due, I should cause wonder in others. Through the
relation I have with great things, I am something great; I possess them to a certain
extent through my wonder at them, and I enjoy them as a result of my hope of
further possessing them. Other men would be as happy as I if they realized my
greatness and like me attached themselves to the cause producing it; but they are
blind men, ignorant of great and beautiful things and unable to raise themselves
up.
The mind might be said to reason naturally and reflectively in this way when it
lets itself be led by the false lights of its passions. These arguments have a certain
plausibility, but it is clear that they have no solid foundation; and yet their

388

Nicolas Malebranche

plausibility, or rather the confused sensation of plausibility, accompanying these
natural and unreflective arguments is so strong that, unless we are careful, it
never fails to seduce us.
When, for example, poetry, history, chemistry, or whatever other human
science you like has struck chords of wonder in the imagination of a young man,
unless he is careful to watch the effect this has on his mind, unless he thoroughly
examines what is to be gained from these sciences, unless he compares the
trouble he will have in learning them to the profit he will receive from them, in
short, unless he is as inquisitive as he should be in order to form a proper
judgment, there is a great danger that his wonder, which shows him these
sciences only in their best light, will seduce him. It is even to be feared that it will
so corrupt his heart that he will be no longer able to give up his illusion, although
he may recognize it as such later on, because the deep traces engraved in his
brain by continuous wonder cannot be erased. This is why he must always guard
the purity of his imagination, i.e., he must prevent these dangerous traces that
corrupt the mind and heart from being formed in the brain. The following is the
way this should be done, which will prove useful not only against excessive
wonder but also against all the other passions.
When the motion of the animal spirits is strong enough to form the deep traces
in the brain that corrupt the imagination, it is always accompanied by some
emotion in the soul. Thus, since the soul cannot be moved without being aware
of it, it receives sufficient warning to carefully examine whether it is to its
advantage for these traces to be completed and made more permanent. But since
the mind while in a state of emotion is not sufficiently free to judge the usefulness
of these traces (because the emotion deceives it and inclines it to favor them),
every effort must be made to halt this emotion or to divert elsewhere the motion
of the spirits that causes it. In the meanwhile, it is absolutely necessary to
suspend one's judgment.
Now it should not be imagined that the soul through its will alone can always
arrest the flow of spirits preventing it from using its reason. Its ordinary powers
are not sufficient to halt motion that it itself has not excited. Consequently, it
must resort to strategems in an attempt to deceive an enemy that attacks only by
surprise.
As motion in the spirits awakens certain thoughts in the soul, so our thoughts
excite certain kinds of motion in our brain. Thus, when we wish to stop some
motion of the spirits that has been excited in us, it is not enough to will it to stop,
for that alone is not always capable of stopping it, but cleverness must be used by
representing to ourselves things contrary to those exciting and sustaining the
motion; this will cause revulsion. But if we wish only to divert motion in the
spirits that has already been excited, we need think not of contrary things but
only of things different from those producing the motion, and this will undoubtedly cause a diversion.
But because diversion and revulsion will vary as our new thoughts are accompanied by more or less motion in the spirits, we should be careful to note which
thoughts most agitate us in order to be able to represent them to the imagination

The Search after Truth

389

on those urgent occasions when it seduces us; and we must try to so habituate
ourselves to resisting the imagination that it no longer excites any motion in the
soul that catches us unawares.
If we carefully attach the thought of eternity, or some other solid thought, to
the extraordinary motions excited in us, these violent and extraordinary motions
will no longer occur without at the same time awakening the idea, and without,
as a result, furnishing us with a defense against them. These things are proved by
experience and by the reasons we have cited in the chapter "The Connection of
Ideas ";a as a result, it should not be imagined that strategy cannot overcome the
passions when we are of a firm will to do so.
Nevertheless, it should not be assumed that by this sort of defense we can
avoid all error or make ourselves impregnable. There are several reasons for this.
First, it is difficult to acquire and preserve the habit of having our extraordinary
motions arouse ideas with which to combat them. Second, granted that the habit
is acquired, motion in the spirits directly excites the ideas that must be combatted, and only indirectly those with which to combat them. Since the evil ideas are
thus the main ideas, they will always be stronger than the ancillary ideas, and it
will always be necessary for the will to resist them. Third, this motion of the
spirits can be so violent that they occupy the soul's entire capacity. as a result of
which there is no room, so to speak, for it to receive the ancillary idea to cause
revulsion in the spirits, or to receive the idea in such a way that it might be
attentively considered. Finally, there are so many particular circumstances capable of neutralizing this remedy that, though we should not neglect it, it should not
be relied on too much. We should always have recourse to prayer to receive the
necessary help from heaven at the time of battle, and we must at the same time
present to the mind truths so strong and well-founded that by means of them we
can overcome the most violent passions. I must note here in passing that the
pious often fall back into the same faults because they have filled their minds
with a great number of truths that have more brilliance than strength and that are
better for dividing and weakening their mind than for strengthening it against
temptations, whereas denser, less enlightened sorts are often faithful to their duty
because they have a grasp on some well-founded truth that strengthens them and
sustains them in all encounters.

•PaR~.

[bk. 2, pl. I, ch. 5).

BOOK FIVE
Chapter Nine

Lol'e and a1·ersion, and their principal kinds.
Love and aversion are the first passions to follow wonder. We do not long
consider an object without discovering the relations it has to us or to something
that we love. Since the object that we love, and to which we are consequently
joined by our love, is almost always present to us, as is the object of our wonder,
our mind easily and without much thought makes the necessary comparisons to
discover the relations they have between themselves and to us, or else it naturally
receives this information from the prevenient sensations of pleasure and pain.
Then the impulse of love that we have for ourselves and for the object we love is
extended to the object of our wonder if the relation in which it immediately
stands to us or to some object joined to us appears to our advantage according to
either our knowledge or sensation of it. Now this new impulse of the soul, or
rather, this newly determined impulse of the soul, which is connected with the
motion in the animal spirits and which is followed by the sensation accompanying the new disposition produced in the brain by the new motion of the spirits, is
the passion I here term love.
But if we sense through some pain, or if we discover through clear and certain
knowledge, that being joined or related to the object of our wonder is disadvantageous to us or to something joined to us, then the impulse of love we have for
ourselves and for the thing joined to us is either restricted to us or is directed
toward the thing joined to us. The impulse does not follow what the mind has
perceived, i.e., it does not direct itself toward the object of our wonder. But since
the impulse toward the good in general that the Author of nature unceasingly
impresses upon the soul leads it only toward what it is aware of and what is
sensibly perceived as either good or agreeable to its nature, the soul's refusal to
attach itself to an object that in no way agrees with it might be said to be a kind of
voluntary impulse whose object is nonbeing. This voluntary impulse of the soul,
which is connected with motion in the spirits and the blood, and which is followed
by the sensation accompanying the new disposition produced by the spirits in the
brain. is the passion that I here term m·ersion.
This passion is entirely contrary to love. yet is never without love. It is entirely
390

The Search after Truth

391

contrary to Jove because it separates whereas Jove joins; its object is nonbeing
whereas Jove always has being for its object; it resists the natural impulse and
neutralizes it, whereas Jove yields to it and allows it to triumph. But it is never
separated from Jove; for if evil, which is its object, is taken as the privation of
good, to flee evil is to flee the privation of good, i.e., to tend toward the good,
and thus aversion to the privation of good is the Jove of good. But if evil is taken
as pain, aversion to pain is not hatred of the privation of pleasure since, given
that pain is a sensation as real as pleasure, it is not its privation; but since
aversion to pain is the aversion to some inner misery, we would not have this
aversion iLwe did not Jove ourselves. Finally, evil might be taken to be what
causes pain in us or for what deprives us of good, and in this case aversion
depends on our Jove for ourselves or the Jove of something to which we desire to
be joined. Love and aversion, then, are the two contrary passions that give birth
to all others; but Jove is the first, chief, and most universal.
In morals, virtues or kinds of charity are often distinguished according to the
differences in their objects; but this procedure sometimes obscures the real idea
we ought to have of virtue, which depends more on the end or purpose assigned
to it than on anything else. We believe the same thing to hold regarding the
passions. We shall not distinguish them here according to their objects because a
single object can excite all of them and because ten thousand objects might excite
but a single one of them. For although objects might be different from one
another, they are not always different in relation to us, and they do not excite
different passions in us. The baton of a marshal of France that is promised to
someone is different from a bishop's crozier promised to someone; yet these two
marks of honor excite roughly the same passion in men of ambition because they
arouse in the mind the same idea of good. But a baton of a marshal of France that
is promised, granted, possessed, and taken away excites entirely different
passions because it awakens in the mind different ideas of good. The passions,
therefore, should not be multiplied according to the different objects causing
them, but only as many should be admitted as there are ancillary ideas that
accompany our principal idea of good or evil and that significantly change it in
relation to us. For the general idea of good or the sensation of pleasure, which is
a good to those who enjoy it, acts on the soul and the animal spirits and produces
the general passion of Jove. The ideas ancillary to this good determine the soul's
general agitation as well as the flow of the animal spirits in a specific way that
disposes the mind and the body as they should be with regard to the good we
perceive, and they thus produce all the particular passions.
Thus, the general idea of good produces an indeterminate Jove that is but a
result of self-Jove or the natural desire to be happy.
The idea of some good we possess produces joyous Jove.
The idea of a good we do not possess but hope to possess, i.e., that we judge
ourselves capable of possessing, produces a desiderative Jove.
Finally, the idea of a good we do not possess and do not hope to possess, or,
what is to the same effect, the idea of a good we do not hope to possess without
loss of some other good, or whose possession we cannot maintain, produces a

392

Nicolas Malebranche

melancholy love. These are the three simple or basic passions that have the good
as their object; for hope that produces joy is not an emotion of the soul but a
simple judgment.
But it should be pointed out that men do not limit their being to themselves,
and that they extend it to everything and everybody with whom it seems advantageous to them to strike a union. Consequently, we are inclined to believe that
they possess good to some extent when it is enjoyed by their friends, though they
do not immediately possess it themselves. Thus, when I say that the possession
of good produces joy, I mean not only possession in the sense of immediate
union but all other kinds; for we naturally feel joy when those whom we love
have good fortune.
Evil, as I have already said, can be taken in three ways: privation of good,
pain, or the thing causing privation of good or producing pain.
In the first sense, since the idea of evil is the same as the idea of good we do
not possess, clearly this idea produces sadness, or desire, or even joy; for joy is
always produced when we feel deprived of the privation of good, i.e., when we
possess the good. As a result, the passions pertaining to evil in this sense are the
same as those pertaining to the good, because, in effect, they also have the good
for their object.
But if by evil, pain is meant (which alone is always a real evil to those who
suffer it, as long as they suffer it), then the sensation of this evil produces sadness
and the desire for the elimination of this evil-passions that are sorts of aversion
rather than love, for their impulse is entirely opposed to that accompanying the
perception of good; their impulse is only the soul's opposition to a natural
impression, i.e., an impulse whose object is nonbeing.
The actual sensation of pain produces a melancholy aversion.
The pain we do not suffer but fear produces a desiderative aversion whose
object is the nonbeing of that pain.
Finally, the pain we neither suffer nor fear, or, what is to the same effect, the
pain we do not fear suffering without being greatly recompensed, or the pain of
which we are relieved, produces a joyous aversion. These are the three simple or
basic passions that have evil as their object, for fear that produces sadness is not
an emotion of the soul but a simple judgment.
Lastly, if by evil is meant the person or thing that deprives us of good or that
makes us suffer pain, the idea of evil produces either an impulse of love and
aversion together or simply an impulse of aversion. The idea of evil produces an
impulse of love and aversion together when the evil deprives us of good, for by
the same impulse we tend toward the good and flee from what prevents its
possession. But this idea produces only an impulse of aversion when the idea of
some evil makes us suffer pain, for by the same impulse of aversion we abhor
pain and whatever makes us suffer it.
Thus, there are three simple or basic passions concerned with good, and three
others concerned with pain or what causes pain, to wit, joy, desire, and sadness,
for we are joyful when good is present and evil has passed, we feel sad when

The Search after Truth

393

good has passed and evil is present, and we are moved by desire when good and
evil are to come.
The passions concerned with good are specific detenninations of the impulse
God gives us for the good in general, and for this reason their object is real; but
the others that do not. have God as the cause of their impulse, have only nonbeing
as their object, i.e., these passions are cessations of impulse rather than real
impulses; here we cease willing rather than willing something.

BOOK FIVE
Chapter Ten

The particular passions and, in general, how to recognize and to give an account
of the errors they cause.
If you consider the makeup of the passions, you will easily see that they are
countless and that there are many more of them than we have words to express.
The passions owe their differences not only to the different combinations of the
three basic passions, for there would be very few differences of this sort, but also
to the different perceptions and judgments that cause them or accompany them.
These different judgments that the soul makes of goods and evils produce different kinds of motions in the animal spirits in order to dispose the body with regard
to the object; and they consequently cause sensations in the soul that are not
altogether similar. They thus cause the difference we notice between certain
passions whose emotions do not differ.
Nonetheless, since emotion in the soul is the main thing found in each of our
passions, it is much better to refer them all to the three basic passions in which
these emotions are very different than to treat them in a disorderly and confused
fashion in relation to the different perceptions we can have of an infinity of goods
and evils causing them.
When the soul perceives some insignificant good within its reach, it might
perhaps be said to hope for it, although it does not desire it; but here its hope is
clearly not a passion but rather a simple judgment. For the emotion accompanying the idea of some good that we think we can possess makes hope into a true
passion. Hope converted into confidence is still the same thing-it is a passion
only on account of the emotion of joy involved with the emotion of desire, for the
soul's judgment when it considers some good as certain is a passion only because
foretaste of the good excites us. Finally, when hope diminishes and is replaced
by despair, it is still clear that this despair is a passion only on account of the
emotion of sadness mixed with the emotion of desire; for the soul's judgment
when considering a good as beyond its reach is not a passion unless this judgment
moves us.
But because the soul never views good or evil without some emotion and
without some change taking place in the body, we often call the judgment
394

The Search after Truth

395

producing passion the passion itself, because of the fact that when we perceive
some good or evil we confuse what occurs in the body with what occurs in the
soul. For the terms hope, fear, boldness, shame, impudence, anger, mercy,
raillery, regret, and, in short, the terms for all the other passions are as ordinarily
used, abbreviations for several terms by means of which we can give a detailed
account of everything the passions contain.
By the word passion is meant the perception of a thing's relation to us, the
soul's sensation and emotion, the disturbance in the brain and the motion in the
spirits, a new sensation and a new emotion in the soul, and finally the agreeable
sensation always accompanying the passions and making each of them
pleasant-all these things are meant. But by the term for some passion we
sometimes mean only the judgment causing it or merely the soul's emotion, or
the motion of the spirits and blood alone, or finally some other thing accompanying the soul's emotion.
Knowledge of the truth is facilitated by abbreviating ideas and their expressions, but this is often a cause of error, especially when the ideas are abbreviated through common usage. For ideas should be abbreviated only when
they have been made very clear and distinct by the mind's close application, and
not, as is ordinarily done, by the passions and sensible things when made familiar
to us through sensations and the mere influence of the imagination, which deceives the mind.
There is a great difference between the mind's pure ideas and the soul's
sensations and emotions. The mind's pure ideas are clear and distinct, but it is
difficult to make them familiar. The soul's sensations and emotions, on the other
hand, are quite familiar, but it is impossible to know them clearly and distinctly.
Extension, numbers, and their properties are known clearly; but unless they are
made sensible by means of characters expressing them, it is difficult to represent
them, for what is abstract does not affect us. The soul's sensations and emotions,
on the other hand, are easily represented to the mind, although they are known
only in an imperfect and confused way and all the terms exciting them strike the
soul and catch its attention. As a result of this, we often fancy that we have
understood discourse that is absolutely incomprehensible; and when we read
descriptions of the soul's passions and sensations, we are convinced that we
understand them perfectly because we are greatly affected by them and because
the words striking our eyes agitate the soul. As soon as the words shame, despair,
impudence, and so on, are said in front of us, a confused idea as well as an
obscure sensation that occupies our attention, are called up; and because this
sensation is familiar to us, and its representation does not require a great deal of
effort by the mind, we are convinced that it is clear and distinct. Nonetheless,
these words are terms for compound passions and therefore are abbreviated
expressions that common usage has produced from several confused and obscure
ideas.
Since we are obliged to use terms sanctioned by usage, it should not be
surprising if obscurity and sometimes a kind of contradiction are to be encountered in what we say. And if you consider that the soul's emotions and sensations

396

Nicolas Malebranche

corresponding to the tenns used in such discourse are not exactly alike in all men,
on account of their different dispositions of mind, you will not be so quick to
condemn when you disagree with us. I say this not so much as a hedge against
possible objections as to demonstrate the nature of the passions as well as the
value of treatises on this topic.
After all these precautions, I feel I can now say that all the passions can be
related to the three basic ones, to wit, desire, joy, and sadness, and that mainly
through the soul's various judgments about goods and evils do those that reduce
to a single basic passion differ from one another.
I can say that hope and dreams as well as irresolution, which is a mean
between them, are kinds of desire, that boldness, courage, competitiveness, and
so on, are related more to desire and hope than to any other passion, and that
fear, cowardice, jealousy, and so forth, are kinds of dread.
I might further add that cheerfulness and fame, kindness and gratitude, are
kinds of joy caused by the perception of good within us or in those to whom we
are related, as laughter or raillery is a kind of joy that is generally excited in us
when we see those to whom we have no relation in dire straights; finally, that
disgust, boredom, regret, mercy, and indignation are kinds of sadness caused by
the perception of something we do not like.
But besides these and several other passions that I do not name8 that specifically reduce to one of the basic passions, there are several others whose emotion
is almost equally composed of either the passions of desire and joy (such as
impudence, anger, and revenge) or from desire and sadness (such as shame,
regret, and spite) or from all three together, when motives of joy and sadness are
found together.
But although these latter passions have no specific name that I know of, they
are nonetheless the most common, because in this life we almost never enjoy any
good without some evil, and because we hardly ever suffer evil without the hope
of being delivered from it and enjoying some good. Furthennore, although joy is
completely contrary to sadness, it nonetheless does not exclude it, and it even
shares with this passion the soul's capacity for willing when the perception of
good and evil shares the soul's capacity for perceiving.
All the passions, then, are species of desire, joy, and sadness. And the main
difference found among passions of the same species is due to the different
perceptions or different judgments that cause or accompany them. As a result, to
know the passions and to enumerate them as exactly as possible, it is necessary to
investigate the different judgments we can make about goods and evils. But since
we are here looking principally for the causes of our errors, we need not pause to
examine so much the judgments preceding and causing the passions as those that
follow them and that the soul forms about objects when excited by some passion,
for these latter judgments are most liable to em)r.
The judgments preceding and causing the passions are almost always false to
some extent, for they almost always arc based on the soul's perception insofar as
it considers objects in relation to itself and not as they are in themselves. But
"There are more passion' than term' to express them.

The Search after Truth

397

judgments following the passions are false in every way, for the judgments
formed by the passions alone are based solely on the soul's perceptions of objects
in relation to itself, or rather in relation to its present emotion.
Judgments preceding the passions contain both the true and the false; but when
the soul is agitated and its judgment is inspired by passion, the true disappears
and the false remains to serve as a premise for false conclusions whose number
varies with the t:nagnitude of the passion.
The passions all seek their own justification; they unceasingly represent to the
soul the object agitating it in the way most likely to maintain and increase its
agitation. The judgment or the perception causing the agitation is strengthened to
the extent that the passion increases, and the passion increases to the extent that
the judgment producing it is in tum strengthened. False judgments and the
passions unceasingly contribute to each other's preservation. As a result of this,
if the heart did not cease supplying the spirits necessary for maintaining the
appropriate traces in the brain and the rapid flow of these same spirits (which is
necessary to preserve the soul's sensation and emotion accompanying the
passions), the passions would continue to increase and we would never recognize
our errors. But since all our passions depend on the fermentation and circulation
of the blood, and since the heart is not always able to supply spirits suited to their
preservation, they must cease when the spirits diminish and the blood cools.
Although it is a simple matter to discover the ordinary judgments of passions,
still we must not neglect to do so. Few subjects are more deserving of the
attention of those seeking the truth, attempting to deliver themselves from the
tyranny of their bodies, or wishing to judge all things on the basis of true ideas.
Instruction might be had in two ways: either by means of pure reason or
through the inner sensation we have of ourselves when we are moved by some
passion. For example, we know from our own experience that we are led to form
an ill opinion of those whom we do not like and to view them in a light colored by
the animus of our passion. Through pure reason we also know that as we can hate
only what is evil, the preservation of hatred demands that the mind represent its
object in the worst possible light. For, in short, in order to infer immediately
which judgments are those that the passions make us form, it is enough for us to
suppose that all the passions seek their own justification and that they distract the
imagination and then the mind in such a way as to preserve their own emotion.
Those of an active and vivid imagination and those extremely sensitive and
liable to the impulse of the passions can see these things for themselves perfectly
well from their sensation of what takes place in them; and they even speak of
them in a way that is more pleasant and sometimes more instructive than do those
who have more reason than imagination. For it should not be thought that those
who best examine self-love and whose penetration into the inner recesses of the
human heart is deepest are always the most enlightened. Often this is only a sign
that they are livelier, more imaginative, and sometimes more malicious and
corrupt than others.
But as for those who without consulting their inner sensation employ only their
reason in seeking the nature of the passions as well as their possible l'onsequences. if they arc not always as penetrating as other people, they are always

398

Nicolas Malebranche

more rational and less liable to error, for these people judge things as they are in
themselves. They see roughly what men in passion are capable of doing, depending on how much they are moved by passion, and they do not rashly judge what
others will do or fail to do in certain instances by what they themselves would do,
for they know that not all men are equally sensitive to the same objects or equally
susceptible to involuntary emotions. Thus, not by consulting the sensations excited in us by the passions, but by consulting reason must we describe the
judgments accompanying the passions, lest we make ourselves rather than the
general nature of the passions known.

BOOK FIVE
Chapter Eleven

That all the passions seek their own justification; the judgments they cause us to
make to justify them.
No elaborate argument is needed to demonstrate that all the passions seek their
own justification. This principle is clear enough from the inner sensation we have
of ourselves and from the conduct of those whom we see moved by some
passion-all we need to do is present the principle so that it may be reflected on.
The mind is so enslaved to the imagination that it never f&ils to obey an excited
imagination. It does not dare question an impassioned imagination because its
resistance is met with ill treatment and because it is always rewarded with
pleasure when it gives way to the imagination. Even those whose imagination is
so disordered that they think they have been transformed into beasts find reasons
to prove that they ought to live as beasts, that they ought to walk on all fours,
feed on grass, and imitate animal behavior. They find pleasure in living according to the impressions of their passion and feel inwardly punished when they
resist them. This is enough to make reason, which is ordinarily the instrument of
pleasure, function in such a way as to defend the cause of it.
If it is true, then, that the passions do seek their own justification, then clearly
desire must of itself lead us to judge well of its object if it is an attractive desire,
or to judge ill of it if it is an averse desire. Attractive desire is an impulse of the
soul excited by the spirits, which disposes the soul toward willing to possess or
use things not under its power, for we desire to maintain our possession of
something only because the future is not under our power. The justification of
desire, therefore, requires that the object inspiring it be judged good either in
itself or in relation to some other good we love, and the opposite must be thought
of that desire which is a kind of aversion.
It is true that there must be some basis for our judgment of something as good
or evil, but every object of our passions is good in a sense. If some of them might
be said to contain nothing good and consequently to be incapable of being
perceived as good by the mind, still they cannot be said to be incapable of being
enjoyed as good, on the assumption that they move us, and this sensation is only
too sufficient to lead the soul to judge well of an object.

399

400

Nicolas Malebranche

If we easily judge that fire contains in itself the heat we feel, and bread the
flavor we taste, due to the sensation these bodies excite in us-although this is
utterly incomprehensible to the mind, which cannot conceive how heat and flavor
should be corporeal modes-there is no object of our passions, no matter how
vile or despicable it might appear, that we shall fail to judge as good when we
feel pleasure in its possession. For as we imagine that heat is emitted by fire, so
we blindly believe that the objects of our passions cause the pleasure we enjoy
when we possess them and that thus they are good, since they are capable of
producing good for us. The same should be said of the passions that have evil as
their object.
But as I have just said, everything is worthy either of love or aversion, either in
itself or through something to which it is related; and when we are moved by
some passion, we quickly discover in its object the good or evil that nourishes it.
Thus, reason easily shows which judgments might be those that our present
passions form in us.
For if we are moved by an attractive desire, clearly it will not fail to justify
itself through the favorable judgments it forms of its object. You will easily see
that these judgments will vary to the extent that the desire is violent, and that
often they will be final and absolute although only a very small part of the thing
appears good. You will have no difficulty in understanding how these favorable
judgments extend to all things that have, or that appear to have, some connection
with the main object of the passion in proportion to the strength of the passion
and the scope of the imagination. But ifthe desire is averse, just the opposite will
happen, for reasons that are equally easy to understand. Experience affords a
sufficient demonstration of these things, and in this it is in perfect agreement with
reason. But let us illustrate these truths with several examples.
All men naturally desire to know, for all minds are created for the truth; but the
desire to know, as perfectly correct and rational as it is in itself, often becomes a
very dangerous vice through the false judgments that accompany it. Curiosity
often tempts the mind with vain objects for its meditations and often attaches to
these ideas false ideas of greatness; it enhances them with the deceptive luster of
rarity and represents them so attractively that we have difficulty contemplating
them without excessive pleasure and attachment.
Some people are taken by almost every trifle, and their occupation is always
justified by the false judgments their vain curiosity leads them to make. For
example, those who are very interested in words imagine that all the sciences are
bound up in the knowledge of certain terms. They find a thousand reasons to be
convinced of this, and the respect paid them by those confused by an unknown
term is in no way the least significant though it is the least reasonable of them.
There are certain people who spend their whole lives learning to speak but who
perhaps ought to spend their whole lives in silence, for clearly we ought to be
quiet when we have nothing worthwhile to say; but they. of course, do not learn
to speak only to remain quiet. They do not know enough to know that in order to
speak well one must think well, i.e., one must perfect the mind and one must
distinguish the true from the false, clear ideas fn1m obscure ones, and what

The Search after Truth

401

springs from the mind from what comes from the imagination. They fancy
themselves rare wits because they can please the ear with a pleasant harmony,
flatter the passions by pleasant gestures, entertain the imagination with expressive phrases, although they leave the mind devoid of ideas and without enlightenment or understanding.
There is some reason, it would seem, to spend one's whole life studying one's
language since we use it all our life, and this might justify certain people's
passion. But my view is that it is difficult to justify with any plausibility the
passion of those who devote themselves to all sorts of languages. We might
excuse the passion of those who build an entire library of all kinds of dictionaries
as well as the curiosity of those who collect coins from all countries and periods;
in certain instances that sort of thing might be useful to them, and if it does not do
them a great deal of good, at least it does not do them any harm. This storehouse
of curiosities of theirs does not encumber them, for they do not carry their books
or their medallions around with them. But how can we justify the passion of
those who tum their head into a library of dictionaries. They lose track of their
affairs and essential duties for the sake of useless words. They speak their own
language only haltingly. Their conversation is constantly mixed with unknown or
barbarous terms, and they never pay honest folk with the proper currency. In
short, their reason functions no better than their tongue, for all the nooks and
crannies of their memory are so full of word derivations that their mind is stifled,
as it were, by the flurry of words constantly flying about it.
Still the strange desire of these philologists must seek its own justification. But
how? Listen to the judgements of these falsely learned about languages and you
will see. Or assume certain of the axioms that they take to be incontestable and
draw whatever consequences you can from them. Assume, for example, that men
who speak several languages are as many different men as the languages they
speak, since it is speech that distinguishes them from beasts. Or assume that
since ancient philosophers and foreigners are more learned than we, our ignorance of languages is the cause of our ignorance in an infinity of things. Assume
these and other such premises, draw your conclusions, and you will form the
judgments that inspire passion for languages, and that consequently are like those
that the same passion forms in philologists in an attempt to justify their studies.
Even the basest and most contemptible sciences have something about them that
lights the imagination and easily dazzles the mind through the effulgence of the
passion attached to it. True, this effulgence diminishes when the spirits in the
blood cool and the light of truth begins to dawn, but this light also begins to
disappear when the imagination is rekindled and we can no longer clearly make
out the reasons for suppressing our passion.
Furthermore, when the passion animating us feels itself dying out, it does not
repent of its behavior. Rather, it might be said to dispose all things either to die
with honor or to be revived soon after. i.e .. it always disposes the mind to form
judgments that justify it. While still in this state it forms a kind of alliance with
all the other passions that might come to its rescue, provide it with spirits and
blood. rekindle its ashes. and give it a new birth. For the pa.~sions are in no way

402

Nicolas Malebranche

indifferent to one another. All those that can exist together faithfully contribute to
each other's preservation. Thus, the judgments that justify one's thirst for languages, or for whatever else you may wish, are always cared for and reinforced
by all the passions that are not contrary to this desire.
The man of false learning imagines himself at one moment as surrounded by
respectful listeners, at the next as having conquered those whom he has overwhelmed with incomprehensible words, and almost always as superior to the
common man. He is flattered by their praises and attention. He thinks himself a
man for all times and places; he does not restrict himself like lesser minds to the
present time and to his own city but, much to his own pleasure, he devours all.
How many passions are mixed with this passion for false learning, and how they
all strive to justify it and warmly solicit judgments in its favor!
If each passion acted only in its own behalf without caring about any others,
they would all disappear soon after their birth. They could not form enough false
judgments in order to subsist, nor could they long support the imagination against
the light of reason. But everything about the passions is arranged in the most
appropriate way possible for their mutual preservation. They strengthen one
another, and even the most remote are of help; and they need only fall short of
being open enemies to cooperate in following the rules of a well-ordered Society.
If the passion of desire stood alone, all its judgments would only tend to
represent the good as attainable, for attractive desire as such is produced only
through the judgment that some good is attainable. Thus, this desire can form
judgments only about attainability, since judgments following and preserving the
passion are exactly like those preceding and causing them. But desire is animated
by love, strengthened by hope, increased by joy, renewed by dread, accompanied by courage, envy, anger, and several other passions that in tum form an
infinite variety of judgments that succeed one another and sustain the desire
giving birth to them. We should not be surprised, therefore, ifthe desire for some
utter trifle or for something that is clearly useless or harmful to us constantly
attempts to justify itself against reason for years or even for the entire life of a
man moved by it, since there are so many passions working for its justification.
Here in a few words is how the passions seek this justification, for these things
must be explained with clear ideas.
Every passion agitates both the blood and the spirits. These agitated spirits are
conducted into the brain by the sensible perception of the object or by the force of
the imagination in such a way as to form deep traces representing this object.
They bend and sometimes even break the brain's fibers because of their tempestuous flow. leaving the imagination tarnished and corrupt for some time; for
injuries to the brain are not easily healed nor are its traces smoothed over.
because the flow of the spirits there is continuous. The brain's traces do not obey
the soul nor are they eradicated at its command: rather, they resist it and even
force it to consider objects in such a way a~ to agitate and disturb it on behalf of
the passions. The passions. then. act on the imagination. and the imagination
thus corrupted combats reason by continually representing things to it not as they
arc in themselves. so that the mind might issue a true judgment, but as they are in

The Search after Truth

403

relation to the present passion, so that the mind might be led into a favorable
judgment of it.
The passions corrupt not only the imagination and the mind in their favor, but
they also produce in the rest of the body all the dispositions necessary for their
preservation. The spirits they agitate do not stop in the brain but continue, as I
have said elsewhere, into all the other parts of the body. They are distributed
mainly in the heart, the liver, the spleen, and the nerves surrounding the main
arteries. Finally, they pour into whatever parts can supply the spirits necessary
for the preservation of the dominant passion. But as these spirits spread out into
all the parts ofthe body, they gradually destroy everything capable of withstanding their flow. They thereby construct such a smooth and rapid path that the
slightest object agitates us infinitely and, as a result, leads us to form judgments
favorable to the passions. In this way they establish and justify themselves.
If you consider the construction of the brain's fibers as well as the agitation
and amount of spirits and blood in the different sexes and ages, you will not have
much difficulty in seeing roughly what passions certain people are liable to and,
as a result, what judgments they form of objects. To give an example of this, I
might point out that from the amount of spirits noted in different people we can
roughly determine that if the same thing be similarly proposed and explained to
them, several will form judgments of hope and joy concerning it, whereas others
will form judgments of dread and sadness.
For since those who have a greater amount of blood and spirits-generally
young people, as well as those who are either sanguine or choleric-are generally optimistic due to the secret sensation they have of their strength, which is
actually a matter of their abundance of animal spirits, they think they will
encounter no opposition to their intentions that they will be unable to overcome.
They first draw strength from the foretaste of the good they hope to possess, and
they form all sorts of judgments in justification of their hope and joy. But since
those who have a paucity of agitated spirits, such as old folk, the melancholic,
and the phlegmatic, are given to dread and sadness, (because their soul feels
weak due to the lack of spirits to carry out its commands) they form just the
opposite judgments. They imagine insurmountable difficulties to justify their
dread, and they give way to envy, sadness, despair, and to those kinds of
aversion to which the weak are most susceptible.

BOOK FIVE
Chapter Twelve

That the passions that have evil as their object are the most dangerous and
wrong, and that those that are least accompanied by knowledge are the most
~·il'id and sensible.
Of all the passions, the various kinds of aversion are those whose judgments are
furthest from re~tson and most to be feared. No passion corrupts reason more in
its favor than hatred and dread, and especially hatred in the choleric or in those
whose spirits are in a constant state of agitation, and dread in the melancholic or
in those whose gross and dense spirits are neither agitated nor quieted very
easily. But when hatred and dread conspire to corrupt reason, as they often do,
we cannot form a judgment so wrong or so strange that we would not defend it
with insurmountable obstinacy.
The reason for this is that the evils in this life affect the soul more than do its
goods. The sensation of pain is more vivid than the sensation of pleasure; injuries
and insults are felt much more than praise and acclaim; and though you might
find people who are indifferent as to whether they enjoy certain pleasures or
receive certain honors, you will have difficulty finding people who suffer pain
and scorn in tranquility.
Thus, hatred, dread, and other kinds of aversion that have evil as their object,
are very violent passions. They give the mind unexpected shocks, dazing it and
disturbing it; they quickly penetrate to the soul's innermost recesses, and, overthrowing reason, they issue erroneous and iniquitous judgments on all sorts of
subjects in order to further their own folly and tyranny.
Of all the passions, these are the cruelest and the most suspect, the most
opposed to charity and civil society, and at the same time the most ridiculous and
most extravagant, for they form such absurd and incongruous judgments that
they provoke the indignant laughter of everyone.
These are the passions that animated the wild utterances of the Pharisees.
·'What are we to do? This man has worked many miracles. If we Jet him
continue, everyone will believe in him. The Romans will come and destroy our
city and nation."" They all finally agreed that Jesus Christ worked many
"John 11:47 [ -4!1).

404

The Search after Truth

405

miracles-the raising of Lazarus was beyond question. Yet what was the judgment of their passions? To kill Jesus Christ and even Lazarus, whom He had
raised from the dead. And they killed Jesus Christ because "if we let Him
continue, everyone will believe in Him, the Romans will come and destroy our
city and nation." And why wish to kill Lazarus? "Because many Jews were
leaving them to follow Jesus on account of him. ••a Judgments at once both cruel
and extravagant-cruel through hatred and extravagant through fear: "the Romans will come and destroy our city and nation."
These same passions made them speak as follows in front of Annas, the high
priest, Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and the rest of the priestly class: ''What shall
we do to these people, for they have performed a miracle which is known to the
whole city and which we cannot deny. But to prevent it from spreading further
among the people, let us threaten to punish them if they continue to teach in the
name of Jesus. "b
All these great men issued judgments that were at once both wrong and absurd
because they were moved by passion and blinded by their false zeal. They did not
dare punish the Apostles because of the people and because the man who had
been miraculously healed was over forty years old and was present in the assembly; but they threatened them to prevent them from teaching in the name of Jesus.
They believed that they could condemn a teaching by killing its author. "You
will try," they said to the Apostles, "to have this man's blood upon us· "•
When false zeal joins with hatred, it conceals hatred from the reproaches of
reason and justifies it in such a way that we even feel scruples about not following its impulses. And when ignorance and weakness accompany dread, they
extend dread to an infinity of subjects and so increase its emotions that reason is
alarmed and troubled by the least suspicion.
Those moved by false zeal believe they are serving God when they obey their
passions. They blindly follow the secret urges of their hatred as if inwardly
inspired by the truth. Since they gleefully accept justifications of their excessive
conduct on the basis of sensation, they are confirmed in their errors with an
insurmountable obstinancy.
As for weak and ignorant minds, they are subject to ridiculous and imaginary
fears. They are like children walking alone in the dark without a candle; they
imagine horrible demons and are troubled and cry out as though all were lost.
Illumination might help the ignorant, but as for weak minds, their imagination
will always remain in its infirm state. The least thing related to what frightened
them renews the traces and the flow of spirits that cause the symptoms of their
fear, so that it is absolutely impossible to cure them or to quiet them for very
long.
But when false zeal combines with hatred and dread in a weak mind, it
produces in this mind a stream of judgments of unthinkably horrible violence and
injustice. To help a mind possessed by these passions requires a miracle greater
•John 12:11.
"Acts 4 (16-17].
'"Acts S [28).

406

Nicolas Malebranche

than the conversion of Saint Paul, and, in fact, would be absolutely impossible
unless the power and mercy of God were limitless.
Those walking in darkness rejoice at the sight of light, but someone possessed
by these passions cannot endure it. Light hurts him because it resists his passion.
Since his dread is to a certain extent voluntary because his hatred produces it, he
enjoys being struck by it because we enjoy being moved even by those passions
that have evil as their object, provided that the evil is imaginary or, rather,
provided that we know, as in plays, that the evil cannot hurt us.
The phantoms imagined by those walking in darkness vanish at the approach
of a candle; but the other's phantoms do not disappear in the light of truth. Only
with difficulty does the truth pierce the shadows of his mind, and it does nothing
but irritate his imagination. As a result of this, since he concentrates solely on the
object of his passion, the light is reflected, and these phantoms seem to have a
real body because they reflect a few weak rays of the light striking them.
But even if we were to suppose these minds to be docile and reflective enough
to listen to and understand arguments that might clear up their errors, no matter
how well founded these arguments might be in themselves they would not be able
to halt the impetuous impulse of these passions for very long, or to prevent them
from soon justifying themselves through very persuasive and sensible proofs,
because their imagination is disordered by dread and their heart corrupted by
hatred and false zeal.
It should be noted that some passions appear but once, and that there are other
persistent ones that subsist for a long while. Those do not last that are not
sustained by the mind's perception or by some plausible reason, but that are only
produced and strengthened by the sensible perception of some object and the
fermentation of the blood; they generally die immediately after their birth. But
those accompanied by the mind's perception are constant; for the principle that
produces them is not liable to change as are the blood and humors. As a result,
hatred, dread, and all the other passions that are excited or preserved in us by the
mind's knowledge, and not by the sensible perception of some evil, must subsist
for a long while. These passions, therefore, are the most lasting, the most violent
and the most unjust. But they are not the most vivid and the most sensible, as we
shall soon show.
The perception of good and evil that excites the passions occurs in three ways:
through the senses, through the imagination, and through the mind. The perception of good and evil through the senses, or the sensation of good and evil,
produces very quick and sensible passions. The perception of good and evil
through the imagination alone excites much weaker passions. The perception of
good and evil through the mind alone produces real passions only to the extent
that the mind's perception of good and evil is always accompanied by some
motion in the animal spirits.
The passions were given to us only for the good of the body and to unite us
through the body to all sensible objects. for although sensible things can be
neither good nor evil with regard to the mind. they arc nevertheless good or evil
in relation to the body to which the mind is joined. Thus. since the senses and

The Search after Truth

407

imagination are much better than the mind alone at revealing the relations that
sensible objects have with the body, these faculties excite much livelier passions
than does clear and certain knowledge or awareness. But because our awarenesses are always accompanied by some motion in the spirits, a clear and evident
awareness of some great good or evil that the senses have not discovered always
excites some secret passion.
Nevertheless, not all our clear and evident knowledge of good or evil is
followed by some sensible passion that we are aware of, just as not air our
passions are accompanied by some awareness on the mind's part. For although
we sometimes think about goods or evils without feeling moved, we often feel
moved by some passion without knowing it and sometimes even without feeling
its cause. A man who inhales a healthy draught of air feels moved by joy without
knowing the cause of it; he does not know the good he possesses that produces
this joy. And if there is some invisible body mixed in with his blood and
preventing its fermentation, he will feel sad and might even attribute the cause of
his sadness to some object visible before him while he experiences this passion.
Of all the passions none is quicker or more sensible and, as a result, less
accompanied by the mind's awareness than are horror and antipathy, approval
and sympathy. If a fly annoys him or a leaf tickles him, a man sleeping in the
shade often awakens with a start as if a snake were biting him. The confused
sensation of something as terrible as death itself frightens him, and without so
much as a thought he is moved by a very strong, violent passion, i.e., by
desiderative aversion. A man in want, on the other hand, by chance discovers
some small good whose delight surprises him; he attaches himself to this trifle as
if to the greatest of all goods without the least reflection. This also happens with
impulses of sympathy and antipathy. We see someone in a group whose appearance and behavior have secret alliances with the present disposition of our body;
the sight of this person affects and penetrates us. We are led unreflectingly to
love him, and we wish him well. Here an 1-know-not-what moves us, for reason
has no role in it. Just the opposite happens with regard to those whose appearance
and behavior spread, as it were, disgust and horror. There is something insipid
about them, I know not what, that repels and horrifies; but the mind knows
nothing of it, for only the senses judge competently of sensible beauty and
ugliness, which are the objects of these sorts of passions.

BOOK SIX: METHOD
PART ONE
Chapter One

The plan of this book. The two general ways ofpresen•ing evidence in the search
after truth, which will be the main topic of this book.
We have seen in the preceding books that the mind of man is extremely liable to
enor, that the illusions of his senses,• the visions of his imagination,b and the
abstractions of his mind0 all continually deceive him; we have seen that the
inclinationsd of his will and the passions of his hearte almost always conceal the
truth from him and actually let it filter through to him only when tinged by the
false colors that flatter concupiscence. In short, we have seen some of the mind's
enors as well as their causes. Now is the time to indicate the paths leading to
knowledge of the truth and to equip the mind with as much strength and skill as
we can, so that it might follow these paths without straying or needlessly tiring.
But to spare the reader from wasted effort, I feel that I must warn that this book
is intended only for those genuinely willing to seek the truth by themselves and to
use the proper capacities of their mind to do so. I ask that they temporarily reject
all probable opinions; that they ignore even the strongest of conjectures as well as
the authority of all philosophers; that they free themselves as much as possible
from any cares, special interest, or passion; that they place no trust in their senses
and imagination-in a word, that they bear in mind most of what was said in the
preceding books.
The aim of this final book is to render the mind as perfect as it can naturally be,
by supplying the help necessary to extend its scope and make it more attentive
and by laying down the rules that it must observe in the search after truth in order
never to err, while in time learning all that it possibly can.
Were I to fulfill this aim perfectly, which I do not pretend to do since this is but
an attempt thereat, I could be said to have produced a universal science; and
"Bk.
"Bk
'Bk.
"Bk.
•Bk.

I
2.
3.

4.
5.

The Search after Truth

409

those able to use it would be truly called learned, since they would have the
foundation of all the particular sciences, which they would then acquire to the
extent to which they used this universal science. For in this treatise I have tried to
enable the mind to form true and certain judgments on all questions suited to it.
As memorizing all the demonstrations of Euclid, Pappus, Archimedes, Apollonius, and all those who have written on the subject is not enough to make one a
good geometer, so it is not enough to be a learned philosopher to have read Plato,
Aristotle, and Descartes, and to have memorized their views on philosophical
questions. The knowledge of all the views and judgments of other men, be they
philosophers or geometers, is not so much a science as a history; for the true
science that alone can render the human mind as perfect as it now can be consists
in a capacity for judging on a firm foundation all things within its scope. But in
order not to waste time or burden anybody with hasty judgments, let us begin our
treatment of this very important matter.
First and foremost, the rule we established and proved at the outset of the first
book must be remembered, for it is the foundation and first principle of everything we said thereafter. To repeat that rule: We must give full consent only to
those propositions that appear so evidently true that we cannot withhold our
consent without feeling inner pain and the secret reproaches of reason, i.e.,
without our knowing clearly that we would make ill use of our freedom were we
to withhold our consent. Each time we give our consent to probabilities, we
clearly run the risk of being deceived; and, in fact, we are deceived almost every
time, or, if we are not deceived, it is only through good fortune. Thus, the
confused perception of a great number of probabilities on a number of different
subjects in no way makes our reason more perfect, and only the clear perception
of truth can give it any real satisfaction or perfection.
Since, according to our first rule, only evidence assures us that we are not
being deceived, it is easy to conclude that we must above all take care to preserve
this evidence in all our perceptions, so that we might form well-founded judgments in everything given to our reason and discover all the truths we can.
There ate two sorts of things that can produce and preserve this evidence. The
first sort is in us, or to a certain extent depends on us; the second is completely
independent of us. For just as in order to see visible objects distinctly we must
have good vision and actually look at the objects, two things that are in us or that
depend to some extent on us, so we must have a good mind and apply it well to
reach the bottom of intelligible truths, two things that are also in us or that
depend on us to some extent.
But as the eyes need light to see and as this light depends on external causes.
so the mind needs ideas in order to understand; and these ideas, as we have
proved elsewhere, do not depend on us but on an external cause that. nonetheless, provides us with them as a result of our attention. If it should happen. then.
that these ideas were not present to our mind each time we wished to have them.
or if He who illuminates the world willed to conceal them from us, there would
be nothing we could do about it and we would know nothing-just as we cannot
sec visible objects when there is no light. But we have no cause for fear. for since

410

Nicolas Malebranche

the presence of ideas to our mind is natural and depends on the general will of
God, which is always firm and immutable, we shall always have ideas to
discover things that are naturally subjects for reason. For the Sun that illuminates
minds is not like the sun that illuminates bodies; it is never eclipsed, and it
penetrates everything without losing its strength.
Since, then, the ideas of all things are continually present to us while we are
not attentively considering them, all we have to do to preserve evidence in all our
perceptions is to look for ways to make our mind more attentive and to extend its
scope, just as to clearly distinguish visible objects in our vicinity all we need is
good vision and the proper attention.
But because the objects we are considering often have more relations than we
can discover with a single perception on the part of the mind, we also need rules
which enable us to unravel every difficulty so well that with this help the mind
will be more attentive and of greater scope, and we shall be able to discover with
complete evidence all the relations of the things we examine.
We shall, therefore, divide this sixth book into two parts. In the first we shall
discuss the aids of which the mind might avail itself in order to become more
attentive and to extend its scope, and in the second we shall give the rules that
must be followed in seeking truths in order to form well-founded judgments
without fear of error.

BOOK SIX: PART ONE
Chapter Two

t

That attention is needed to preserve evidence in our knowledge. That the soul's
sensible modifications make it attentive, but take too great a share of its capacity
for perceiving.
Right at the outset of this work we showed that the understanding does nothing
but perceive, and that as far as it is concerned, there is no difference between
simple perceptions, judgments, and inferences-unless it is that judgments and
inferences are much more complex than simple perceptions because they represent not only things but even the relations that things have among themselves.
For simple perceptions represent to the mind only things; but judgments represent
to the mind the relations between things, and inferences represent the relations
between relations of things if they are simple inferences, or the relations of
relations, or the complex relations between the relations of things, ad infinitum,
if they are complex inferences. To the extent that these relations are multiplied,
the inferences representing them to the mind become more complex. Nevertheless, judgments and inferences, both simple and complex, are but pure perceptions on the part of the understanding, because all the understanding does is
perceive, as we have already said right at the outset of the first book.
Since judgments and inferences are but pure perceptions as far as the understanding is concerned, it is clear that the understanding never falls into error,
since error is not found in perception and is not even intelligible. For in the final
analysis, error or falsehood is but a relation that does not exist, and what does not
exist is neither perceptible nor intelligible. We can perceive that two times two is
four, or that two times two is not five, because there is actually a relation of
equality between two times two and four, and a relation of inequality between
two times two and five; and so truth is intelligible. But we shall never perceive
that two times two is five, for here there is no relation of equality, and what does
not exist cannot be perceived. As we have already said several times, error
consists only in hasty consent of the will, which allows itself to be dazzled by
some false light and which, instead of preserving its freedom as much as it can,
carelessly relies on the appearance of truth.
Yet, because it often happens that the understanding has only confused and
411

BOOK SIX: PART ONE
Chapter Three

The use that can be made of the passions and the senses for preserving the mind's
attention.

The passions that can be used in moving us toward the search after truth are those
that strengthen and encourage us to overcome the difficulty we find in making
ourselves attentive. There are good passions and bad passions; there are good
ones such as the desire to find truth, to be sufficiently enlightened so as to behave
properly, to be helpful to one's neighbor, and so on; and there are evil or
dangerous passions such as the desire for fame, for gaining a certain status, for
rising above one's neighbors, and others even more inordinate that we need not
mention.
In our unhappy state, it often happens that the least rational passions encourage
us more to seek the truth and offer greater consolation in the difficulties involved
therein than the more proper and more rational passions. Vanity, for example,
agitates us a great deal more than love for truth, and we daily see people
constantly studying when they know there are others to whom they can relate
what they have learned, but who give up their studies altogether when there is no
one to listen to them. The confused perception of the glory they will receive
when they announce their views sustains their courage even during the driest and
most uninteresting studies. But if, through circumstances dictated either by
chance or by the necessities of life, they find themselves separated from their
little flock of admirers, their ardor immediately cools; even the most worthwhile
studies no longer have any attraction for them; disgust, boredom, and vexation
overtake them, and they give up everything. Vanity triumphs over their natural
sloth, but sloth, in tum, triumphs over their love for truth: for vanity sometimes
stands up against sloth, but sloth is nearly always victorious over love of truth.
Yet, given that the passion for glory can be directed toward a good end (since
it can be used for the glory of God as well as for the benefit of others and our own
reputation). this passion might perhaps be used by certain people in certain
instances as an aid to making their mind more attentive. But care must be taken to
make usc of it only when the rational passions of which we have just spoken are
not enough, and when we are obliged by duty to apply ourselves to distasteful
414

The Search after Truth

415

topics. First, because this passion is very dangerous to the conscience; second,
because it imperceptibly involves us in evil studies that have more glamour than
usefulness and truth; and finally, because it is very difficult to control, because
we are often made fools by it, and because though we think we are enlightening
our mind, we are perhaps only strengthening the concupiscence of pride, which
not only corrupts the heart but also plunges the mind into such darkness as is
morally impossible to illumine.
For you must realize that this passion is insensibly rooted, strengthened, and
increased in the heart of man, and that when it is too violent, instead of helping
the mind to pursue the truth, it greatly blinds it and even makes it believe that
things are as it wishes them to be.
Undoubtedly there would not be so many false inventions and imaginary
discoveries if men did not let themselves be overcome by their ardent desire to
look like innovators. For the obstinate and steadfast belief on the part of several
people that they have found, for example, perpetual motion, the way to square
the circle and to duplicate the cube by ordinary geometry, is probably due to their
great desire to seem to have done what others have failed to do.
It is more fitting, then, to be moved by those passions that are as useful in the
search after truth as they are strong, and whose excess is less to be feared, such as
the desire to use the mind well and to be delivered from prejudice and error, to be
sufficiently enlightened to act properly in our present state, and other such
passions that do not involve us in worthless studies or lead us into hasty judgments.
When we have begun to experience the pleasure found in using the mind,
when we have seen the utility to be derived from it, and when we have freed
ourselves from the greater passions and have become disgusted by the sensible
pleasures that, when we indiscriminately give in to the passions, invariably
dominate, or rather, tyrannize reason, we then need no passions other than those
of which we have just spoken in order to rouse our attentiveness for subjects on
which we wish to meditate.
But most men are not in this state; they have neither the taste, nor intelligence,
nor fastidiousness for anything but what affects the senses. Their imagination is
corrupted by an almost infinite number of deep traces. which arouse only false
ideas, for they depend on everything falling under the senses and imagination,
and always judge them according to the impression they receive from them, i.e.,
in relation to themselves. Pride, debauchery, plots, driving desire to make
money, all so common among men of the world, obscure their perception of truth
as well as stifle their sense of piety, because they separate them from God, who
alone can enlighten us and govern us. For we cannot increase our union with
sensible things without diminishing our union with intelligible truths, since we
cannot at the same time be closely joined to such different and contrary things.
Those of pure and chaste imagination, i.e .. those whose brain is not occupied
by deep traces belonging to visible things. can easily unite themselves to God and
make themselves attentive to the truth that speaks to them; they can forgo the
assistance drawn from the passions. But those who are in the world at large, who

412

Nicolas Ma/ebranche

imperfect perceptions of things, it is truly a cause of our errors that might be
called occasional or indirect. For just as physical perception often casts us into
error because it represents external objects in a confused and imperfect way (in a
confused way when the objects are too far away from us or poorly lighted, and in
an imperfect way because it represents to us only their sides facing us), so the
understanding, which often has only a confused and imperfect perception of
things because they are not sufficiently present to it and because it fails to
discover all their parts, causes the will to fall into a great number of errors by
yielding too easily to these obscure and imperfect perceptions.
It is therefore necessary to look for means to keep our perceptions from being
confused and imperfect. And because, as everyone knows, there is nothing that
makes them clearer and more distinct than attentiveness, we must try to find the
means to become more attentive than we are. In this way we shall preserve
evidence in our inferences and see at a glance a necessary connection between all
the parts of our longest deductions.
In order to find these means, we must be thoroughly convinced of what we
have said elsewhere, that the mind does not pay equal attention to everything it
perceives. For it applies itself infinitely more to those things that affect it, that
modify it, and that penetrate it, than to those that are present to it but that do not
affect it and do not belong to it. In a word, it is much more occupied with its own
modifications than with simple ideas of objects, which ideas are something other
than itself.
This is why we consider the abstract ideas of pure understanding only with
distaste and without a great deal of application, and why we apply ourselves
much more to objects of imagination, especially if our imagination is lively and
forms deep traces in our brain. Finally, this is also why we are entirely occupied
with sensible qualities, without even being able to attend to the pure ideas of the
mind, when we sense something that is very pleasant or very painful. For since
pain, pleasure and the other sensations are only modes of the mind, we cannot
fail to perceive them, nor can our mind's capacity fail to be filled by them, since
all our sensations are nothing but perceptions.
But this is not true of the mind's pure ideas; we can have them intimately
joined to our mind without paying them the least bit of attention. For although
God is very closely joined to us, and although the ideas of everything we see are
found in Him, yet these ideas, although right in our midst, are hidden from us
when the motion of the spirits does not arouse traces or when our will does not
apply our mind to them, i.e., when it does not bring about the acts to which the
Author of nature has attached the representation of these ideas. These things are
the basis for all of what we are going to say concerning the assistance that can be
given to make the mind more attentive. This assistance will thus be based on the
very nature of the mind, and there is some reason to hope that it will not be
useless or chimerical, like many other such aids that are more of a hindrance than
a help. But though it might not be as helpful a.'i we might wish, you will not
completely waste your time in reading what I shall say of this a'isistance, since it
will at least provide you with a better understanding of your own mind.

The Search after Truth

413

The soul's modifications have three causes: the senses, the imagination, and
the passions. Everyone knows from his own experience that instances of pleasure
and pain and generally all the sensations of a rather strong nature, lively imaginings, and the stronger passions, so occupy the mind that it is incapable of
attentiveness while these things are affecting it because its capacity or faculty of
perceiving is then entirely exhausted by them. But even if these modifications
were moderate, they would still divide the mind's capacity to some extent, as a
result of which the mind would be unable to give itself entirely to the consideration of truths at all abstract.
We must therefore draw this important conclusion: that all those who seriously
wish to apply themselves to the search after truth must be careful to avoid as best
they can all sensations that are too strong, such as loud noise, strong light,
pleasure, pain, and so on; they must continuously guard the purity of their
imagination and prevent deep traces, which continually disturb and dissipate the
mind, from being formed in their brain. Finally, they must above all halt the
impulses of the passions that form impressions in the body and soul so powerful
that it is ordinarily next to impossible for the mind to think about anything but the
objects exciting these impulses. For though the pure ideas of truth are always
present to us, we are unable to consider them when our capacity for thought is
filled by these modifications that so affect us.
Nonetheless, as the soul cannot be without passions, sensation, or some other
particular modification, we must make a virtue of necessity and draw even from
these modifications assistance in making ourselves more attentive. But much
skill and care is required in the use of these aids if they are to be of any help. Our
need for them must be carefully examined, and we must use them only to the
extent to which we are forced to do so by the necessity for becoming more
attentive.

416

Nicolas Malebranche

are involved in so many things, and whose imagination is tarnished by the false
and obscure ideas that sensible objects excite in them-they cannot apply themselves to the truth unless they are sustained by some passion strong enough to
counterbalance the influence of the body and to form traces in their brain capable
of causing revulsion in the animal spirits. But since the passions by themselves
can only confuse ideas, they must not be used unless urgently required, and all
men must study themselves in order to adjust their passions proportionately to
their weaknesses.
There is no difficulty in finding the means to excite in ourselves whatever
passions we wish. The information we have supplied in preceding books concerning the union of soul and body is a sufficient basis for this; for in a word, it is
enough to think attentively about the objects that according to nature's institution
are capable of exciting the passions. Thus, we can almost always generate in our
heart the passions we need. But though we can almost always generate them, we
cannot always extinguish them, nor remedy the disorders they have caused in the
imagination. We must use them, therefore, in great moderation.
Above all, care must be taken not to judge things by passion, but only by the
clear perception oftruth, which is almost impossible to do when the passions are
at all lively. Passion should be used only to awaken our attention; but it always
produces its own ideas, and it drives the will to judge things by these ideas that
affect it, rather than by the pure and abstract ideas of truth, which do not affect it.
As a result of this, we often form judgments that last only as long as passion
does, because the circulation of blood, and not the clear perception of immutable
truth, causes them to be formed.
True, men are extremely obstinate in their errors, and they hold to them most
of their lives. But this is because these errors often have causes other than the
passions, or else because they depend on certain long-lived passions that spring
from the construction of the body, self-interest, or some other enduring cause.
Self-interest, for example, which is always present, produces a passion that never
passes away, and the judgments that this passion causes to be formed last just as
long. But all of men's other sensations that depend on particular passions are as
unstable as the fermentation of their humors. Now they say one thing, then
another, and what they say often enough agrees with what they think. Since they
jump from one false good to another according to the impuse of their passion,
and again have their pleasure changed when the impluse ceases, they run from
one false system to another. They fervently embrace some false view as long as
passion makes it seem plausible; but they give it up immediately after the passion
is extinguished. Through the passions they experience all goods without finding
anything good, they see all truths without seeing anything true, though while
their passion lasts, what they experience and see seem to be the sovereign good
and the indisputable truth.
The second possible source of aid in making the mind attentive is the senses.
Sensations are the natural modifications of the soul and differ from the mind's
pure ideas; sensations awaken our attention much more quickly than pure ideas.
From this it is clear that the mind's lack of attention to truths that do not affect it
can he remedied hy expressing them by sensible things that do aftect it.

The Search after Truth

417

This is why geometers use sensible lines to express the proportions between
the magnitudes they wish to consider. In tracing these lines on paper, they trace,
so to speak, the ideas corresponding to them in their mind, and make them more
familiar by sensing them at the same time they conceive them. In this way we can
teach many rather difficult things to children, who are incapable of abstract truths
due to the delicacy of their brain's fibers. With their eyes they see only colors,
pictures, and images, but with their mind they consider the ideas corresponding
to these sensible objects.
Above all, care must be taken not to invest the objects we wish to consider or
to demonstrate to others with so much sensibility that the mind is more occupied
with it than with the truth itself, for this is one of the gravest as well as the most
common of mistakes. We see people every day who apply themselves only to
what affects the senses and who express themselves in a way so sensible that the
truth is, as it were, stifled under the weight of the vain ornamentation of their
false eloquence. Consequently, since those who listen to them are more affected
by the cadence of their speech and by their facial expressions than by the arguments they hear, they let themselves be persuaded without knowing why or even
of what they are persuaded.
Care must be taken, therefore, to moderate the sensibility of our expressions in
such a way as only to make the mind more attentive. Nothing is as beautiful as
the truth, and we must not pretend to be able to make it more beautiful by
painting it with sensible colors that are impermanent and have but passing charm.
We might give it a certain delicacy, but that would diminish its strength. It
should not be dressed in so much pomp and brilliance that the mind dwells more
on its embellishments than on it, for this would be to treat the truth like certain
people who are so laden with gold and precious stones that they appear the least
part of the whole they make up together with their accoutrements. The truth
should be clothed as the magistrates of Venice, who are obliged to wear an
utterly simple cap and gown that only distinguishes them from ordinary men, so
that men may look at their faces with attention and respect without dwelling on
their apparel. Finally, care must be taken not to surround the truth with too many
pleasant things, which dissipate the mind and prevent it from recognizing the
truth, lest we should give to anything else the honors that belong to it, as often
happens to princes who cannot be distinguished from the great number of court
people surrounding them and assuming the air of greatness and majesty that
belongs only to sovereigns.
But to give a better example, we must show the truth to others as the truth
showed itself. Because men's perception since the time of their first father's sin
has been too weak to consider the truth in itself, this sovereign truth has made
itself sensible by investing itself with our humanity in order to attract our attention, to enlighten us, and to make itself worthy of love to our eyes. Following
this example, we can invest the truths we wish to understand or teach to others
with a certain sensibility in order to catch the mind, which loves the sensible and
which is not easily taken with anything that does not flatter the senses. The
eternal wisdom made itself sensible, but it did so without pomp; it made itself
sensible not to entrench us in the sensible but to elevate us to the intelligible; it

418

Nicolas Malebranche

became sensible in order to condemn and sacrifice in its person all sensible
things. In our knowledge of the truth, therefore, we must avail ourselves of
something that is sensible but that is not too glamorous, and that does not root us
to the sensible but is capable only of sustaining our mind's perception in its
contemplation of purely intelligible truths. We must use something sensible that
we can disperse, annihilate, and sacrifice with pleasure upon perceiving the truth
toward which it will have led us. The eternal Wisdom has presented itself
externally and sensibly not to give us an external orientation, but rather to make
us withdraw into ourselves, so that we might consider it intelligibly according to
the inner man. In our search after truth, we must therefore employ something
sensible that does not keep us outside ourselves by its brilliance but makes us
withdraw into ourselves, that makes us more attentive and joins us to the
eternal truth, which alone presides over the mind and can enlighten it on any
subject.

BOOK SIX: PART ONE
Chapter Four

The imagination's use in preserving the mind's attention; the usefulness of
geometry.
We must be very careful in choosing and making use of the aids that can be
drawn from our senses and passions in order to make ourselves attentive to the
truth, because our passions and senses affect us too much and so occupy the
mind's capacity that it often sees only its own sensations when it thinks it is
discovering things in themselves. But the same is not true of the assistance that
can be drawn from our imagination. Here the mind is made more attentive
without a wasteful division of its capacity and is thus remarkably aided in clearly
and distinctly perceiving objects, with the result that it is almost always to our
advantage to avail ourselves of its help. Let us illustrate this, however, with a
few examples. <See figure, page 420.>
We are given (I) that a body is moved by two or more different causes, in two
or more different directions; (2) that these forces are equal or unequal; (3) that
they constantly increase or decrease at whatever known rate you like. We wish to
know (I) the path this body must take; (2) where it must be at a given moment;
(3) what its speed must be at a given point, and other such things.
1. From point A, which is assumed to be the point from which the body begins
to move, we must first draw the undefined lines AB and AC, which, if they
intersect, form the angle BAC; for AB and AC are straight, or form the same
straight line, and do not intersect when the motions they express are directly
opposite. In this way, we distinctly represent to the imagination, or, if you wish,
to the senses, the path this body would follow if it were moved by only one of
these forces toward C or B.
2. If the forces moving the body toward B and toward C are equal, we must
then disect AB and AC into I, 2, 3, 4 and I, II, lll, IV equally distant from A. If
the force moving it toward B is double that moving it toward C, the dissections of
AB are double those of AC. lfthis force is half, the dissections should be half as
great; and if three times greater or smaller, the dissections should be three times
greater or smaller. These dissections again express to the imagination the mag419

Nicolas Malebranche

420

B

T!T

rv

nitude ofthe different forces moving the body, as well as the distance they could
make it move.
3. Through these intersections we draw parallels to AB and to AC forming 1X,
2X, 3X, and so on, equal to AI, All, Alii, and so fonh, and I.X, II.X, lll.X,
equal to AI, A2, and A3, which express the distances these forces could make
the body move. And through the intersection of these parallels we draw the line
AXYE, which 8 (by assuming that these forces have been fully applied to the
body and that they are expressed as speeds] represents three things to the imagi•<The addenda of the sixth edition direct that the following bracketed material be inserted
here.- Trans.:·

The Search after Truth

421

nation: first, the true magnitude of the compound motion of this body, which is
conceived as moved toward both B and C by two different forces in a given
proportion; second, the path it must take; and finally, all the points at which it
must be at a given time. Consequently, this line serves not only to support the
mind's perception in pursuing all the truths that can be discovered about the
matter at hand, it also represents them in a perceptible and convincing fashion.
First, the line AXYE expresses the true magnitude of the compound motion.
For we visibly perceive that if each of the forces producing it can move the body
a foot a minute, its compound motion will be two feet a minute if the combining
motions are in exactly the same direction; for in this case we need only add AB to
AC because the forces of the combining motions are fully used in producing the
compound motion. If these motions are not in exactly the same direction. the
compound AE will be greater than either AB or AC by the magnitude YE. But if
these motions happen to form an angle CAB of 120 degrees, the compound
motion will be equal to each of them. Finally, if these motions are exactly
opposite, the compound motion will be zero because, with the force of the
combining motions being equal, they are counterbalanced.
Second, the line AXYE represents to the imagination the path the body will
take, and we visibly perceive to what extent it moves more in one direction than
the other. We also see that every compound motion is in a straight line when each
of the combining motions remains the same, even if the combining motions
should not be equal to one another, or else when combining motions remain
equal to one another even if they should not remain constant. Finally, it is clear
that the lines describing these motions are curved when the combining motions
are not equal to one another and do not remain constant.
Lastly, this line represents to the imagination all the points through which a
body moved by two different forces toward two different points must pass;
consequently, we can mark the exact point at which the body must be at whatever
instant we want. If we want to know, for example, where it is at the beginning of
the fourth minute, we need only dissect AB or AC into such parts as express the
distance each of the known forces alone could make the body move in one
minute, and then take three of these parts on one of the lines and draw through
the beginning of the fourth 3X parallel to AB or III. X parallel to AC. For it is
clear that point X marked off by one of these parallels on AXYE indicates the
point at which the body will be at the beginning of the fourth minute of its
motion. Thus, this way of examining questions not only sustains the mind's
perception, it even shows it their solutions and sufficiently illuminates it so that it
can discover many unknown things from very few things that are known.
For example, from what has been said, it is enough to know merely that a body
which was at A at a certain time is atE at another, and that the forces moving it
are at an angle such as BAC, in order to discover the direction of its compound
motion and the different speeds of the simple motions. provided that these
motions are known to be either equal to one another or constant. For when we
have two points of a straight line. we have the whole line. and we can compare
the straight line AE or the compound motion that is known, with the lines AB and
AC, i.e .• with the simple motions that are unknown.

422

Nicolas Malebranche

Let us suppose again that a stone is moved uniformly from A toward 8 but that
it falls toward a point C infinitely distant from A with an inconstant motion such
as that with which we generally believe heavy bodies to tend toward the center of
the earth, i.e., that the distances through which it passes stand to each other as
the squares of the time it takes to pass through them. In this case, the line it
describes will always be a parabola, and we shall be able to determine with utter
precision the point at which it will be at each moment of its motion.
For if in the first minute the body falls two feet from A toward C, six in the
second, ten in the third, fourteen in the fourth, and if its motion from A toward
8. a distance of sixteen feet, is uniform, it is clear that the line it describes will be
a parabola whose parameter is eight feet. For the square of the applicates (or
ordinates) to the diameter, which indicate the time and regular motion from A
toward 8, will be equal to the rectangle formed on the parameter by the lines
indicating the unequal and accelerated motions; and the squares of the applicates. i.e., the squares of the times, will stand to each other as do the parts of the
diameter between the pole and the applicates.

A '""""~-v--~-4=~~
~ ...,-;--jt...

c

G~---=-----------~

The Search after Truth

423

16 : 64 :: 2 : s
64: 144 :: S: lS, etc.

You need only look at the sixth figure to be convinced ofthis, for the semicircles show that A2 is to A4 (i.e. ,to the applicate 2X, which is equal to it) as 2X is
to AS; that AlS is to A 12 (i.e., to the applied line lSX) as lSX is to AS, and so
on; that therefore the rectangles A2-AS and AlS-A8 are equal to the squares on
2X, 18X and so on, and that consequently the squares stand to each other in the
same proportion as do the rectangles.
The parallels to AB and AC that intersect at points X, X, X, visibly show the
path the body must take, indicating the points at which it will be at a given time.
They visibly show us the true magnitude of the compound motion and of its
acceleration for any detenninate time.
Let us suppose again that a body moves unequally from A toward C and from
A toward B. If the inequality is constant, i.e., if the inequalities in the motions
toward 8 and C are equivalent, or if the motion increases at the same rate, the
line it describes will be straight.
But if we suppose an inequality in the increase or decrease of the simple
motions, then no matter what this inequality may be, it will always be easy to
find the line that represents the compound motion to the imagination by expressing the motions with lines and then drawing intersecting parallels. For the line
passing through all these intersections will represent the motion compounded
from unequal simple motions that accelerate or decrease unequally.
If, for example, we suppose that a body is moved by two forces that are either
equal or unequal as you wish; that one of these motions continuously either
increases or decreases according to either an arithmetic or geometric progression as you wish; and that the other motion increases or decreases according to
either a geometric or arithmetic progression as you wish; then the following is
how to find the points through which the line visibly representing the compound
motion will pass.
As has been said, we must first draw AB and AC to express the two simple
motions, and then divide these lines according to the supposed acceleration of
the motions. If we suppose the motion expressed by AC to increase or decrease
according to the arithmetic progression l, 2, 3, 4, 5; and if we suppose the

9

Sc

t&'

Nicolas Malebranche

424

motion expressed by AB to increase according to the duplicate progression I, 2,
4, 8, 16, or to decrease according to the subduplicate progression 4, 2, I, 112, It!,
'Is, then AB should be divided at the points marked I, 2, 4, 8, 16 or 4, 2, I, Yz,
1,4, 1/s. Then through these points parallels must be drawn to AB and AC; AE,
which will express the compound motion we are looking for, will necessarily
pass through all the points of intersection of the parallels. In this way we see the
path this body must take.
If we wish to know precisely how long a body has been in motion when it is at
a given point, we shall be able to tell from the lines drawn from this point parallel
to AB or AC, for the divisions of AB and AC indicate time. Similarly, if we wish
to know the point at which a body will be at a given time, parallels drawn from
the divisions of AB and AC representing time will indicate by their intersection
the point we are looking for. As for its distance from its starting point, this can
easily be known by drawing a line from this point to A; for the length of this line
will be known in relation to AB or AC, which are already known. But as for the
distance it will have gone to reach this point, this is very difficult to know
because with the line of its motion, AE, being curved we cannot relate it to any of
the straight lines.
But if we wished to determine the infinite points through which this body must
pass, i.e., to describe exactly and with a continuous motion the line AE, we
would have to use a compass capable of drawing Jines according to the conditions
expressed in the suppositions we have just laid out. This compass would be very
difficult to construct, impossible to use, and rather useless for discovering the
relations that things have between themselves, since we do not ordinarily need all
the points of which this line is composed, but only a few of them, to help the
imagination when it considers such motions.
3 [But care must be taken in using geometry not to make any false supposition
in violation of the certain principles pf physics. Among other things, we have
supposed that if two causes can independently move a body in a minute, the one
from A to Band the other from A to C, thereby making an angle between AB and
AC, it would make the body describe the entire diagonal, taking the same time as
the two sides. But this is true only in certain cases.

A
1

)'

:J,3t---~X
~

....

~·

.. '&

·'··The addenda of 111<· .. uh cdilmn dire<:! !hal the follnwm(! hracked malrrial he msertcd here.
Tr•n' ·

The Search after Truth

425

If, for example, we were to suppose that there are two rulers, AB and AC, set
at some angle to one another, and that there is an ant that starts at point A and
walks at a constant rate from A toward B; and that in the meantime we move the
ruler AB by sliding it across AC at a constant rate and parallel to itself; the ant
would then cover the entire diagonal AE in the same time that it would go from A
to B. This needs no proof; what follows, however, is not so evident.
If a body at rest at point A is struck simultaneously by two others following the
lines AB and AC, which form an angle BAC, then (I) if BAC is a right angle, the
body at A will as a result of the two forces describe the complete diagonal of the
parallelogram AE in the same time that it would have described one of the sides
AB or AC if moved by only one of the two forces; (2) if BAC is acute, the body
will describe only part of the diagonal, even if it were elastic as is supposed of all
three bodies; (3) if the angle is obtuse, the body will go well beyond the diagonal,
and the farther beyond it as the angle is more obtuse, in the same time that it
would have described the sides.
It is clear that bodies communicate their motion only in proportion to their
relative speeds. If, for example, a body with two degrees of speed comes upon
another moving in the same direction with one degree of speed, then clearly it
will strike it with only one degree of speed; for its speed in relation to the body
fleeing it is only one degree. If it strikes the other body while it is at rest, it will
strike it with twice as much speed; if it comes upon the other body when it is
coming toward it with one degree of contrary speed, it will strike it with three
times as much speed. In this last case, the stress or shock of these two bodies, or
of a third body assumed to be between them, will be three times as great. From
this it follows:
1. that when two bodies simultaneously move a third along AB and AC, which
are at right angles, the body will move through the complete diagonal, for the
relative speed remains the same as long as the two bodies communicate their
motion to the third. The speed of the one moving it toward B is neither increased
nor decreased by the speed of the one moving it toward C since the two lines are
perpendicular to each other. Thus, each of these two bodies necessarily makes
the same impression on the third for the short time they act together on it as if
they acted separately, the thrust of the one toward B in no way affecting the
thrust of the other toward C. These two bodies, then, communicate to the third all
their force and, consequently, all their speed, not through the diagonal, where
neither of them had a tendency to go, but each in the direction in which it was
tending, i.e., along a line passing through the points at which the body was
struck and its center of gravity. Thus, the third body, when moved simultaneously by two forces, will describe the full diagonal in the same time that it would the
sides when moved by each of the same forces separately. For the speed along the
diagonal simultaneously satisfies two speeds, each in the direction in which it
was determined by the impact. I say the direction or the line BE. for example,
and not toward the same point B, for the line passing through the point of impact
and the center of the body (which necessarily remains parallel to itself during the
body's motion) will intersect all the points on the line BE. Likewise. the force of

426

Nicolas Malebranche

the third body, which describes the diagonal in the same time it would have
described the sides, is equal to the sum ofthe two forces which would have made
it describe them. AE2 is equal to AB2 + AC2 , for it should be noted that the actual
forces of identical moving bodies do not stand to each other as their speeds but as
the square of their speeds. The force that moves a body with one degree of speed
stands to another that moves it in the same time with two degrees of speed in a
ratio I :4. This follows from what I have just proved. Indeed, since the force with
which bodies act is equal to the product of their acting mass [masse agissante]
and speed, when the two bodies are equal and the speed of one is double that of
the other, the one with the greater speed has transmitted all its motion or has
expended all its force against the one it meets when the other has as yet acted
with only half its mass. Thus, the body with two degrees of speed actually acts
with a force four times as great as the other, since both its mass and its speed are
twice as great. On account of its greater speed, the action of each part of its
mass is twice as great as the other's and, furthermore, with twice as many parts.
For bodies transmit their motion only successively and through parts, as I have
explained below in articles XX and XXIX3 ; these articles give the physical basis
for the calculations required to find the motion in bodies resulting from their
being struck.
Now glance at the second figure, which is on the first page of this addendum.
2. When the angle BAC is acute, the relative speeds of each of the bodies in
relation to the third either diminishes or is null at the moment of stress preceding
the moment it begins to move. For with the third body moved along AB with
whatever speed you wish, the body moving it along AC will not act on it with the
same stress or relative speed, since the third body is already moving away, or
tending to move away, from it. Or, if the two bodies act on the third at the very
same instant, and if the angle BAC is infinitely acute, we shall have the same
result as if these two bodies were but one single mass.
3. Finally, if the angle BAC is obtuse, the third body will pass beyond pointE
of the diagonal AE, and the fanher beyond it as the angle is more obtuse. For

···cr. Ot•uvrrs

1

·ompliotl",,, 17-1:85-87, 127-29-Trans.>

The Search after Truth

427

besides the fact that the diagonal decreases to the elttent that the angle increases,
the relative speeds of the bodies moving the third increases, becauses the motions
of the bodies striking it become contrary to the elttent that the angle becomes
obtuse. Therefore, if the body struck by the two others were soft, it would be
compressed more quickly and rebound farther, given that the parts of which it is
composed could be easily separated; and if it is elastic, its parts will be compressed to the elttent to which the angle is obtuse, it will be wound up tighter and will
spring along the diagonal with a speed proportionate to its compression, provided
that its figure allows it to escape the pressure. Consequently, we could suppose
that two bodies by striking a third could move it with whatever speed you wish.
But this would lead me too far from the topic.]
These examples show that we can eltpress most of our ideas by means of lines
and thereby represent them to the imagination, and that geometry, which shows
us how to compare lines in order to determine their relations, is much more
useful than is ordinarily thought. For in the final analysis, astronomy, music,
mechanics, and generally all the sciences that deal with things that vary quantitatively, and that as a result can be treated as extended, i.e., all the exact sciences,
can be related to geometry. [This is so,] because as all speculative truths involve
only the relations of things, and the relations between their relations, they are all
easily related to lines. Their conclusions can be drawn geometrically, and as
these conclusions are illustrated by the lines representing them, it is almost
impossible to go astray, and these sciences can be advanced a great deal with
little difficulty.
The reason why, for example, we notice so distinctly and can mark out with
such precision the musical eighth, fifth, and fourth, is that we eltpress these
sounds with strings that are divided exactly, and that we know (l) that the string
which sounds the octave is in duplicate proportion with the string with which the
octave is formed, and (2) that the fifth is in sesquilateral, or three-to-two proportion, and so on for the others. For the ear alone is unable to judge sounds with the
precision necessary for a science. The most practiced and discerning ear still is
not sensitive enough to recognize the difference between certain sounds, and
those relying on it deceive themselves into thinking there is none because they
judge things only according to their sensations of them. There are those who find
no difference between an octave and a third. Some even fancy that the major and
minor keys do not differ; as a result of this, they fail to notice the comma that
distinguishes them, and even more so the schisma that is only half a comma.
Only reason, then, can clearly show us that as the space of string that differentiates certain sounds can be divided into several parts, there can be even more
sounds, both with and without use for music, that the ear cannot discern. From
this it is clear that without arithmetic and geometry. we would have no precise
knowledge of music, and any success in music would be due to luck and imagination. i.e .. music would no longer be a science based on indisputable demonstrations. although airs composed through strength of imagination might be more
beautiful and pleas;mt to the senses than airs wmposcd with rules.

428

Nicolas Malebranche

Likewise in mechanics, the weight of a body as well as the distance from its
center of gravity to the fulcrum, each of them capable of quantitative variation,
can be expressed with lines. Thus can we use geometry to discover and demonstrate an infinty of new things that are very useful in life and that, because of the
certainty accompanying them, are even very pleasant to the mind.
If, for example, you wish to balance a weight of six pounds with another of
only three pounds, with the weight of six pounds attached to the arm of a balance
two feet from the fulcrum, then if you know the most general principle of all
mechanics: that for weights to rest in equilibrium, they must be in reciprocal
proportion to their distances from the fulcrum, i.e., the one weight must stand to
the other as the other's distance from the same fulcrum; it will be easy to fmd by
means of geometry what the distance of the three-pound weight must be for the
whole to be in quilibrium. You can do so by using the twelfth proposition of the
sixth book of Euclid to find a fourth proportional line, which will be four feet
long. Consequently, by applying geometry to mechanics, i.e., by visibly expressing with lines all the things considered in mechanics, you need know only
this basic principle of mechanics to discover with certainty all the truths that
depend on it.
The lines and figures of geometry, then, are well-suited for representing relations between magnitudes to the imagination, or between things that vary quantitatively, such as space, time, weight, and so on, as much because they are
simple objects as because they can be imagined very easily. We might even say,
on behalf of geometry, that lines can represent to the imagination more things
than the mind can know, since lines can express relations of incommensurable
magnitudes, i.e., magnitudes with relations we cannot know because there is no
measure by means of which they can be compared. But this advantage of
geometry is not very significant in the search after truth, since these visible
representations of incommensurable magnitudes do not distinctly reveal to the
mind their true magnitude.
Geometry, then, is very helpful in making the mind attentive to things whose
relations we wish to discover, but it must be admitted that sometimes geometry is
an occasion of error for us because we attend so closely to the pleasant and
certain demonstrations provided by this science that we completely tum our
attention away from nature. It is mainly for this reason that not all the machines
we invent work, and that not all the musical compositions in which proportions
of consonance are best observed are the most pleasant. and that the most exact
astronomical calculations do not always best predict the size and duration of
eclipses. Nature is not abstract; the levers and balls of mechanics are not the lines
and circles of mathematics. Our tastes for musical airs arc not always the same in
all men, nor in the same men at different times; they change in the strangest ways
according to the different agitations of the spirits. Finally. as far as astronomy is
concerned. there is no perfect regularity to he found in planetary motion; floating
through these vast spaces. the planets arc carried along hy the fluid matter that
surrounds them. Thus. the errors we fall into in astronomy, mechanics, music,
and all the other sciences to which geometry is applied, come not from geometry

The Search after Truth

429

itself, which is an incontrovertible science, but from our faulty application of it.
We assume, for example, that planetary motion describes perfectly regular
circles and elipses, which is not true. We do well to make this assumption in
order to reason, and also because it is not far from the truth; but we should always
remember that the premise on which we are reasoning is an assumption.
Likewise in mechanics, we assume that the balls and levers are perfectly hard
and, like the lines and circles of mathematics, without weight or friction-or
rather, we do not sufficiently consider their weight, their friction, their matter, or
the relations these things have to each other; that hardness and size increase
weight, and that weight increases friction; that friction decreases force and either
destroys or slowly wears down the machine, so that what almost always works in
miniature hardly ever works on a large scale.
We should not be surprised at our errors, then, since we base our reasoning
here on premises that are not known precisely. Nor should it be fancied that
geometry is useless because it fails to deliver us from all our errors. It draws
conclusions for us from the assumptions we have made. By making us attentive
to what we consider, it makes us know with certainty. By means of geometry, we
even see whether our assumptions are false-for, as we are always sure that our
reasoning is true, if experience fails to agree with it, we see that our assumed
premises are false. But without geometry and arithmetic, nothing that is somewhat difficult in the exact sciences can be learned, even though we may have
principles that are certain and indisputable.
Geometry, then, should be regarded as a kind of universal science that opens
the mind, makes it attentive, and gives it the skill to control the imagination and
to draw from it all the help it can give; for with the help of geometry the mind
controls the imagination, and a controlled imagination sustains the mind's perception and attention.
But in order to be able to use geometry properly, it should be noted that not
everything within the imagination's scope can be imagined with equal ease; for
not all images equally occupy the mind's capacity. It is more difficult to imagine
a solid than a surface, and a surface than a simple line, because a clear perception
of a solid involves more thought than does the clear perception of a surface or a
line. This is also true of different lines: more thought, i.e., greater capacity of
mind, is needed to represent a parabolical, elliptical, or some other compound
line than to represent the circumference of a circle, and more for the circumference of a circle than for a straight line, because it is more difficult to imagine
lines whose path is very complex and which have many relations than those whose
path is quite simple or which have few relations. For relations cannot be perceived
clearly without the mind's attention to several things, whose number determines
how much thought is required to perceive them. There are, then, figures so complex that the mind lacks sufficient scope to imagine them distinctly, whereas it can
imagine others quite easily.
Of the three kinds of angles. acute, right. and obtuse. only the right angle
awakens in the mind an idea that is distim:t and well-defined. There arc an
infinity of acute angles that all differ fmm one another. and the same is true for

430

Nicolas Malebranche

obtuse angles. Thus, when we imagine an acute or an obtuse angle, we imagine
nothing either exact or distinct. But when we imagine a right angle, we cannot be
mistaken, our idea of it is quite distinct, and the image we form of it in the brain
generally is sufficiently accurate.
True, we can also specify the vague idea of an acute angle as the specific idea
of an angle of thirty degrees, and the idea of an angle of thirty degrees is as exact
as that of ninety degrees, i.e., of a right angle. But the image we would try to
form of it in the brain would not be nearly as accurate as that of a right angle. We
are not accustomed to representing this image, and we can trace it only by
thinking of a circle or of a determinate part of a circle divided into equal parts.
But to imagine a right angle, we need not think about a circle divided in this way;
the mere idea of a perpendicular allows the imagination to trace the image of this
angle, and we find no difficulty in representing perpendiculars because we are
accustomed to seeing things upright.
It is easy to conclude, then, that to have an object that is simple, distinct,
well-defined, suitable for being easily imagined and, consequently, for making
the mind attentive and preserving clarity in the truths it seeks, all the magnitudes
we consider must be related either to simple surfaces bounded by lines and right
angles, like perfect squares and other rectangular figures, or else to simple
straight lines; for these are the figures whose nature we know more easily.
I might have attributed to the senses the help we draw from geometry in
preserving the mind's attention; but I thought that even though lines are sensible
things, geometry belonged more to the imagination than to the senses. There
would be no point in spelling out here my reasons for thinking so, since they
would only justify the order of what I have just discussed, which is not something
essential. Nor have I discussed arithmetic or algebra, because the numbers and
letters of the alphabet used in these sciences are useful, not so much for increasing the mind's attention, as for extending it scope, as we shall explain in the
following chapter.
There you have the general aids for making the mind more attentive. I know of
no others unless it is for the will to be attentive, which I have not discussed at all,
for I assume that everyone engaged in study wishes to attend to what he is
studying.
Nonetheless, there are many other aids that are peculiar to individual people,
such as certain beverages, meats, places, dispositions of the body, and several
others that each of us must learn from his own experience. We must observe the
state of our imagination after eating and consider which things maintain and
which dissipate the mind's attention. It might be said in general that a moderate
usc of food that pmduces a great deal of animal spirits is best suited both for
increasing the mind's attention as well as for strengthening the imagination of
those in whom it is weak and languid.

BOOK SIX: PART ONE
Chapter Five

The ways to increase the mind's scope and capacity. That arithmetic and algebra
are absolutely necessary for this.
First, we should not fancy that we can ever actually increase the mind's scope
and capacity. Man's soul is, as it were, a determinate quantity or portion of
thought, which has limits beyond which it cannot pass. It cannot grow larger or
more extended than it already is; it does not expand as certain metals and liquids
are believed to. Finally, it seems to me-l know of no convincing proof to the
contrary-that it never perceives more at one time than at another.
I grant that this seems to be contradicted by experience. We often think about a
great many objects; often we think only about one object, and frequently we even
say that we are not thinking about anything. Yet if it be considered that thought is
to the soul what extension is to body, it will be clearly seen that just as a body
cannot be extended more at one time than at another, so the soul, properly
understood, can never think more at one time than at another-whether it perceives several objects, or one only, or even when we are said to perceive nothing
at all.
However, for two main reasons we are led to believe that we think more at one
time than at another. The first is that we sometimes have so much freedom of
mind that in one minute, for example, we can have sixty thoughts in rapid
succession, and at other times our mind has but the same thought for a minute.
But it does not follow from this that we think more at one time or, to speak
unequivocally, at one instant than at another. We have sixty different thoughts,
but we have each of them for only one second, which is the same as having the
same thought for sixty seconds. When I open my eyes in the countryside, as long
as I do not move my eyes, the sensation I have is as great as when I move them
from side to side; that is, my capacity for seeing is not increased by the variety of
successive perceptions. I see more objects. but my vision is not any better, nor
does it have any greater scope.
The other reason that leads us to believe that we think more at one time than at
another is that we do nnt sufficiently distinguish between confused and distinct
perception. Undoubtedly, either more thought is required. or our capacity ti.n
431

432

Nicolas Malebranche

thinking must be occupied more in perceiving several things distinctly than in
perceiving only one thing distinctly; but no more thought is required for perceiving several things confusedly than for perceiving a single thing distinctly. Thus,
there is no more thought in the soul when it thinks of several objects than when it
thinks of only one, since if it thinks about only one, it always perceives it much
more clearly than when it applies itself to several.
For it should be noted that a simple perception sometimes contains as much
thought, i.e., that it occupies as much of the mind's capacity for thinking, as a
judgment or even a complex inference, since experience shows that a lively,
clear, and compelling simple perception of a single thing occupies us as much as
a complex inference, or the obscure and confused perception of several relations
between several things.
For just as there is as much or more sensation involved in the visual perception
of an object that I hold close to my eyes and carefully examine as in the perception of an entire countryside that I look at haphazardly and without much attention, with the result that the clarity of the sensation I have of the object near my
eyes makes up for the scope of my confused sensation of the many things I see at
random in the countryside, so the perception the mind has of a single object is
sometimes so lively and distinct that it contains as much or even more thought
than the perception of the relations between several objects.
I grant that at certain times it seems to us that we are thinking only about a
single thing and that we yet have trouble in fully comprehending it, whereas at
other times we have no difficulty in comprehending it as well as many other
things. And from this we fancy that the soul has greater scope or greater capacity
for thought at one time than at another; but it seems to me that we are mistaken in
this. The reason why at certain times we have difficulty in conceiving the easiest
things is not that the soul's thought or capacity for thinking is diminished, but
that this capacity is occupied by some lively sensation of pleasure or pain or by a
great number of weak and obscure sensations causing a kind of giddiness, which
is generally only a confused sensation of a great number of things.
A piece of wax can have but one figure; it cannot have two figures without the
one mixing with the other, for it cannot be completely round and square at the
same time. Finally, if it receives a million different figures, none of them will be
distinct. Now, if this piece of wax could know its own figures, it nonetheless
would be incapable of knowing which of the figures defined it, should there be a
large number of them. The same is true of the soul when a great number of
modifications occupy its capacity; it cannot perceive them distinctly because it
does not sense them separately. Thus, it thinks that it perceives nothing. It cannot
tell that it senses pain, pleasure, light, sound, tastes-it perceives none of those,
yet they are all it perceives.
But even if we were to assume that the soul was not subject to the confused and
unruly motion of the animal ~pirits. and that it was so free of its body that its
thoughts in no way depended on what takes place in it, still we might understand
certain things with greater case at one time than at another without the capacity of
our ~oul hcing de<.:rcased or increased, because in this case we might think about
other particular things or about indeterminate being in general. Let me elaborate.

The Search after Truth

433

The general idea of the infinite is inseparable from the mind and occupies its
full capacity when it is not thinking about some particular thing. For when we say
that we are thinking about nothing, that does not mean that we are not thinking
about this general idea, but simply that we are not thinking about some particular
thing.
Surely, if this idea did not fill our mind we would be unable to think as we do
about all sorts of things, for one cannot think about things of which one has no
knowledge. And if this idea were not more present to the mind when we seem to
be thinking about nothing than when we are thinking about some particular thing,
it would be as easy for us to think about whatever we want when we are deeply
occupied with some particular truth as when we are occupied with nothing at all,
and this is contrary to experience. When, for example, we are deeply occupied
with some proposition in geometry, it is not as easy for us to think about other
things as when we are occupied with no particular thought. Thus, one thinks
more about infinite and universal being when one thinks less about particular,
finite beings, and one always thinks as much at one time as at another. But be
that as it may, it seems to me certain that the mind's scope and capacity cannot be
increased by expanding it, as it were, or by giving it more reality than it naturally
has, but only by skillfully conserving it. Now this is what is perfectly achieved
through arithmetic and algebra; for these sciences show how to simplify ideas in
such a way and to consider them so methodically that though the mind might
have but little scope, it can, with the help of these sciences, discover very
complex truths that at first seem incomprehensible.
Truth is nothing else but a real relation, whether of equality or inequality.
Falsehood is but the negation of truth, or a false and imaginary relation. Truth is
that which is; falsity does not exist, or, if you wish, is that which is not. We are
never deceived when we perceive relations that exist, but we are always deceived
when we judge that we perceive certain relations and they do not exist; for here
we perceive falsity, we perceive what does not exist, or rather, we do not
perceive at all, since nothingness cannot be perceived, and the false is a relation
that does not exist. Whoever perceives the relation of equality between twice two
and four perceives a truth, for the relation of equality that he perceives is as he
perceives it. Likewise, whoever perceives a relation of inequality between twice
two and five perceives a truth, because he perceives a relation of inequality that
exists. But whoever judges that he perceives a relation of equality between twice
two and five is mistaken, because he perceives, or, rather, thinks he perceives, a
relation of equality that does not exist. Truths, then, are only relations, and the
knowledge of truths the knowledge of relations.
There are three kinds of relations or truths. There are those between ideas,
between things and their ideas, and between things only. It is true that twice two
is four-here is a truth between ideas. It is true that the sun exists-this is a truth
between a thing and its idea. It is true that the earth is larger than the moon -here
is a truth that is only between things.
Of those three sorts of truths. those between ideas are eternal and immutahle,
and hecause of their immutability, they are the standards [h•s rt;!(les & /e.1·
mt'.Hift•s) for all other truths, for every standard must be invariable. This is why

434

Nicolas Malebranche

only these sorts of truths are considered in arithmetic, algebra, and geometry,
because these universal sciences both determine and contain all the particular
sciences. All the relations or truths between created things, or between ideas and
created things, are subject to the change to which every creature is liable. Only
the truths between ideas are immutable. because God is not subject to change,
nor, consequently, are the ideas He contains.
Thus, we use the mind alone to try to discover only truths between ideas, for
we almost always employ the senses to discover the other sorts of truths. We use
our eyes and our hands to assure ourselves of the existence of things, and to
recognize the relations of equality and inequality between them. Relations of
ideas are the only ones the mind can know infallibly and by itself without the use
of the senses. But not only are there relations between ideas, but also between the
relations between ideas, relations between these relations, and finally between
collections of several relations, and between relations between collections of
relations, ad infinitum, that is to say, truths can be compounded ad infinitum. In
geometry we call the way in which a given magnitude or idea contains or is
contained by another (the relation of four to two, or of twice two, for example) a
geometrical ratio, or simply, a ratio. For the deficiency or excess of one idea
over another or, to use the ordinary terms, the deficiency or excess of a magnitude is not properly a ratio, nor are equal excesses or deficiencies of magnitudes equal ratios.
Now it should be noted that all relations or all ratios, both simple and complex,
are true magnitudes, and that the very term magnitude is a relative term necessarily indicating some relation. For nothing is great by itself and without relation to
something else, unless it be infinity or unity. All whole numbers are relations just
as truly as are fractions or numbers compared to each other or divided by some
number, though we do not realize this because whole numbers can be expressed
by a single number. Four, for example, or 8/2 is a relation just as truly as 1/4 or
2/8. The unity to which four is related, though not expressed, is understood, for
four is a relation as much as 1/4 or 2/8, since four is equal to 4/1 or 8/2. As evel)'
magnitude is a relation then, and as every relation is a magnitude, we can clearly
express all relations by numbers and represent them to the imagination with lines.
Thus, since all truths are only relations, in order to know all truths exactly,
whether simple or complex, it is enough to know all relations exactly, both
simple and complex. As we have just said, there are two kinds of relations: those
of equality and those of inequality. It is clear that all relations of equality are
alike, and that as soon as we realize that one thing is equal to another known
thing, we know its relation exactly. But such is not the case with inequality. We
know that a tower is bigger than a fathom and smaller than a thousand fathoms,
but still we do not know its precise si1.c or the relation it has to one fathom.
In order to compare things, or rather to measure relations of inequality with
precision. a precise measure is required: we need an idea that is hoth simple and
pcrfCl·tly intl"lhgihle, a unrveNal measure that can he adapted to every sort of
ohjel"t. Tlus measure is umty. f·or cad1 kind of nm~nitudc, a spcl"ilk amount is
tahn a\ the unity or u•rnmon measure: li1r cllamplc, a fathom li1r meusures of

The Search after Truth

435

length, an hour for time, a pound for weight, and so on, and all these unities are
divisible to infinity. The following is how arithmetic shows us the way to express
all sorts of magnitudes, how to compare them, and how to discover their relations.
In arithmetic all magnitudes are expressed in very simple fashion with nine
numbers, following the relation they have to the unit, i.e., depending on whether
they contain the unit or a determinate number of equal parts of the unit. Magnitudes that contain the unit exactly are expressed by whole numbers; those that
contain only a determinate number of the unit's parts are expressed by broken
numbers, also called fractions. Arithmetic also has individual expressions for
magnitudes called incommensurables because they have no common measure
with the unit, i.e., however many equal parts the unit can be conceived as
divided into, incommensurable magnitudes contain none of these parts a specific
number of times, there always being the slightest remainder less than one of these
parts. Thus, arithmetic provides the means of expressing all the simple and
complex relations possible between magnitudes. It then shows us how to perform
the calculations to deduce these relations from one another, and to discover the
relations of magnitudes that might be useful by means of those already known;
and it shows us how to do this with skill, with clarity, and with a remarkable
exploitation of the mind's meager capacity.
It is clear that man's mind is so meager, his memory so unfaithful, and his
imagination of so little scope, that without using numbers and written symbols,
and without the skill employed in arithmetic, it would be impossible to perform
the operations necessary for knowing the precise inequality of magnitudes and
their relations. nor could we make any progress in the knowledge of complex
truths.
Nonetheless, algebra and analysis are entirely different from arithmetic. They
divide the mind's capacity a great deal less; they simplify ideas in the simplest
and easiest way conceivable. What can be done with arithmetic only in a great
deal of time can be done in a minute with algebra and analysis, without the mind
becoming entangled in manipulating numbers in lengthy operations. An individual arithmetical operation discovers only one truth; a similar algebraic operation discovers an infinity of them.
Algebra expresses magnitudes of every possible kind, as well as the relations
they might have. by means of letters of the alphabet. which are our simplest and
most familiar characters. It shows us how to perform. on these lettered magnitudes, all the calculations to deduce the most difticult and wmplex relations
that we might desire to know from the relations of the same magnitudes that arc
already known. These are the simplest. easiest. and at the same time. mnst
universal l"akulutions l"Onl·eivahlc. It preserws in them the same ell pression of
magnitudes that must hl· kept in vil'W if 11 perfect knnwledgc of the magnitudes of
which they are composed is to he gained. It redUl'Cs to simpk· and general
eltpressions of only a few letters the solutions to an infinite numher t>f pn>hlcm~
and otlen t>f l'Wn whole ~l·ienl·es. You will find twt> e'lamplcs nf this herl·; t>lll' at
the end of tlw sel·tion on the law~ of motion, the other at the end ,,f this Wllfk.

436

Nicolas Malebranche

Analysis is the art of employing the calculations of algebra and arithmetic in
discovering all we want to know about magnitudes and their relations. In order to
solve all problems about magnitudes, it first shows us how to represent the
unknown magnitudes we are looking for by means of individual characters,
generally the latter letters of the alphabet, and known magnitudes by other
letters, usually the first letters of the alphabet, though these expressions are
amitrary. It then shows us how to use known relations between known and
unknown magnitudes to reduce each problem to equations expressing all their
values. Finally, by adopting the axiom that when magnitudes are equal their
equality is always preserved by increasing or decreasing them equally, it sets out
the operations that must be performed on the two equal members of each equation in order to isolate the unknown members, thereby making them equal to
magnitudes that are fully known. This solves the problem; and when the problem
can have several solutions, they too are shown.
As far as the discovery oftruths in compound geometry is concerned, analysis
teaches us how to reduce the curved lines of this science to equations that express
their principal properties; then, by means of the calculus, how to draw from these
equations all the other properties of such figures. It also gives us the means to
distinguish and to describe their different kinds, and finally, it teaches us the
main uses that can be made of them.
The invention of the differential and integral calculus has extended analysis
beyond limit, as it were. For these new calculi have placed an infinity of mechanical figures and problems of physics under its jurisdiction. They have provided it
with a means of expressing infinitely small elements that we can conceive as composing the circumference of curved lines, as well as the area of figures and the
volume of bodies defined by curved lines; they have provided it with a means of
answering, in a simple and general way by calculating the expression of these
elements, problems whose solutions are both useful and the most complex that
can be stated in geometry.

BOOK SIX: PART TWO
Chapter One

t

Rules to be observed in the search after truth.
Having explained the means that must be used to increase the mind's attention
and scope, which are the only means that can make it more perfect, i.e., more
enlightened and penetrating, we come to the rules that absolutely must be observed in the resolution of all questions. These will occupy me for quite a while,
and I shall try to explain them thoroughly by using several examples in order to
make their necessity more manifest and to accustom the mind to using them,
because the most necessary and difficult thing is not knowing them well but
practicing them well.
We should not expect anything very extraordinary here, or anything that
surprises and taxes the mind very much. On the contrary, in order for these rules
to be good, they must be simple and natural, few in number, very intelligible,
and interdependent. In a word, they should only guide our minds and regulate our
attention without dividing it, for experience shows clearly enough that Aristotle's
logic is not very useful because it occupies the mind too much and diverts
attention that it should have brought to bear upon the subjects it is examining.
Therefore, let those who love only mysteries and extraordinary inventions temporarily quit this bizarre mood, and channel all the attention of which they are
capable toward the investigation of whether the rules to be given are sufficient for
always preserving the evidence in the mind's perceptions, and for discovering the
most hidden truths. If they are not unjustly prejudiced against the simplicity and
facility of these rules, I hope they will recognize through the use that can be made
of them (which we shall show next,) that the clearest and simplest principles are
the most fruitful, and that extraordinary and difficult things are not always as
useful as our vain curiosity makes us believe.
The principle of all these rules is that it is always necessary to kt•ep our
rt'asoning cft·ar to di.1·cm·n tl~t• truth without .ft'ar of' being mistakt•n. On this
principle depends the general rule regarding the subject of our studies, namely:
that 11'1' should rt•aso/1 only abouttllinRs o(ll'hifh ll't' hm·e dear itll'a.l': and. as a
necessary nmsequence of this. thatll't' should alll'ays /)('Iii" ll'ith the simt>lt'.l't and

437

Nicolas Malebranche

438

easiest things, and pause there for a considerable time before undertaking the
search after the most complex and difficult ones.
The rules regarding the way in which we must go about resolving questions
also depend on this same principle; and the first of these rules is: the state ofthe
question we propose to resol1•e must be \'ery distinctly conceil·ed. We must have
sufficiently distinct ideas of our terms to be able to compare them, and thus to
recognize the relations we seek among them.
But when we cannot recognize the relations between things by immediate
comparison, the second rule is: it is necessary through some effort of the mind to
discover one or several intermediary ideas that can sen·e as a common measure
for recogni::.ing by their means the relationships between them. We must be sure
that these ideas are clearer and more distinct in proportion as the relations we try
to discover are more numerous and exact.
But when the questions are difficult and controversial, the third rule is: the
subject being considered must be carefully simplified in order to ai'Oid examining
things that are irrelevant to the disco1·ery of the truth sought. For the capacity of
the mind must never be uselessly divided, and all its strength should be applied
only to things that can enlighten it. The things that can be so eliminated are all
those that do not affect the question and whose elimination leaves the question
intact.
When the question is thus reduced to its fewest terms, the fourth rule is: it is
necessary to divide the subject of our meditation into parts and to consider them
all one after the other according to natural order, beginning with the simplest,
i.e .. those that im•oll·e fewer relations, and nn·er adrancing to the more complex
before haring distinctly recogni::.ed the simplest and ha1·ing become familiar wit/1
them.
When these things have become familiar through meditation, the fifth rule is:
we should simplifY their ideas, and afterward arrange them in our imagination or
write them on paper so they will no longer occupy the entire capacity of the mind.
Although this rule is always useful, it is only absolutely necessary in very
difficult questions that demand that the mind be wide-ranging, because the mind
is expanded only by simplifying its ideas. The utility of this rule, and of those
that follow, is well recognized only in algebra.
When the ideas of all things whose consideration is absolutely necessary are
clear, familiar, simplified, and ordered in the imagination or expressed on paper,
the sixth rule is: they must all he compared according to the rule.\· of combination. altanately with one another, either hy the mind's eye alone, or by the
mo1·ement of'tht' imagination togethu with the mind's eye, or by tile calculation
of the pen ;oined to the attellfion of' tht' mind and imagination.
If the relation we seek is not found among those resulting frnm all these
comparisons, it i.1 once more nen'.\.\arv to diminatc all tline rdatio11.1, omitting
thos1' tlwt are 1rrdn·ant to tlw tfiW.Ition. to lwnnne Jiuniliar with the others,
.I i1111'h f\' and <IITWI!-it' tlu'/11 011 flliJ't'r. ""'1111are them accordillf< to the rules of
CIJ/1/IJ/II<Ition. and 1.,.,. 1/ tl11' collllll<·x relation 11'1' sed: i.1 lii/WII/-i all the complo:
rdatit1111 11'\llltm/-i from tlll'.l'l'

II I'll'

UJIIIIIIIri.lo/1.\.

The Search after Truth

439

If none of the relations discovered in this way contains the resolution of the
question, it is once again necessary to eliminate the useless relations, become
familiar with the others, and so on. By continuing in this manner, we shall
discover the truth or relation we seek, however complex it is, provided that we
can expand the capacity of the mind sufficiently by simplifying its ideas, and that
during all these operations we always keep our goal in sight. For it is the
continual study of the question that must govern all the steps of the mind, since
we must always know where we are going and what we are seeking.
Above all it is necessary to beware being content with some glimmer or
probability. We must take the comparisons that aid in discovering the truth we
are seeking, and begin them anew so often that we cannot prevent ourselves from
believing it without feeling the secret reproaches of the Master, who responds to
our question, i.e., to our toil, to the application of our minds, and to the desires
of our hearts. And then we shall be able to use this truth as an infallible principle
for advancing in the sciences.
Not all these rules we have just given are generally necessary in every kind of
question; for when the questions are very easy, the first rule suffices; and in some
other questions, only the first and second are needed. In a word, since we must
make use of these rules until we have discovered the truth we are seeking, it is
necessary to practice them all the more as the questions get more difficult.
These rules are not great in number. They all depend upon each other. They
are natural, and we can become so familiar with them that we shall be able to use
them without giving them much thought. In a word, they can regulate the attention of the mind without dividing it, i.e., they play the role one wishes them to
play. But they appear to be of such little importance by themselves that it is
necessary, in order to make them more estimable, for me to show that philosophers fell into many errors and exaggerations merely because they did not observe the first two, which are the principal and easiest ones, and that it is also
through the use Descartes made of them that he discovered all the great and
fruitful truths by which we can be instructed in his works.

BOOK SIX: PART TWO
Chapter Two

t

The general rule concerning the subject of our studies. That the school philosophers do not obsen·e it, which is the cause of se1·eral errors in physics.
The first of these rules, and the one that concerns the subject of our studies,
teaches us that we must reason only on the basis of clear ideas. From that we
should draw the conclusion that, to study methodically, it is necessary to begin
with the simplest and most easily understood things and to dwell upon them,
even for a long time, before undertaking the search for the most complex and
difficult ones.
Everyone will easily agree on the necessity of this general rule, for it is clear
enough that to reason on the basis of obscure ideas and uncertain principles is to
walk in darkness. But perhaps you will be surprised if I say that it is almost never
observed, and that most of the sciences that are presently still the subject of the
pride of some false scholars are based on ideas either too confused or too general
to be useful in the search after truth.
Aristotle, who justly deserves the status of Prince of these philosophers because he is the father ofthat philosophy which they cultivate so carefully, nearly
always reasons only on the confused ideas received through the senses and on
other vague, general, and indeterminate ideas that represent nothing in particular
to the mind. For ordinary terms, to this philosopher, can serve only to explain
confusedly to the senses and imagination the confused sensations we have of
sensible things, or to make us speak so vaguely and indeterminately that we
express nothing distinct. Nearly all his works, but mainly his eight books about
physics, on which there are as many different commentators as there are teachers
of philosophy, are only pure logic. In them, he teaches only general terms that can
be used in physics. He talks a lot and says nothing. It is not that he is diffuse but
that he has the secret of being concise and saying nothing but words. In his other
works he does not make such frequent use of general terms, but the ones he uses
arouse only the confused ideas of the senses. It is through these ideas that he
claims in these problems (and elsewhere) to resolve in two words an infinity of
questions that can be shown to he unresolvahle.
But in order that you can better understand what I mean, you should remember
440

The Search after Truth

441

what I have proved elsewhere: 8 that all terms which arouse only sensible ideas
are equivocal; but (which is to be considered) that they are equivocal because ot
error and ignorance and consequently that they are the cause of an infmite
number of errors.
The word ram is equivocal. It means an animal that chews and a constellation
that the sun enters in spring; but it is rare that one is mistaken there. For it takes
an enthusiastic astrologer to imagine some relation between these two things and
to believe, for example, that we are prone to vomit the medicines we take at that
time because the ram chews. But as for the terms of sensible ideas, almost no one
recognizes that they are equivocal. Aristotle and the ancient philosophers barely
thought about the matter. You will agree if you read something of their works,
and if you distinctly perceive the cause of the ambiguity of these terms. For
nothing is more obvious than the fact that philosophers believed the complete
opposite of what must be believed about this subject.
For example, when philosophers say that fire is hot, grass green, sugar sweet,
and so on, they mean, like children and the common man, that fire contains what
they feel when they are warm; that grass has on it the colors they believe they see
there; that sugar contains the sweetness that they sense in eating it, and so on of
all things we see or feel. It is impossible to doubt this in reading their writings.
They speak of sensible qualities as sensations; they take motion for heat; and they
thus confuse, because of the equivocation of the terms, the modes of bodies with
those of minds.
Only since Descartes do we respond to these confused and indeterminate
questions, whether fire is hot, grass green, sugar sweet, and so on, by distinguishing the equivocation of the sensible terms that express them. If by heat,
color, flavor, you mean such and such a movement of insensible parts, then fire
is hot, grass green, sugar sweet. But if by heat and the other qualities you mean
what I feel near fire, what I see when I see grass, and so forth, then fire is not hot
at all, nor is grass green, and so forth, for the heat we feel and the colors we see
are only in the soul, as I proved in the first book. Now, as men think that what
they sense is the same thing that is in the object, they believe they have the right
to judge the qualities of objects by their sensations of them. Thus, they do not say
two words without saying something false, and they say nothing about this matter
that is not obscure and confused. Here are several reasons for this.
First, because all men do not have the same sensations of the same objects, nor
does the same man at different times, or when he senses these same objects
through different parts of the body. What seems sweet to one person seems bitter
to another; what is hot to one is cold to the other; what seems hot to one person
when he is cold seems cold to this same person when he is hot or when he senses
through different parts of his body. If water seems hot to one hand, it often seems
cold to the other, or if we wash some part close to the heart with it. Salt seems
salty to the tongue, and smarting or stinging to a sore. Sugar is sweet to the
tongue and aloe extremely bitter, but nothing is sweet or bitter through the other
"Bk. I.

442

Nicolas Malebranche

senses. Thus, when we say this or that thing is cold, sweet, or bitter, it means
nothing certain.
Second, because different objects can cause the same sensation of color;
plaster, bread, sugar, salt, and so on, have the same sensation of color; nevertheless, their whiteness is different if one judges it other than through the senses.
Thus, when one says that flour is white, one says nothing distinct.
The third reason is that the qualities of bodies that cause totally different
sensations in us are nearly the same, and, on the contrary, those of which we
have nearly the same sensations are often very different. The qualities of sweetness and bitterness in objects differ hardly at all. The motions that cause pain and
tickling differ only in degree; yet, the sensations of tickling and pain are essentially different. On the other hand, the tartness of a fruit does not seem to our
sense of taste as different from bitterness as sweetness does. Nonetheless, this
quality is as far from being bitter as it can be, since a fruit that is tart because it is
green must undergo a very great number of changes before it becomes bitter with
the bitterness that is caused by rottenness or overripeness. When fruits are ripe,
they seem sweet; and when they are a little too ripe, they seem bitter. Bitterness
and sweetness in fruits differ therefore only in degree, and that is why there are
people who find them sweet when others find them bitter; for there are even some
who find that aloe is as sweet as honey. It is the same with all sensible ideas. The
terms sweet, bitter, salty, tart, acid, and so on; red, green, yellow, and so on;
such and such an odor, flavor, color, and so on, are therefore all equivocal, and
arouse no clear and distinct idea in the mind. Nevertheless, the School philosophers and the common man judge all sensible qualities of bodies only by the
sensations that they receive from them.
Not only do these philosophers judge sensible qualities by the sensations that
they receive from them, they even judge things in the light of the judgments that
they have made concerning the sensible qualities. For, from the fact that they have
essentially different sensations of certain qualities, they judge that there is a
generation of new forms that produce these imaginary differences of quality·
Wheat appears yellow, hard, and so on; flour, white, soft, and so on; and from
that they conclude, on the reports of their eyes and hands, that these are essentially different bodies, which shows that they do not think about the way in
which wheat is changed into flour. Nevertheless, flour is nothing but crushed and
ground wheat, just as a fire is nothing but divided and agitated wood, cinders only
the heaviest wood divided without being agitated, and glass nothing but cinders of
which every particle has been polished and rounded off a bit by the rubbing
caused by fire, and so on with the other transmutations of bodies.
It is therefore obvious that terms for sensible ideas are completely useless for
the distinct proposal and clear resolution of questions, i.e., for the discovery of
truth. Nevertheless. there are no questions, as encumbered as they may be by the
equivocal term~ of sense, that Aristotle and the majority of philosophers do not
claim to resolve in their books, without these distinctions we have just given,
becau~c thc~c terms are equivocal through error and ignorance.
Consider, lor example, those who have spent all their lives reading the ancient

The Search after Truth

443

philosophers or doctors, and who have been entirely captivated by their spirit and
opinions. If one asks them whether water is moist, fire dry, wine hot, the blood
of fish cold, whether water is harder than wine, gold more perfect than
quicksilver, whether plants and animals have souls, and a million other indeterminate questions, they will answer them imprudently without consulting anything other than the impressions these objects have made on their senses, or those
which their reading has left on their memory. They will not see that these terms
are equivocal; they will find it strange that we want to define them, and they will
lose patience if we try to make them see that they are going a little too fast and
that their senses are beguiling them. They will always use any distinction for
confusing the most obvious things, and in these questions, where it is necessary
to omit the equivocal, they find nothing to distinguish.
If we consider that most of the questions of philosophers and doctors include
some equivocal terms similar to those of which we are speaking, we shall not be
able to doubt that these scholars, who could not define these terms, also could not
say anything well-founded in the huge volumes that they composed about them,
and what I have just said suffices to overturn nearly all the opinions of the
ancients. Such is not the case with Descartes. He knew how to distinguish these
things perfectly. He does not resolve questions through sensible ideas, and if one
takes the trouble to read him, one will see that he explains the principal effects of
nature in a clear, obvious, and often demonstrative manner using the only ideas
that are distinct, i.e., those of extension, figure, and motion, the principal effects
of nature.
The other type of equivocal terms used by philosophers includes all these
general terms of logic with which it is easy to explain all things without having
the slightest knowledge of them. Aristotle is the one who used them the most: all
his books are full of them, and there are some that are only pure logic. He
presents and resolves all things through the use of these lovely words: genus,
species, act, potency, nature, form, faculties, qualities, cause in itself, and
accidental cause. His followers have trouble understanding that these words
signify nothing, and that they are no more learned than before just because they
are heard to say that fire dissolves metals because it has a dissolving faculty; and
that man does not digest because he has a weak stomach or because his digestive
faculty is not performing its functions well.
It is true that those who use only these general terms and ideas for explaining
everything do not make as many mistakes as those who use terms that arouse
only the confused ideas of sense. The Scholastic philosophers are not so subject
to error as certain opinionated doctors who dogmatize and base systems on
experiments whose explanations they do not understand, because the scholastics
speak so generally that they do not risk very much.
Fire heats, dries, hardens, and softens because it has the faculty to produce
these effects. Senna purges because of its purgative quality; bread even
nourishes, if you will, through its nutritive quality: these propositions are not
subject to error. A quality is why we call a thing by this or that name-one
cannot deny Aristotle that-for in the end this definition is incontestable. These

444

Nicolas Malebranche

or similar ways of speaking are not false: it is just that in effect they mean
nothing. These vague and indeterminate ideas do not involve one in error, but
they are completely useless for discovering truth.
For even if you know that there is a substantial form in fire, accompanied by a
million faculties similar to those for heating, dilating, and melting gold, silver,
and all metals; for lighting, boiling, and cooking; <nevertheless> if you ask me to
solve this difficulty-namely, can fire harden mud and soften wax?-the ideas
of substantial forms and faculties for producing heat, rarefaction, fluidity, and so
on, would be useless to me in discovering whether fire would be capable of
hardening mud and softening wax, there being no connection whatsoever be·
tween the ideas of the hardness of mud and the softness of wax and the ideas of
the substantial form of fire, and of the qualities of producing rarefaction, fluidity,
and so on. It is the same with all general ideas. Thus, they are completely useless
for resolving a single question.
But if you know that fire is nothing more than wood whose particles are in
continual agitation, and that it is only through this agitation that it arouses the
sensation of heat in us; if you know also that the softness of mud only consists in
a mixture of earth and water: then as these ideas are not confused and general, but
distinct and particular, it will not be difficult to see that the heat of fire must
harden mud; because there is nothing easier to conceive than the fact that one
body can move another if, being agitated, it collides with it. You can see with no
difficulty that since the heat you feel near fire is caused by the motion of the
invisible parts of wood striking against the hands, if you expose mud to the heat
of fire, the particles of water that are in contact with the earth, being more
loosened and consequently more agitated by the collision of the tiny bodies
emitting from the fire than are the heavy particles of earth, they must be sepa·
rated from it and hence leave it dry and hard. In the same way you will clearly see
that fire must not harden wax, if you know that the particles composing it are
twisted and of about the same bulk. Thus, particular ideas are useful in the search
after truth; and not only are vague and indeterminate ideas incapable of being
useful in that search, but on the contrary they insensibly involve us in error.
For philosophers are not content to use general terms and vague ideas that
correspond to them; in addition they would have these terms signify certain
particular beings. They claim that there is some substance distinguished from
matter, which is the form of matter, as well as an infinity of lesser beings really
distinguished from matter and form; and they normally posit as many of these as
they have different sensations of bodies, and as they think there are different
effects that these bodies produce.
Nevertheless, it is obvious to every man capable of any attention that all these
lesser beings distinguished from fire, for example, that are supposedly contained
in it to produce heat, light, hardness, fluidity, and so on, are only figmentsofthe
imagination that rebel against reason; for reason has no particular idea that
represents these lesser beings. If we ask the philosophers what sort of entity is
fire's illuminating faculty, they will answer only that it is the being that causes
fire to be capable of producing light. So their idea of this faculty is no different

The Search after Truth

445

from the general idea of cause and the confused idea of the effect they see. They
therefore have no clear idea of what they are saying when they allow for these
particular beings. Thus, they say what they do not even conceive, and even what
is impossible to conceive.

BOOK SIX: PART TWO
Chapter Three

The most dangerous error of the philosophy of the ancients.
Not only do philosophers say what they do not conceive when they explain
natural effects through certain beings of which they have not one single particular
idea, they even furnish a principle from which one can directly infer very false
and very dangerous conclusions.
For if we assume, in accordance with their opinion, that bodies have certain
entities distinct from matter in them, then, having no distinct idea of these
entities, we can easily imagine that they are the true or major causes of the effects
we see. That is even the general opinion of ordinary philosophers; for it is mainly
to explain these effects that they think there are substantial forms, real qualities,
and other similar entities. If we next consider attentively our idea of cause or of
power to act, we cannot doubt that this idea represents something divine. For the
idea of a sovereign power is the idea of sovereign divinity, and the idea of a
subordinate power is the idea of a lower divinity, but a genuine one, at least
according to the pagans, assuming that it is the idea of a genuine power or
cause. We therefore admit something divine in all the bodies around us when we
posit forms, faculties, qualities, virtues, or real beings capable of producing
certain effects through the force of their nature; and thus we insensibly adopt the
opinion of the pagans because of our respect for their philosophy. It is true that
faith corrects us; but perhaps it can be said in this connection that if the heart is
Christian, the mind is basically pagan. Perhaps it will be said that substantial
forms, those plastic forms, for example, that produce animals and plants, do not
know what they are doing and that, thus lacking intelligence, they have no
relation to the divinities of the pagans. But who will be able to believe that what
produces works that manifest a wisdom that surpasses all philosophers produces
them without intelligence?
Furthermore, it is difficult to be persuaded that we should neither fear nor Jove
true powers-beings that can act upon us, punish us with pain, or reward us with
pleasure. And ao; Jove and fear are true adoration, it is also difficult to be
persuaded that we should not adore these beings. Everything that can act upon us
as a true and real cause is necessarily above us, according to Saint Augustine and
according to reason; and according to the same saint and the same reason, it is an
446

The Search after Truth

447

immutable law that inferior things serve superior ones. It is for these reasons that
this great saint recognizes8 that the body cannot act upon the soul, b and that
nothing can be above the soul except God.
In the Sacred Scriptures, when God proves to the Israelites that they must
adore Him, i.e., that they must fear and love Him, the main reasons He gives are
drawn from His power to reward and punish them. He shows them the benefits
they have received from Him, the evils for which He chastised them, and that He
still has the same power. He forbids them to adore the gods of the pagans because
they have no power over them and can do them neither good nor evil. He wants
them to honor only Him because He alone is the true cause of good and evil, and
because nothing happens in their city, according to one prophet, c that He himself
does not cause: because natural causes are not the true causes of the ill they
appear to cause us, and because, as it is God alone who acts in them, it is He
alone who must be feared, and who must be loved in them; ''Soli Deo honor et
gloria" [I Tim. 1:17].
Finally, this opinion that we should love and fear what can be the true cause of
good and evil appears so natural and right that it is impossible to disbelieve it.
Hence, if we assume this false opinion of the philosophers, which we are here
trying to destroy, that the bodies that surround us are the true causes of the
pleasures and ills we feel, reason seems to some degree to justify a religion
similar to that of the pagans, and to approve the universal disorder of morals.
It is true that reason does not teach that it is necessary to adore onions and
leeks, for example, as the sovereign divinity, because they cannot make us
completely happy when we have them, nor entirely unhappy when we do not.
Also the pagans never gave them as much honor as they gave to the great Jupiter,
on whom all their divinities depended, or as they gave to the sun, which our
senses represent to us as the universal cause that gives life and motion to all
things, and that we cannot help regarding as a divinity if we assume with the
pagan philosophers that it encompasses in its being the true causes of everything
it seems to produce, not only in our bodies and minds, but also in all the beings
that surround us.
But if one should not render sovereign honor to leeks and onions, one can
always render them some particular adoration; I mean, one can think of them and
love them to some extent, if it is true that they can to some extent make us happy.
We should render them honor in proportion to the good they can do. And
certainly. men who heed the reports of their senses think these vegetables are
capable of doing them good. The Israelites, for example, would not have missed
them so much in the desert, they would not have considered themselves unhappy
for want of them, had they imagined themselves in some way happy because of
their enjoyment of them. Perhaps drunkards would not love wine so much if they
""Ego cnim ab anima hue l'orpus animari non puto. nisi intentione facientis; nee ab isto quicquam
illam pati arbitn>r. sed facerc de ill<• ct in illu. tam<juam subjecto divinitus dmninatiunis suae. · · 1. 6.
MII.<.C'. ~.
"Sec chapter 34 of St. Augustine
''Amos. chs. 3, fl.

[)<' qllalllital<' animac·.

448

Nicolas Malebranche

were well aware of what it is, and that the pleasure they find in drinking it comes
from the Almighty, who commands them to be temperate and whom they unjustly cause to serve their intemperance. Those are the disorders in which we
involve reason itself when it is joined to the principles of pagan philosophy and
when it follows the impressions of the senses.
In order that we shall no longer be able to doubt the falseness of this detestable
philosophy and shall clearly recognize the soundness of the principles and the
distinctness of the ideas being used, it is necessary clearly to establish the truths
that are opposed to the errors of the ancient philosopher, and to prove in few
words that there is only one true cause because there is only one true God; that
the nature or power of each thing is nothing but the will of God; that all natural
causes are not true causes but only occasional causes, and certain other truths
that will follow from these.
It is clear that no body, large or small, has the power to move itself. A
mountain, a house, a rock, a grain of sand, in short, the tiniest or largest body
conceivable does not have the power to move itself. We have only two sorts of
ideas, ideas of minds and ideas of bodies; and as we should speak only of what
we conceive, we should only reason according to these two kinds of ideas. Thus,
since the idea we have of all bodies makes us aware that they cannot move
themselves, it must be concluded that it is minds which move them. a But when
we examine our idea of all finite minds, we do not see any necessary connection
between their will and the motion of any body whatsoever. On the contrary. we
see that there is none and that there can be none. We must therefore also
conclude, if we wish to reason according to our lights, that there is absolutely no
mind created that can move a body as a true or principal cause, just as it has been
said that no body could move itself.
But when one thinks about the idea of God, i.e., of an infmitely perfect and
consequently all-powerful being, one knows there is such a connection between
His will and the motion of all bodies, that it is impossible to conceive that He
wills a body to be moved and that this body not be moved. We must therefore say
that only His will can move bodies if we wish to state things as we conceive them
and not as we sense them. The motor force of bodies is therefore not in the bodies
that are moved, for this motor force is nothing other than the will of God. Thus,
bodies have no action; and when a ball that is moved collides with and moves
another, it communicates to it nothing of its own, for it does not itself have the
force it communicates to it. Nevertheless, a ball is the natural cause of the motion
it communicates. A natural cause is therefore not a real and true but only an
occasional cause, which determines the Author of nature to act in such and such a
manner in such and such a situation.
It is certain that all things are produced through the motion of either visible or
invisible bodies, for experience teaches us that bodies whose parts have more
motion are always those that act more and pmducc more change in the world. All
•sec rhr seventh /Jialoi(Ut' on Mrtuph_v.l-it·.•· and rhe fifth
14 JH).

or !he Chri.rtitm

Mt'ditations (3-9 and

The Search after Truth

449

natural forces are therefore nothing but the will of God, which is always efficacious. God created the world because He willed it: "Dixit, & facta sunt" [Ps.
32:9]; and He moves all things, and thus produces all the effects that we see
happening, because He also willed certain laws according to which motion is
communicated upon the collison of bodies; and because these laws are efficacious, they act, whereas bodies cannot act. There are therefore no forces, powers, or true causes in the material, sensible world; and it is not necessary to admit
the existence of forms, faculties, and real qualities for producing effects that
bodies do not produce and for sharing with God the force and power essential to
Him.
But not only are bodies incapable of being the true causes of whatever exists:
the most noble minds are in a similar state of impotence. They can know nothing
unless God enlightens them. They can sense nothing unless God modifies them.
They are incapable of willing anything unless God moves them toward good in
general, i.e., toward Himself. They can determine the impression God gives
them toward Himself toward objects other than Himself, I admit; but I do not
know if that can be called power. If the ability to sin is a power, it will be a power
that the Almighty does not have, Saint Augustine says somewhere. If men held,
of themselves, the power to love the good, we could say they had some power;
but men can only love because God wills them to and because His will is
efficacious. Men can only love because God incessantly pushes them toward the
good in general, i.e., toward Himself; for God having created them only for
Himself, He never preserves them without turning and pushing them toward
Himself. It is not they who move themselves toward the good in general, it is
God who moves them. They merely follow this impression through an entirely
free choice according to the law of God, or they determine it toward false goods,
according to the law of the flesh; but they can determine it only through the
perception of good, for, being capable only of what God makes them do, they
can love only the good.
But were one to assume what is in one sense true, that minds have in themselves the power to know truth and to love good, still, if their thoughts and wills
produced nothing externally, one could always say that they are capable of
nothing. Now it appears to me quite certain that the will of minds is incapable of
moving the smallest body in the world; for it is clear that there is no necessary
connection between our will to move our arms, for example, and the movement
of our arms. It is true that they are moved when we will it, and that thus we are
the natural cause of the movement of our arms. But natural causes are not true
causes; they are only occasional causes that act only through the force and
efficacy of the will of God, as I have just explained.
For how could we move our arms? To move them, it is necessary to have
animal spirits, to send them through certain nerves toward certain muscles in
order to inflate and contract them, for it is thus that the arm attached to them is
moved; or according to the opinion of some others, it is still not known how that
happens. And we see that men who do not know that they have spirits, nerves,
and muscles move their arms, and even move them with more skill and ease than

Nicolas Malebranche

450

those who know anatomy best. Therefore, men will to move their arms, and only
God is able and knows how to move them. If a man cannot tum a tower upside
down, at least he knows what must be done to do so; but there is no man who
knows what must be done to move one of his fingers by means of animal spirits.
How, then, could men move their arms? These things seem obvious to me and, it
seems to me, to all those willing to think, although they are perhaps incomprehensible to all those willing only to sense.
But not only are men not the true causes of the movements they produce in
their bodies, there even seems to be some contradiction (in saying) that they
could be. A true cause as I understand it is one such that the mind perceives a
necessary connection between it and its effect. Now the mind perceives a necessary connection only between the will of an infinitely perfect being and its
effects. Therefore, it is only God who is the true cause and who truly has the
power to move bodies. I say further (a) that it is inconceivable that God could
communicate His power to move bodies to men or angels, and (b) that those who
claim that our power to move our arms is a true power should admit that God can
also give to minds the power to create, annihilate, and to do all possible things; in
short, that He can render them omnipotent, as I shall show.
God needs no instruments to act; it suffices that He wills• in order that a thing
be, because it is a contradiction that He should will and that what He wills should
not happen. Therefore, His power is His will, and to communicate His power is
to communicate the efficacy of His will. But to communicate this efficacy to a
man or an angel signifies nothing other than to will that when a man or an angel
shall will this or that body to be moved it will actually be moved. Now in this
case, I see two wills concurring when an angel moves a body; that of God and
that of the angel; and in order to know which of the two is the true cause of the
movement of this body, it is necessary to know which one is efficacious. There is
a necessary connection between the will of God and the thing He wills. God wills
in this case that, when an angel wills this or that body be moved, it will be
moved. Therefore, there is a necessary connection between the will of God and
the movement of the body; and consequently it is God who is the true cause of its
movement, whereas the will of the angel is only the occasional cause.
But to show this still more clearly, let us suppose that God wills to produce the
opposite of what some minds will, as might be thought in the case of demons or
some other minds that deserve this punishment. One could not say in this case
that God would communicate His power to them, since they could do nothing
they willed to do. Nevertheless, the wills of these minds would be the natural
causes of the effects produced. Such bodies would be moved to the right only
because these minds willed them moved to the left; and the volitions of these
minds would determine the will of God to act, as our willing to move the parts of
our bodies determines the first cause to move them. Thus, all the volitions of
minds are only occasional causes.
"It is clear that I am speaking here about practical volitions. or those God has when He wills to

act.

The Search after Truth

451

But if after all these arguments someone still wishes to maintain that the will of
an angel who moved a body would be a true and not an occasional cause, it is
clear that this same angel could be the true cause of the creation and annihilation
of all things. For God could communicate to him His power to create and
annihilate bodies, as <He does> the power to move them, if He willed all things
to be created and annihilated, in a word if He willed all things to happen as the
angel would will, just as He willed bodies to be moved as the angel would will.
Therefore, if someone claims that an angel and a man are true movers because
God moves bodies when they will it, they must also say that a man and an angel
can truly be creators, since God could create beings when they would will it.
Perhaps one could even say that the most vile animals. or matter all by itself.
would effectively cause the creation of some substance, if one assumed as do the
philosophers 8 that God produced substantial fonns when required by matter.
Finally, because God resolved from all eternity to create certain things in a
certain time, one could also say that these times would be the causes of the
creation of these beings; just as one claims that a ball that collides with another is
the true cause of the movement it communicates to it, because God willed
through His general will, which causes the order of nature, that when two bodies
collide, such a communication of motion occurs.
There is therefore only one single true God and one single cause that is truly a
cause, and one should not imagine that what precedes an effect is its true cause.
God cannot even communicate His power to creatures, if we follow the lights of
reason; He cannot make true causes of them. He cannot make them gods. But
even if He could, we cannot conceive why He would. Bodies, minds, pure
intelligences, all these can do nothing. It is He who made minds, who enlightens
and activates them. It is He who created the sky and the earth, and who regulates
their motions. In short, it is the Author of our being who executes our wills:
semel jussit, semper paret. He moves our anns even when we use them against
His orders; for He complains through His prophetb that we make Him serve our
unjust and criminal desires.
All these insignificant pagan divinities and all these particular causes of the
philosophers are merely chimeras that the wicked mind tries to establish to
undermine worship of the true God in order to occupy the minds and hearts that
the Creator has made only for Himself. It is not the philosophy received from
Adam that teaches these things; it is that received from the serpent; for since
Original Sin, the mind of man is quite pagan. It is this philosophy that, together
with the errors of the senses, made men adore the sun, and that today is still the
universal cause of the disorder of men's minds and the corruption of men's
hearts. Their actions and sometimes even their words ask why we should not love
the body, since bodies are capable of gorging us with pleasure. And why do
people mock the Israelites who longed for the cabbages and onions of Egypt.
since they were actually unhappy being deprived of something that could make
•See the Elucidation on the efficacy of secondary causes [15]. Dia/og11es on M<'laplrysics. seventh
Dialogue.

•tsa. 43:24.

452

Nicolas Malebranche

them to some extent happy. But the philosophy that is called new, which is
represented as a specter to frighten feeble minds, which is scorned and condemned without being understood, the new philosophy, I say (since it is the
fashion to call it thus), ruins all the arguments of the skeptics through the
establishment of the greatest of its principles, which is in perfect hannony with
the first• principle of the Christian religion: that we must love and fear only one
God, since there is only one God who can make us happy.
For if religion teaches us that there is only one true God, this philosophy shows
us that there is only one true cause. If religion teaches us that all the divinities of
paganism are merely stones and metals without life or motion, this philosophy
also reveals to us that all secondary causes, or all the divinities of philosophy, are
merely matter and inefficacious wills. Finally, if religion teaches us that we must
not genuflect before false gods, this philosophy also teaches us that our imaginations and minds must not bow before the imaginary greatness and power of
causes that are not causes at all; that we must neither love nor fear them; that we
must not be concerned with them; that we must think only of God alone, see God
in all things, fear and love God in all things.
But that is not the inclination of some philosophers. They do not want to see
God, they do not want to think about God; for since sin there is a secret
opposition between man and God. They take pleasure in fabricating gods at their
whim, and they willingly love and fear the figments of their imaginations, as the
pagans do the works of their hands. They are like children who tremble before
their companions after they have painted their faces. Or if one wishes a more
noble comparison, although perhaps not as accurate, they resemble those famous
Romans who had fear and respect for the figments of the imagination, and who
foolishly worshiped their emperors after they had released the eagle at their
apotheoses.

"Haec est religio Christiana, fratres mei, quae praedicatur per universum mundum horrentibus
inimicis. et ubi vincuntur murmurantibus, ubi praevalent savientibus, haec est religio Christiana ut
COLTUR liNUS DEUS NON MULTI D/1. QUIA NON FACIT ANIMAM BEATAM NISI
UN/IS Df:IIS." Aug. Tmct. 23 on St. John [C. S].

BOOK SIX: PART TWO
Chapter Four

t

An explanation of the second part of the general rule. That philo.wplll•rs almlHt
never observe it, and that Descartes tried to obsen-e it precisdy in his physics.
as is prol'ed through the summary of it gil·en here.
I have just shown what errors we can make when we reason on the basis of the
false and confused ideas of the senses and the vague and indeterminate ideas of
pure logic. As a result, it is fairly easy to see that, to keep our perceptions clear,
it is absolutely necessary to observe exactly the rule we have just prescribed, and
to study which ideas are the clear and distinct ideas of things, in order to reason
only according to these ideas.
In this same general rule regarding the subject of our studies, there is still this
circumstance to note well, namely, that we must always begin with the simplest
and easiest things, and dwell on that point, if necessary even for quite a while,
before undertaking the search for more complex and difficult ones. For if we
must reason only on the basis of clear and distinct ideas in order to keep our
perceptions clear, it is clear that we must never go on to the search for complex
things before having very carefully examined, and become quite familiar with,
the simple ones on which they depend. For ideas of complex things are not clear,
and cannot be when our knowledge of the simple ones composing them is
confused and imperfect.
We know things imperfectly when we are not sure that we have considered all
their parts; and we know them confusedly when they are not sufficiently familiar
to the mind, even if we are sure we have considered all their parts. When things
are known only imperfectly, we can offer only probable explanations. When we
perceive things confusedly, there is neither order nor light in our deductions;
often we know neither where we are nor where we are going. But when we know
things imperfectly and confusedly at the same time, which is most common, we
never clearly know what we are seeking nor the means for finding it. Hence it is
absolutely necessary to preserve this order inviolably in one's studies: always
begin with the simplest things, examine all their parts, and become .familiar with
them before going on to the more complex ones upon which they depe11d.
But this rule does not correspond to men's inclinations. They have a natural
453

454

Nicolas Malebranche

scorn for everything that appears easy, and their minds, which are not made for a
limited object that is easy to understand, cannot long dwell on consideration of
these simple ideas, which do not have the character of the infinite, for the
consideration of which they are made. They have, on the contrary, and for the
same reason, great respect and eagerness for great things that concern the infinite, and even for those that are obscure and mysterious. It is not basically that
they love darkness; it is just that they hope to find there the good that they desire,
and that in broad daylight they realize that it is not to be found here below.
Vanity also significantly disturbs minds, throwing them from the outset into
the great and extraordinary. and the foolish hope of success keeps them there.
Experience teaches that the most exact knowledge of ordinary things gives no
reputation in the world, and that knowledge of uncommon things, as confused
and imperfect as it may be, always attracts the esteem and respect of those who
willingly form a lofty idea of what they do not understand. And this experience
determines all those who are more sensitive to vanity than to truth, and consequently most men, to a blind search for these specious and imaginary bits of
knowledge of all that is great, rare, and obscure.
How many people reject Descartes's philosophy for the ridiculous reason that
its principles are too simple and easy! There are no obscure, mysterious terms in
this philosophy; women and people who know neither Greek nor Latin can learn
it; therefore, it must be something insignificant, and inappropriate for great
geniuses to apply themselves to it. They imagine that such clear and simple
principles are insufficiently fecund to explain natural effects, which they assume
to be obscure and perplexing. They do not immediately see the use of these
principles, which are too simple and easy to attract their attention for the time it
takes to recognize their use and scope. They therefore prefer to explain effects
whose causes they do not understand by principles they do not conceive and that
are absolutely inconceivable rather than by principles at once both simple and
intelligible. For these philosophers explain obscure things through principles that
are not only obscure but entirely incomprehensible.
When some people claim to explain extremely confusing things through principles that are clear and known by everyone, it is easy to see whether they
succeed, because if we clearly conceive what they say, we can recognize whether
they speak the truth. Thus, false scholars do not find it to their advantage and are
not admired as they wish when they use intelligible principles, because we
clearly recognize that they are saying nothing true. But when they use unknown
principles and speak of very complex things, as though they had an exact knowledge of all their relations, they are admired, because people do not conceive what
they are saying, and we naturally respect what surpasses our intelligence.
Now, as obscure and incomprehensible things seem to be better connected to
each other than obscure things to those that are clear and intelligible, incomprehensible principles are more useful in very complex questions than intelligible
principles. There is nothing so difficult that philosophers and physicians do not
claim to explain it in few words by their principles; for since their principles are
still more incomprehensible than all the questions we can solve by them, when
we assume these principles to be certain, no problem can embarrao;s them.

The Search after Truth

455

For example, they respond boldly and without hesitation to these obscure or
indeterminate questions: Why does the sun attract vapors, quinquina arrest sleeping sickness, rhubarb purge bile, and polychrestral salts cure phlegm? and to
other such questions. And the majority of men are sufficiently satisfied with their
responses, because the obscure and the incomprehensible adapt well to each
other. But incomprehensible principles are not easily adapted to clearly exposed
and easily resolved questions, because we clearly recognize that they signify
nothing. Philosophers cannot, through their principles, explain how horses pull a
chariot; how dust stops a watch; how tripoli cleans metals, and brushes clean
clothing. For they would make themselves ridiculous to everyone if they assumed (the existence oO a motion of attraction and attractive faculties to explain
why chariots follow the horses to which they are harnessed, and a detersil•e
faculty in brushes to clean clothing, and so on with other questions. Thus, their
great principles are useful only for obscure questions because they are incomprehensible.
Therefore, we need not dwell on any one of all these principles that no one
knows clearly and evidently and that, one may think, are not accepted by some
nations. It is necessary to consider our ideas of extension, figure, and locomotion, and the relations between these things. If we distinctly conceive these ideas
and find them so clear that we are convinced that all nations in all times have
accepted them, then it is necessary to pause there and examine all their relations;
but if we find them obscure, we must look for others if they can be found. For if
it is necessary always to keep our perceptions clear in order to reason without fear
of being mistaken, then we must reason only on clear ideas and their clearly
known relations.
To consider the properties of extension in an orderly way, it is necessary to
begin, as Descartes did, with their simplest relations and to go from the simple to
the more complex ones, not only because this method is natural and helps the
mind in these operations, but also because as God always acts with order and in
the simplest ways, this method of examining our ideas will make us better
understand His works. And if we consider that the simplest relations are always
the first to be presented to the imagination when it is not determined to think of
one thing rather than another, we shall recognize that to regard things with
attention and without preoccupation is sufficient for adopting this orderly
method that we prescribe, and for discovering very complex truths, provided we
do not wish to rush from one subject to another too quickly.
If we consider extension attentively then, and without any prejudice. we will
see first of all that it is impenetrable, for it is contradictory to say that two feet of
extension make only one. But as we see no force whatever in the idea that
represents it, it is certainly not hard in itself, and hence each part must be
separated from its neighbor if they are pushed from different sides. Thus, we
conceive that motion is possible, even though there is no void and bodies are
impenetrable, because extension not being hard in itself. when one part advances. the others. since there is no void, will be pushed toward the place it
leaves in advancing. thus slipping in and so producing a circular motion. But if
we conceive an infinity of rectilinear motions in an infinity of similar parts of this

456

Nicolas Malebranche

immense extension we are considering, it is still nece~>sary for all these bodies
that obstruct one another to tend by their mutual action and reaction, I mean the
mutual communication of all their particular motions, to move with a circular
motion.
This initial consideration of the simplest relations of our ideas already causes
us to recognize the necessity of Descartes's vortexes; that their number will
increase in proportion as the rectilinear motions of all the parts of extension,
having been more opposed to each other, will have had greater difficulty accommodating the same motion; that of all these vortexes, the largest will be those
wherein more parts have tended toward the same motion, or whose parts have
had more power to continue their rectilinear motion.
But we must be careful not to dissipate or tire the mind by uselessly applying it
to the infinite number and immense size of the vortexes. It is first necessary to
dwell for a while on one of these vortexes, to search out with order and concentration all the motions of the matter it contains, and all the figures with which all
.the parts of this matter should be invested.
As only rectilinear motion is simple, it must first be considered as the one with
which all bodies tend to move, since God always acts in the simplest ways, and
since in effect bodies move circularly only because they encounter constant
resistance in their rectilinear movements. Hence, since bodies are not all the
same size, and since the largest ones have more power to continue their rectilinear motion than the others, we can easily conceive that the tiniest of all
bodies must be found toward the center of the vortex and the largest toward the
circumference, since the lines we conceive to be described by the movements of
the bodies at the circumference more nearly approach the straight than those
described by the bodies near the center.
If we consider once more that each part of this matter could not be moved at
first without finding some constant opposition to its movement, unless it rounded
off and broke its comers, we will easily recognize that this whole extension will
still be composed of only two kinds of bodies: round balls8 that constantly
revolve on their centers in several different ways and that, beyond their particular
motion, are also carried by the common motion of the vortex; and a very fluid
and highly agitated matter, generated by the crumpling of the balls of which we
have just spoken. In addition to the circular motion common to all parts of the
vortex, this subtle matter will also have a particular motion, almost rectilinear,
from the center of the vortex toward the circumference, through the intervals
between the balls that allow them free passage, so that their motion, composed of
these motions, will be in a spiral line. Since this fluid matter, which Descartes
calls the .first elem£'nt, is divided into much smaller parts that have much less
power to continue their rectilinear motion than do the balls, or the second element, it is clear that this first element must be in the center of the vortex and in
the intervals between the parts of the second, and that the parts of the second
"De••:arte' believes that tbc.e tiny halls arc solid, hut. in fact, they are tiny vortexes of a fluid
matt·nal. '" 1 shall 'ay in the Eluddation on h!(ht anti colors. My intention here is only to ~ivc some
otlca of ll•:scartt·•s system.

The Search after Truth

457

must fill the rest of the vortex and tend toward its circumference in proportion to
their bulk or strength to continue their rectilinear motion. As for the shape of the
entire vortex, it cannot be doubted, from what has just been said, that the
distance from one pole to the other is smaller than the line traversing the
equator. a And if we consider that the vortexes enclose one another, and press
unevenly upon each other, we will also clearly see that their equator is a curved,
irregular line that may approach an ellipse.
These are the things that naturally present themselves to the mind when we
carefully consider what must happen to the parts of extension, which constantly
tend to move in a straight line; i.e., with the simplest of all motions. Now
suppose we wish to assume something that seems very worthy of the wisdom and
power of God, namely, that He formed the entire universe instantaneously, and
in the same state in which its parts would have been arranged through time, by
the simplest means; and that He also preserves these parts through the same
natural laws. In short, if we wish to compare our ideas to the objects we see, we
will be able to judge: that the sun is the center of the vortex; that the corporeal
light it dispenses in all directions is nothing but the continual effort of the tiny
balls, which tend to recede from the center of the vortex; and that this light must
be transmitted instantaneously through immense spaces because, since all space
is full of these balls, one cannot be pressed without all the others next to it being
pressed.
Several other results are deducible from what I have just said, for the simplest
principles are the most fruitful for explaining the works of Him who always acts
in the simplest ways. But we still need to consider certain things that must
happen to matter. We should therefore consider that there are several vortexes
similar to the one we have just briefly described; that the centers of these vortexes
are the stars, which are so many suns; that the vortexes surround each other, and
that they are arranged in such a way that they hinder each other as little as
possible in their movements; but that things could not have happened this way
unless the weakest vortexes had been carried away and, as it were, absorbed by
the strongest.
To understand this, we have only to consider that the first element, which is in
the center of the vortex, can and does escape constantly through the intervals
between the balls toward the circumference of the same vortex; and while this
center or this star is being emptied through its equator, other of the first element
must enter at its poles; for this star cannot be emptied from one side without
being filled from the other, since there is no void in the world, as I assume here
and which is easy to prove through natural effects, i.e., through the transmission
of light. But as there may be an infinity of causes that can prevent very much of
the first element from entering this star of which we are speaking, it is necessary
for the parts of the first element that are forced to stay there to adapt themselves
to move in a single direction, which is how they become attached and bound to
each other, and form spots that, thickening into crusts, gradually cover the center
•By <'quator I mean the largest curved line described by the maner of the vonex.

458

Nicolas Malebranche

and tum the most subtle and agitated of all bodies into solid, gross matter. It is
this gross matter that Descartes calls the tllird element; and it is necessary to note
that, since it is engendered by the first, whose figures are infinite, it must be
arrayed with an infinity of different forms.
This star, thus covered with spots and crusts, and having become like other
planets, no longer has the strength to sustain and defend its vortex against the
constant effort of those around it. This vortex therefore gradually diminishes.
The matter that composes it is dispersed in all directions, and the strongest of the
neighboring vortexes carries away the largest part of it and finally envelops the
planet that is its center. The planet, finding itself completely surrounded by the
matter of this large vortex, floats there, preserving its former circular motion
with a small amount of the matter of its own vortex, and it finally takes a position
that puts it in equilibrium with an equal volume of the matter in which it floats. If
it has little solidity and size, it descends very close to the center of the vortex that
has surrounded it because, having little strength to continue its rectilinear motion, it must place itself in the part of this vortex where an equal volume of the
second element has as much strength as it does, to withdraw from the center; for
it can be at equilibrium only in this part. If this planet is larger and more solid, it
must find its equilibrium some place farther from the center of the vortex. And
finally if there is no place in the vortex where an equal volume of its matter has as
much solidity as this planet, and consequently as much strength to continue its
rectilinear motion (perhaps because this planet might be very large and covered
with very solid and thick crusts), it will not be able to stop in this vortex, since it
will not be able to put itself in equilibrium with the matter composing the vortex.
This planet will therefore pass into other vortexes; and if it does not find its
equilibrium there, it will not stop there either. So it may occasionally be seen
passing like a comet when it is in our vortex, and close enough to us for viewing;
and it will not be seen for a long time when it is in the other vortexes or at the
extremity of ours.
If we now consider that a single vortex, through its size, strength, and advantageous situation, can gradually consume, envelop, and finally carry away several other vortexes, even vortexes that have themselves overwhelmed several
others in the same way, then it will be necessary for the planets made in the
centers of these vortexes, having entered into the large vortex that has overcome
them, to place themselves in equilibrium there with an equal volume of the
matter in which they float. So that if these planets are of unequal solidity, they
will be located at unequal distances from the center of the vortex in which they
float. And if it happens that two planets have approximately the same strength to
continue their rectilinear motion, or that one planet carries away one or several
other smaller planets in its small vortex, which it will have overcome according
to our manner of conceiving the formation of things, then these small planets will
revolve around the largest, while the largest will tum on its center; and all these
planets will be carried around by the motion of the large vortex at almost equal
distances from its center.
If we are to follow the lights of reason, then we arc obliged to arrange the parts
of the world. which we imagine to have hcen formed in the simplest ways. in just

The Search after Truth

459

this way. For everything that has just been said rests only on our idea of extension, whose parts supposedly tend to move with the simplest motion, which is
rectilinear motion. And when we investigate through effects, if we do not err in
wanting to explain things by their causes, we are surprised to see that the
phenomena of the heavenly bodies are in rather close harmony with what has just
been stated. For we see that all the planets in the middle of a small vortex tum on
their own centers like the sun; that they all float around the sun in its vortex; that
the smallest or least solid are closest to the sun and the most solid are most
remote; and there are also some that, like comets, cannot remain in the vortex of
the sun. Finally, we see that several planets also have several other small ones
revolving around them, like the moon around the earth. Jupiter has four and
Saturn five, and Saturn is also the largest according to some astronomers. But if
it is not, then at least it must be the most solid. It is even possible that Saturn has
such a large number of tiny satellites that they have the same effect as a continuous circle, which appears to have no thickness because of its great remoteness.
These planets (being the largest we see) can be considered as having been
generated from vortexes large enough to have overcome others before having
been enveloped by the vortex we are in. Huygensa says that the diameter of
Saturn's ring is to that ofthe sun as II is to 37, that of its globe as 5 to 37, that of
Jupiter as 2 to 11, of Mars as I to 166, of earth as I to Ill, of Venus as I to 84,
and that of Mercury as 1 to 290. As for Saturn's year, or its revolution around the
sun, it is 29 years, 174 days, and 5 hours; Jupiter's is II years, 317 days, 15
hours; that of Mars, quite close to 687 days, earth's 365'A days; that of Venus,
224 days, 18 hours; and Mercury's is 88 days.
All these planets rotate on their centers: the Earth in 24 hours, Mars in about
25, Jupiter in approximately 10; but the moon makes its trip around its center
only once a month, since it always faces the same way. All the matter in which
they float revolves more quickly when it is closer to the sun or to the center of its
vortex because the line of its motion is shorter. Astronomers, following Kepler,
today holdb that the cubes of the distance between each planet and the center of
its revolution stand to each other as the squares of the times of their revolutions,
which also holds for the satellites of Jupiter and Saturn. When Mars is in opposition to the sun, it is fairly close to the earth; and it is extremely far from it when in
conjunction with the sun. The same is true of the superior planets, Jupiter and
Saturn; for the inferior ones, like Mercury and Venus, are never in opposition to
the sun, properly speaking. The lines that all the planets seem to describe around
the earth are not circles but almost ellipses; and all these ellipses appear quite
different because of the different positions of the planets in relation to us. In
short. everything we observe with certitude in the skies concerning the motion of
the planets is in rather close accord with what has just been said about their being
formed in the simplest ways.
There are many people who regard Descartes's vortexes as pure chimera~.
Nevertheless. nothing is easier to demonstrate by assuming: first. that every
;'('o.,·motllf.•oro,,.,

p. 14.

1 '('o.nr~otlu•oro.\·,

p. 105.

460

Nicolas Malebranche

moved body tends to move in a straight line, and second, that the planets have
circular movements, two truths certain by experience. For it is clear that if
Jupiter, for example, moved_ in a void, it would always travel in a straight line;
and that if it moved in matter that did not form a vortex or that did not revolve
around the sun, not only would it still continue to go in a straight line or at least a
spiral one but it would gradually lose its motion by communicating it to the fluid
it would displace. It is therefore necessary that celestial matter form a vortex and
that each planet be so situated in it that its effort to recede from the sun balances
the effort of an equal volume of this matter.
As for the fixed stars, experience teaches that there are some that diminish and
disappear entirely, and also some that seem completely new and whose brilliance
and size greatly increase. They increase and diminish as the vortexes of which
they are centers receive more or less of the first element. They become invisible
when spots and crusts are formed on them, and we begin to notice them when
these spots, which diminish their brilliance, have completely dissipated. These
stars always maintain the same distance between them, since they are the centers
of vortexes, and they are not carried away so long as they resist other vortexes or
remain stars. They are brilliant like small suns because they, like the sun, are the
centers of vortexes that have not yet been overcome. They are at different
distances from the earth, although they appear to the eye as though attached to a
vault; for if we have not yet observed the parallax of the closest ones with the
most remote, in virtue of the different position ofthe earth every six months, it is
because this difference of position is not great enough, because of the immense
distance separating us from the stars, to make this parallax perceptible. Perhaps
by means of telescopes we will be able to notice it somewhat. In short, nothing
observable in the stars through the senses and by experiment, seems different
from what has just been disclosed by the mind in examining the simplest and
most natural relations found between the parts and the motions of extension.
If we wish to examine the nature of bodies here below. it must first of all be
noted that since the first element is composed of an infinite number of different
figures, bodies formed by the assemblage of parts of this element will be of
several sorts. There will be some whose parts will be branched; others whose
parts will be long; and others whose parts will be rather round, but irregular in
every way. If their branched parts are gross enough, they will be hard, but
flexible, and inelastic, like gold; if their parts are less gross, bulky, they will be
soft or fluid, like gums, fats, and oils. But if their branched parts are extremely
delicate, they will be like air. If the long parts of bodies are gross, bulky. and
inflexible, they will be sharp, incorruptible, ea<;y to dissolve, like salts. If these
same long parts are flexible, they will be insipid like waters. If the bodies have
parts that are gmss and irregular in every way, they will be like earth and stones.
In short, there will be bodies of several different natures, and no two will be
completely alike. because the first element is capable of an infinity of figures,
and all these figures will never be combined in the same manner in two different
bodie~- Whatever figures these bodies have. if their pores arc large enough to
allow passage to the second clement in every direction, they will be transparent,

The Search after Truth

461

like air, water, glass, and so on. Whatever figures these bodies may have, if the
first element completely surrounds some of their parts and agitates them strongly
and swiftly enough to resist the second element on every side, they will be
luminous, like flame. If these bodies repulse all of the second element" that
strikes them, they will be completely white; if they admit it with no resistance,
they will be quite black; and finally, if they repel it through various bumps or
vibrations, they will appear to be of different colors.
As for their position, the heaviest or the least light, i.e., those that have less
strength for continuing their rectilinear motion, will be closest to the center, like
metals. Earth, water, and air will be more remote from the center, and all bodies
will remain where we see them because they must be placed further from the
center of the earth as they have more motion to recede from it.
And you should not be surprised if I now say that metals actually have less
force for continuing their rectilinear motion than do earth, water, and other
bodies even less solid, although I said previously that the most solid bodies have
more force to continue their rectilinear motion than others do. For the reason
metals have less force to continue their motion than do earth and rocks is that
metals have much less motion, since it is always true that, two bodies of unequal
solidity being moved at an equal speed, the more solid has more force to go in
a straight line because then the more solid has more motion, and it is motion that
makes force.
And if we wish to know the explanation of why gross bodies are heavy toward
the centers of vortexes and light when they are far removed from the center-for
example, if the earth were closer to the sun, it would recede to where it now
is-we must consider that heavy bodies receive their motion from the subtle
matter that surrounds them and in which they float. Now this subtle matter
actually moves in a circle around the center of the vortex, and it is this motion,
common to all its parts, that it communicates to the gross bulky bodies it surrounds. But it cannot communicate to them the movements particular to each part
that tends in a different direction, while nevertheless receding from the center of
the vortex. For we must note that the parts of the subtle matter, exerting effort in
different directions, can only compress the gross body they transport; for this
body cannot go in different directions at the same time. But because the subtle
matter toward the center of the vortex has much more motion than it uses to
rotate; because it communicates to the gross bodies it transports only its circular
motion, common to all its parts; and because if the gross bodies had motion in
addition to that which they have in common with the vortex, they would soon
lose it by communicating it to the tiny bodies with which they collide. From this
it is clear that the gross bodies toward the center of the vortex do not have as
much motion as the matter in which they float, whose every part moves in several
different ways besides their circular, common motion. And it is this motion, in
directions different from the circular, common one, that makes the subtle matter
lighter than the gross bodies whose parts are, as it were, at rest alongside each
"Sec lhe sixleenlh Elucidaliun un lhis puinl al lhe end of lhis work.

462

Nicolas Malebranche

other. When dust is disturbed, it becomes light because it has more freedom to
fulfill its upward than its downward motion, whose resistance and reaction are
greater. Hence gross bodies, having only the circular motion common to the
entire earth, are forced to yield, and consequently to approach the center of the
vortex, i.e., they become heavier as they become more solid. I explain the cause
of weight more precisely toward the end of the penultimate [16] elucidation. My
purpose here is to give only a summary of Descartes's physics.
But when gross bodies are very remote from the center ofthe vortex, since the
circular motion of the subtle matter is then very great (because it uses nearly all
its motion to rotate about the center of the vortex), the more solid these bodies
are, the more motion they have, since they travel at roughly the same speed as the
subtle matter in which they float. Thus, they have more strength to continue their
rectilinear motion. Thus, gross bodies, at a certain distance from the center of the
vortex, are lighter to the extent that they are more solid.
This, then, shows that the earth is metallic toward its center, that it is not very
solid toward its circumference, and that water and air must remain where we see
them; but that all these bodies have weight, a air as well as gold or quicksilver,
because they are more solid and more gross than the first and second elements.
This shows that the moon, although solid, is a bit too far removed from the center
of the earth's vortex to have weight; that Mercury, Venus, the earth, Mars,
Jupiter, and Saturn cannot fall into the sun, and that they are not solid enough to
leave their vortex like comets; that they are in equilibrium with the matter in
which they float; and that if a musket ball or a cannon bullet could be thrown high
enough, these two bodies would become tiny planets, or they would be sufficiently solid to become like tiny comets that could no longer be arrested in the
vortexes.
I do not claim to have sufficiently explained everything that I have just said, or
to have deduced from the simple principles of extension, figure, and motion
everything that can be derived from them. I only want to show the manner in
which Descartes undertook to discover natural things, in order that we may be
able to compare his ideas and method with those of other philosophers. I had no
other aim here. But I am not afraid to assert that if you wish to cease admiring the
power of the magnet, the controlled movements of the ebb and flow of the sea,
the noise of thunder, the generation of meteors, in short, if you want to be
basically instructed in physics, which can be done in no better way than to read
and to meditate UJX>n his works, you would not know how to do anything unless
you followed his method, that is, unless you reasoned as he does on the basis of
clear ideas, always beginning with the simplest ones.
It is not that this author is infallible, and indeed I think I can demonstrate that
he is mistaken in several places in his works. But it is more advantageous to those
who read him to believe that he is mistaken than to be persuaded that everything
he ~ays i~ true. If we hclieved him to be infallible, we would read him without
srudying him; we would hclieve what he said without understanding it; we would
,.., hal " 111 '"Y· they arc Jlre,o,ed Inward the <·enter of the cunh.

The Search after Truth

463

learn his views as we learn histories, which would not form the mind. He himself
warns that in reading his works we must take care that he is not mistaken, and we
must believe nothing he says unless we are obliged to do so by the evidence. For
he bears no resemblance to those false scholars who, usurping an unjustified
domination over minds, want everyone to take them at their word, and who,
instead of making men into disciples of internal truth by proposing only clear
ideas to them, subject them to the authority of pagans and, through arguments
they do not understand, force them into views they cannot comprehend.
It must be noted that in Descartes's time people had not discovered the secret
of centr(fugal forces, and it was not yet known how to measure their relations,
which is nevertheless necessary to perfect celestial physics. But aside from that
he was ignorant of what we have learned from the latest observations. If he had
only been convinced of what skillful astronomers agree upon today, namely, that
the cubes of the distances of celestial bodies from the centers of their rotation
stand to each other as the squares of the periods of their revolutions; and had he
known that centrifugal forces stand to each other as the squares of their speeds
divided by the diameter of their revolution, it would have been easy for him to
correct certain parts of his physics, and to make it more perfect. For by calculating their value, for example, by the preceding ratio, rather than by their periods,
i.e., the distances trans versed or the revolutions divided by their speeds, he
would have discovered a natural explanation of the equilibrium of the celestial
matter and the relations between the speeds and distances of the planets that it
transports while rotating. He would also have drawn many conclusions from the
knowledge of centrifugal forces that can be seen in works that appeared some
years ago. Descartes was not given to us by God to teach us everything that can
possibly be known, as Averroes says of Aristotle. He is often even mistaken, not
by fault of his method or the falsity of his principles (for he assumes nothing but
common notions and clear ideas), but because of the difficulty of following them
in the study of subjects that are too complex.
The principal criticism of the way Descartes explains the origin of the sun,
stars, earth, and all the bodies around us, is that it appears to be contrary to what
Sacred Scripture teaches us about the creation of the world; and that, if we
believe this author on that subject, it seems the universe was formed as it were by
itself, just as we see it today. Several replies can be given to this.
The first reply is that those who say Descartes is contrary to Moses, may not
have examined Sacred Scripture and Descartes as well as those who have written
to prove that the creation of the world is perfectly consistent with the views of
this philosopher.
But the major reply is that Descartes never claimed that things were made by
degrees as he describes them. For in the first article of the fourth part of his
philosophy, which is Tlrat in orda to find tire true causes of wlrat existJ on tire
eartlr. ll"e must retain tire lrypotlresis tlrat is a/reCllly accepted. nen !lit be ./c1l.H',
he positively states the contrary in these terms:
Although I do not wish to persuade anyone that the bodies that make up the visible
world were ever produced in the manner I have described, as I have advised above,!

464

Nicolas Malebranche

am nevertheless obliged here to retain the same hypothesis in order to explain what
exists on the earth, so that iflclearly show, as I hope to do, that we can by this means
provide quite intelligible and certain explanations of all the things observed there,
and that we cannot do the same thing in any other way, we have reason to conclude
that although in the beginning the world was not made in this way but had been
immediately created by God, all the things it contains would nevertheless now be of
the same nature as if they had been so produced.
Descartes knew that, in order to understand the nature of things, they must be
considered in their origin and birth; that we must always begin with the simplest
and go first to their principle; that it is unnecessary to go to the trouble of
discovering whether God formed His works gradually in the simplest ways or
produced them all at once, but that in whatever way God had formed them, in
order to understand them fully we must first consider them in their principles and
take care only in the sequel that what has been thought agrees with what God has
done. He knew that the laws of nature, through which God preserves all His
works in the order and situation in which they subsist, are the same laws as those
through which He was able to form and arrange them; for it is obvious to all those
who consider things with care that if God had not arranged His work all at once in
the manner in which they would be arranged through time, the entire order of
nature would be upset, since the laws of conservation would be contrary to the
order of the first creation. If the entire universe remains as we see it, it is because
the laws of motion that preserve it in this order were capable of so placing it. And
if God had placed them in an order different from the one in which they were
placed by the laws of motion, everything would be upset and would be placed, by
the force of these laws, in just the order in which we presently perceive them. For
example, if He had made the sun in a cubical shape, certainly it would soon have
become spherical as a result of the laws of motion.
Suppose a man wants to discover the nature of a chicken. To do this, every day
he opens all the eggs it lays. In them he notes a vesicle that contains the embryo
of the chicken, and in this vesicle a projecting point that he discovers to be its
heart; that from there, blood-carrying conduits that are the arteries go out in all
directions, and that this blood returns toward the heart via the veins; that the brain
also appears at an early stage, and that the bones are the last parts to be formed.
By this means he is delivered from a great many errors, and he even draws many
conclusions of considerable use in the understanding of animals from these
observations. What can one find to criticize in the conduct of this man? Can we
say that he would persuade us that God formed the first chicken by immediate
creation of an egg to which He gave a certain degree of heat in order to make it
hatch, just because He tries to discover the nature of chickens in their formation?
Then why accuse Descartes of being contrary to Scripture because, wanting to
examine the nature of visible things, he studies their formation according to the
laws of motion, which are inviolably observed in all ca~cs? He never doubted
this:a that the world was created in the beginning with as much pc•rfection as it
now lws .w that (I) the .wn, earth, moon, and Jtar.f hc11·c· exi.\fc•cl.\·inn• that time•,
(2) the earth not only had in itJe({ the Jc•c·ch of fl/anti hut II'CIJ c·l·c·n partially
"Ankle 4S of the third pan of his Prinripl•··•

The Search after Truth
co~·ered

465

by these plants, and (3) Adam and E1·e were created not as infants but at
the age of perfect men. The Christian religion, he says, desires that we beliel'e
this, and natural reason absolutely persuades us of this truth, because, considering the omnipotent nature of God, we should judge that el'erything He made has
all the perfection it should ha~·e. But just as we would ha1·e understood the
natures of Adam and of the trees of paradise much better if we had studied how
infants are gradually formed in the wombs of their mothers, and how plants grow
out of their seeds, than if we had only considered what they had been when God
created them, so in the same way we would better understand the nature of all
things in the world in general ifwe could imagine certain quite intelligible and
very simple principles, by which we could clearly show that the stars, the earth,
and in short the entire visible world might have been produced just as if from a
few seeds (even though we know that it was not produced in this manner) than if
we were merely to describe it as it is or as we belie~·e it was created; and because
I think I ha1•e found such principles, I shall try to explain them here.
Descartes thought that God had formed the world all at once. But he also
believed that God had formed it in the same state, in the same order, and with the
same arrangement of parts that it would have had if He had formed it gradually in
the simplest ways. And this thought is worthy of the power and wisdom of God:
of His power, since in an instant He made all His works in their greatest perfection; of His wisdom, because He thereby made it known that He perfectly
foresaw everything that would necessarily happen in matter if it were agitated by
the simplest means, and again because the order of nature could not subsist if the
world had been produced in a manner contrary to the laws of motion by which it
is preserved, as I have just said.
Furthermore, there is a great difference between the formation of living and
organized bodies, and that of the vortexes of which the universe is composed. An
organized body contains an infinity of parts that mutually depend upon one
another in relation to particular ends, all of which must be actually formed in
order to work as a whole. For it need not be imagined with Aristotle that the heart
is the first part to live and the last to die. The heart cannot beat without the
influence of the animal spirits, nor these be spread throughout the heart without
the nerves, and the nerves originate in the brain, from which they receive the
spirits. Moreover, the heart cannot beat and pump the blood through the arteries
unless they as well as the veins that return the blood to it are already complete. In
short, it is clear that a machine can only work when it is finished, and that hence
the heart cannot live alone. Thus, from the time this projecting point that is the
heart of the chicken appears in a setting egg. the chicken is alive; and for the
same reason, it is well to note, a woman's child is alive from the moment it is
conceived, because life begins when spirits cause the organs to work. which
cannot occur unless they are actually formed :md l'Onnel·ted. It would be wrong
then to pretend to explain the formation of animals and plants and their parts, one
after the other. on the basis of the simple and general laws governing the communication of motion; for they arc differently connected to one another hy \irtuc
of different ends and different uses in the different species. But surh is not thl'

466

Nicolas Malebranche

case with the formation of vortexes; they are naturally born from general laws, as
I have just in part explained.
It is ridiculous to say that Descartes believed that the world might have been
fonned by itself, since he recognized, as do all those who follow the light of
reason, that no body can move itself by its own forces, and that all the natural
laws of the communication of motion are but the consequences of the immutable
volitions of God, who always acts in the same way. Having proved that only God
gives motion to matter, and that motion produces in all bodies all the different
fonns with which they are invested, this was sufficient to deprive the skeptics of
all pretext for drawing any advantage from his system. On the contrary, if the
atheists reflected a little on the principles of this philosophy, they would soon
find themselves constrained to admit their errors; for if they can assert, like
pagans, that matter is not created, they cannot at the same time assert that it has
never been capable of moving itself by its own powers. Thus, the atheists would
at least be obliged to recognize the true mover, if they would not recognize the
true Creator. But ordinary philosophy furnishes them with enough to blind themselves and to support their mistakes, for it speaks to them of certain impressed
virtues, of certain motor faculties, in short, of a certain nature that is the principle
of motion in each thing; and although they have no distinct idea of this thing,
they are complacent enough, because of the corruption of their hearts, to substitute it for the true God, imagining that it causes all the wonders we see.

BOOK SIX: PART TWO
Chapter Five

An explication of the principles of Aristotle's philosophy. where it is shown that
he ne1·er obsen•ed the second part of the general rule. and where his four
elements, and his elementary qualities, are examined.
In order to compare the philosophies of Descartes and Aristotle, I shall first
summarize what the latter thought about the elements and natural bodies in
general, which the most learned men think he discussed in his four books On the
HeQI·ens, for the eight books on physics belong rather to logic or, if you will, to
metaphysics than to physics, for they consist of nothing but vague and general
words representing no distinct and particular idea to the mind. These four books
are entitled On the HeQI·ens because the heavens are the most important of the
simple bodies with which he deals.
This philosopher begins this work by proving that the world is perfect. Here is
his proof. All bodies have three dimensions; they could not have more, since the
number three encompasses everything, according to the Pythagoreans. Now, the
world is the assemblage of all bodies: therefore, the world is perfect. One could,
by this amusing proof, also demonstrate that the world could not be more imperfect than it is, since it cannot be composed of parts that have fewer than three
dimensions.
In the second chapter, he begins by assuming certain Peripatetic truths. First.
that all natural bodies have the power to move themselves, which he proves
neither here nor elsewhere. He affirms on the contrary, in the first chapter of the
second book of physics, that it is ridiculous to endeavor to prove it because. he
says, it is self-evident. and because only those who cannot discern what is
self-evident from what is not stop to prove the evident by the obsl·ure. But it has
been shown elsewhere that it is absolutely false that natural bodies have the
power to move themselves. and that this seems evident only to those who. like
Aristotle. follow the impressions of their senses and make no use of thl·ir reason.
In the second place. he says that all lnl·al movement is either in ;1 straight t>r
cin:ular line, or a line compt>Sl'd of these. But if he did not want to g.iw serious
considcratit>n to what Ill' so rashly P"'J"ll>ses, he should at least ha\e opened his
eyes. and he would have seen that then: arc infinitely many kinds of movenwnts
467

468

Nicolas Malebranche

that are not composed of the straight and the circular. Or rather, he should have
considered that even movements composed of movements in a straight line can
be circular in an infinity of ways, if we assume that the component movements
increase or diminish their speed in an infinity of different ways, as can be seen
from what we said previously. 8 There are, he says, only these two simple
motions, the straight and the circular; therefore, all motions are composed of
these. But he is mistaken: circular motion is not simple; we cannot conceive of it
without thinking of a point to which the body moved, rather than the motion, is
related, and everything that contains a relation is relative and not simple. But if
we define simple motion, as we should, as that which always tends toward the
same place, circular motion would be infmitely complex, since all the tangents of
the circular line lead in different directions. We may define the circle in relation
to its center; but to judge the simplicity of circular motion by reference to a point
with regard to which there is no motion would be ill-advised. It is obvious that a
body which moves through the circumference of a circle does not move in
relation to the mathematical point that is the center of the circle.
Third, he says that all simple motion is of three sorts: from the center, toward
the center, and the third around the center. But it is false that the last is simple, as
we have already said. It is also false that there are no simple motions except those
that go up or down, because all motions in a straight line are simple, whether
they approach or recede from the center, approach or recede from the poles, or
some other point. Every body, he says, is composed of three dimensions. Therefore, the motion of all bodies must have three simple motions. What relation do
simple motions and dimensions have to one another? Moreover, every body has
three dimensions, and no body has motion composed of these three simple
motions.
In the fourth place, he assumes that bodies are either simple or compound, and
he says that simple bodies are those such as fire, earth, and so on, which have in
themselves some force that moves them, and that compound bodies receive their
motion from the bodies composing them. But, in this sense, there are no simple
bodies at all, as there are none at all that have in themselves some principle of
their motion. Neither are there any compound bodies, since compound bodies
presuppose simple ones, which do not exist. Thus, there would be no bodies at
all. What imagination to define the simplicity of bodies by the power of selfmovement! What distinct ideas can be attached to these words simple and compound bodies if the simple bodies are defined only in relation to an imaginary
power to move themselves? But let us see what conclusions he draws from these
principles. Circular motion is simple motion; the heavens move in a circle;
therefore, their motion is simple. Now, simple motion can belong only to a
simple body, that is to say, to a body that moves by its own power: therefore, the
heavens are a simple body distinct from the four elements, which move rectilinearly. It is obvious enough that all this reasoning contains nothing but false
and absurd propositions. Let us examine his other proofs. since he supplies many
devices in them for proving what is as useless as it is false.
"Chapler 4.

The Search after Truth

469

His second argument for proving that the heavens are a simple body distinct
from the four elements assumes that there are two kinds of motion, the one
natural and the other against nature, or l'io/ent. But it is obvious enough to all
who judge things by clear ideas that since bodies have in themselves neither a
nature nor any principle of their motion, as Aristotle means it, no movement is
violent or against nature. Bodies are indifferent as to whether they are moved or
not, whether in one direction or the other. But Aristotle, who judges things by
sense impressions, imagines that bodies constantly placed in a certain situation
with regard to others, according to the laws of the communication of motion, put
themselves there because they find it better, and because it conforms more to
their nature. Here, then, is Aristotle's reasoning.
The circular motion of the heavens is either natural or against nature. If it is
natural, as we have just said, the heavens are a simple body distinct from the
elements, since the elements do not move circularly by their natural motion. So
either circular motion is contrary to the nature of the heavens, or the heavens will
be some one ofthe elements, such as fire, or something else. The heavens could
not be any of the elements because, for example, if the heavens were of fire, the
natural motion of fire being upward, the heavens would have two contrary
motions, circular and upward, which cannot be, since a body cannot have two
contrary motions. If the heavens are some other body, whose motion is not
naturally circular, it will have some other natural motion, which cannot be.
Because if it naturally moved upward, it would be fire or air; if downward, water
or earth: therefore, and so on. I shall not pause to comment on the absurdities of
these arguments in detail. I say only that in general what Aristotle says here
signifies nothing distinct, and there is nothing true or even persuasive in it. The
following is his third argument.
The first and the most perfect of all simple motions must be that of a simple
body, and even ofthe first and most perfect of simple bodies. But circular motion
is the first and most perfect of the simple motions, because every circular line is
perfect whereas no straight line is perfect. For if it is finite, something can be
added to it; if infinite, it is not yet perfect, since it has no end, • and things are
perfect only when they are complete. Therefore, circular motion is the first and
most perfect of motions. Therefore, the heavens (which move circularly) are
simple, and the first and most divine of the simple bodies. Here is his fourth
argument.
All motion either is natural or it is not. and all motion that is not natural to
some bodies is natural to some others. We see that upward and downwani
motions, which are not natural to some bodies. arc natural to others. sinl·c tire
does not descend naturally, but earth docs. Now. circular motion is not natural to
the four elements; there must be, then. a simple body to which this rmllion is
natural. Thus, the heavens. which move circularly. arc a simple body distinl'l
from the f(lur elements.
Finally, circular mlllion is natural or •·iolt·11t for sollll' bodies. If it is JHitural.

'""'""'''If'

"TrAotT and Tt:Ar.·cmr arc equiv••:al here as
Vi11i) and md Vml Tim phih'"'l'lll·r lhus
Jhal an infiniiC (111/illld line j, nul pcrli'l"l b.:<"illiSl' il IS nul l"Utnpkll' U1111.-J

JlroVC~

470

Nicolas Malebranche

the body clearly must be simple and most perfect. If it is not natural, it is very
strange that this motion is perpetual, since we see that all motions that are not
natural last only a very short time. Therefore, we must believe according to all
these reasons that there is some other body separated from all those around us
whose nature is the more perfect as it is farther removed from us. That is how
Aristotle reasons. But I defy the most intelligent of his interpreters to attach any
distinct ideas to the terms he employs, and to show that this philosopher begins
with the simplest things before talking of the most complex, which is absolutely
necessary for correct reasoning, as I have just proved.
Were I not afraid of boring the reader, I would translate a few chapters of
Aristotle. But besides the fact that one takes little pleasure in reading it in French
(i.e., when one understands it), I have made it clear enough, by the little of it I
have exposed, that his manner of philosophizing is completely useless for
discovering truth. For since he himself says in the fifth chapter of this book that
those who are mistaken in something from the outset are mistaken ten thousand
times more if they progress very far, and since he clearly does not know what he
is saying in the first two chapters of his book, we must believe that it is not safe to
rely on his authority without examining his reasoning. But to convince you even
more, I shall show that no chapter of this first book is without some absurdity.
In the third chapter, he says that the heavens are incorruptible and unalterable;
he supplies several rather trifling proofs for this, such as that they are the
dwelling place of the immortal gods, and that no change has ever been noted in
them. The last of these proofs would be good enough, if he said that someone had
returned from the heavens, or that he had been close enough to the heavenly
bodies to note changes in them. But I do not know if even now we would rely on
his authority, because telescopes teach us the opposite.
He claims to prove, in the fourth chapter, that circular motion has no contrary.
Nevertheless, it is manifest that motion from east to west is contrary to that from
west to east.
In the fifth chapter, he proves badly that bodies are not infinite, because he
draws his proof from the motions of simple bodies. For what prevents there being
some extension without motion above his first moved?
In the sixth chapter, he wastes his time proving that the elements are not
infinite. For who can doubt it, when one supposes as he does that they are
enclosed by the heavens that surround them? But he makes himself ridiculous
when he recommends proving this by means of their heaviness and lightness. If
the elements were infinite, he says, there would be an infinite heaviness and
lightness: that cannot be. Therefore, and so on. Those who want more extensive
knowledge of this proof can read it in his books. I believe I would be wasting
time to recount it.
He continues, in the seventh chapter, to pmve that bodies are not infinite, and
his first proof assumes that all bodies must be in motion, which he does not prove
and which cannot be pmven.
He maintains, in the eighth, that there arc not several worlds of the same kind,
for this amusing reason: that if there were an earth other than the one we inhabit,

The Search after Truth

471

since earth is heavy by its nature, this earth would have fallen on ours because
ours is the center toward which all heavy bodies must fall. Where did he learn
that but from his senses?
In the ninth chapter, he proves that it is not even possible that there be several
worlds, because if there were a body above the heavens, it would be simple or
compound, in a natural or violent state, which cannot be for reasons he draws
from the three types of motion of which he has already spoken.
He affirms, in the tenth, that the world is eternal because it cannot have begun
to be and at the same time last forever, since we see that everything that is made
is corrupted with time. He learned this from his senses. But who taught him that
the world will last forever?
He uses the eleventh chapter to explain what we mean by incorruptible, as if
equivocation were really a problem, or as if he had to make significant use of his
explanation. But this term incorruptible is so clear by itself that Aristotle does
not trouble to explain either in what sense it must be taken or in what sense he
takes it. It would have been more to the point had he defined an infinity of terms
he uses that arouse only sensible ideas, for then we might have learned something
by reading his works.
Finally, in the last chapter of this first book On the Hea1·ens, he tries to show
that the world is incorruptible because it cannot have begun to be and at the same
time last forever. All things, he says, subsist for a finite or an infinite time. But
what is infinite in only one sense is neither finite nor infinite. Therefore, nothing
can subsist in this way.
Behold the reasoning of the prince of philosophers and the genius of nature,
who, instead of making the true cause of natural effects known by clear and
distinct ideas, establishes a pagan philosophy on the false and confused ideas of
the senses, or on ideas too general to be useful in the search for truth.
I do not reprove Aristotle here for what he did not know, namely, that God
created the world in time to make known His power and the dependence of
creatures upon Him; and to show He is immutable and never regrets His plans,
He will never annihilate it. But I believe I can find fault with what he proves on
grounds that have no strength, namely, that the world has existed from all
eternity. If he is sometimes excusable in the opinions he supports, he is almost
never excusable in the arguments he adduces when he deals with subjects involving some difficulty. You may already be persuaded by the things I have just said,
although I have not outlined all the errors I encountered in the book from which I
extracted them, and of which I have tried to speak more clearly than is customary.
But, in order that you may be fully convinced that the !(I'll ius ~~r nature will
never reveal either the secrets or powers of nature to men, it is relevant that I
show that the principles on which this philosopher rcusons to cx.pluin naturul
effects have no solidity.
It is clear that one can discover nothing in physics" unless one begins with the
"I speak according to the opinion of the Peripatetics. C'. 3. I. 3 n,· cat•lo

472

Nicolas Malebranche

simplest bodies, the elements; for the elements are the bodies into which all
others are resolved, because they are contained in them either actually or potentially. This is how Aristotle defined them. But you will not find in his works that
Artistotle used a clear and distinct idea to explain these simple bodies into which
he claims the others are resolved. Therefore, since his elements are not clearly
known, it is impossible to discover the nature of the bodies composed of them.
This philosopher accurately states that there are four elements, fire, air, water,
and earth, but he does not make their nature clearly known; he gives no distinct
idea of them; he does not even want these elements to be the fire, the air, the
water, and the earth we see; for indeed if they were, we would at least have some
knowledge of them through our senses. It is true that in several places in his
works he tries to explain them by the qualities of heat and cold, moisture and
dryness, heaviness and lightness. But this way of explaining them is so absurd
and ridiculous that it is inconceivable how so many of the learned are content
with it. This is what I shall show.
In his book On the Hea1·ens, Aristotle claims that the earth is at the center of
the world, and that all the bodies he is pleased to call simple, because he assumes
they move by their nature, must move by simple motion. He affirms that besides
circular motion, which he holds to be simple and by which he proves that the
heavens, which he assumes to move circularly, are a simple body, there are only
two other simple motions, one downward, or from the circumference toward the
center, the other upward, or from the center toward the circumference; that
simple motion suits the simple bodies, and consequently that earth and fire are
simple bodies, of which one is absolutely heavy and the other absolutely light.
But because heaviness and lightness can belong to a body either wholly or in
part, he concludes that there are still two other elements or simple bodies, of
which one is partly light and the other partly heavy, namely, water and air. That
is how he proves that there are four and only four elements.
It is clear to those who use their own reason to examine the opinions of men
that all these propositions are false, or at least that they cannot pass for clear and
incontestable principles, of which one has the clearest and most distinct ideas and
which can serve as a foundation for physics. It is certain that there is nothing
more absurd than to want to establish the number of elements by the imagin3I}'
qualities of heaviness and lightness, saying without a single proof that there are
bodies that are heavy and others that are light by their nature. For, if one need
speak only without proof, one could say that all bodies are naturally heavy, and
that they make every effort to draw near to the center of the world as their place
of rest; and one can maintain to the contrary that bodies are naturally light, that
they all tend to rise toward the heavens, as toward the place of their greatest
perfection. For if you object to someone who says all bodies are heavy, that air
and fire are light, that person need only respond that fire and air are not light but
less heavy than water and earth, and this is why they seem light. He may also say
that these elements are like a piece of wood, which seems light in water not
because it is light of itself, since it falls downward in air, but because the water,
which is heavier, takes the underside and raises it.
If. on the contrary, you object to someone who maintains that all bodies are

The Search after Truth

473

light by their nature, that earth and water are heavy, that person will similarly
respond that these bodies seem heavy because they are not as light as those
around them; that some wood, for example, seems heavy in air not because it is
heavy, since it rises in water, but because it is not as light as air.
It is therefore ridiculous to assume as incontestible principles that bodies are
light or heavy by their nature. On the contrary, it is obvious that no body has in
itself the power of self-movement, and that all bodies are indifferent whether
they are moved downward or upward, from east to west, or west to east, from the
south pole to the north, or in any other conceivable way.
But let us grant to Aristotle that there are four elements as he desires, namely:
fire, air, water, and earth, of which two are heavy and two others light by their
nature. What conclusion shall we be able to draw from this for our know ledge of
the universe? These four elements are not the fire, air, water, and earth that we
see; according to him, they are something else. We do not know them through
the senses, and even less by reason, as we have absolutely no distinct idea of
them. I wish we knew that all natural bodies are compounds of them, since
Aristotle said it; but the nature of these compound bodies is unknown to us, and
we can know them only by knowing the four elements or the simple bodies that
compose them, for one knows the compound only through the simple.
Fire, says Aristotle, is light by its nature; upward motion is simple; fire is
therefore a simple body, since the motion must be proportioned to the movable.
Natural bodies are composed of simple bodies; therefore, there is fire in all
natural bodies, but a fire unlike that which we see, for fire is often only a power
in the bodies composed of it. What do these Peripatetic discourses teach us? That
there is fire in all bodies, be it actual or potential; i.e., that all bodies are
composed of something we do not see and whose nature we do not know.
Behold, therefore, how vigorously we advance.
But if Aristotle does not show us the nature of fire and the other elements of
which all bodies are composed, it might be imagined that he at least uncovers
for us their qualities and principal properties. It is again necessary to examine
what he says about it.
He declares 8 to us that there are four principal qualities belonging to the sense
of touch-heat, cold, moistness, and dryness-of which all others are composed; and he distributes their primary qualities to the four elements: he gives
heat and dryness to fire; to air, heat and moistness; to water, cold and moistness,
and to earth, cold and dryness. b He assures us that heat and cold are active
qualities and that dryness and moistness are passive qualities. He defines heat as
that which unites things of the same type, cold as that which unites all things o(
whate1•er kind, the moist. that whic/1 is not easily contained withi11 it.1· ow11
boundaries but is within e:ctt•rnal boundarit•s, and the dry. that ll'hich is easilr
contained within its own hmmdaries and is not easily adaf'ted to the '"-'llllclarit·s
of bodies around it.
Thus, according to Aristotle. fire is a hot and dry clement; it is thcrdnn.· an
"Dt• geru.•rutimu·
"Chapter 2.

t.'l

corruption<•. bk. 2. chs. 2-].

474

Nicolas Malebranche

element that unites things of the same nature and is easily contained within its
own boundaries and, with difficulty, within external boundaries. Air is a warm,
moist element; it is therefore an element that unites things of the same kind and is
not easily contained within its own boundaries but is within external boundaries.
Water is a cold and moist element, it is therefore an element that unites things of
both the same and of different natures and is not easily contained within its own
boundaries, but is within external ones. And finally, earth is cold and dry; it is
therefore an element that unites things of the same and of different natures, is
easily contained within its own boundaries, and is not easily adapted to external
boundaries.
There you have the elements explained according to the view of Aristotle, or
according to the definitions he has given of their principal qualities; and because,
if we believe him in this, the elements are the simple bodies of which all other
bodies are composed, and their qualities the simple qualities of which all other
qualities are composed, the knowledge of these elements and qualities must be
most clear and distinct, since all of physics, i.e., knowledge of sensible bodies
composed of them, must be deduced from it.
Let us see then what these principles may lack. First, Aristotle does not attach
any distinct idea to the word quality; one does not know whether by quality he
means a real being distinct from matter, or only the modification of matter; it
sometimes appears that he means it in one sense, and sometimes in another. It is
true that in the eighth chapter of Categories, he defines quality as that in virtue of
which things are called such and such, but this is not all of what we are asking.
Second, the definitions he gives of the four first qualities, heat, cold, moistness,
and dryness, are all false or useless.
Here is his definition of heat: heat is that which unites things of tile same
nature.
First, I fail to see how this definition explains the nature of heat perfectly, even
if it were true that heat always united things of the same nature.
Second, it is false that heat unites things of the same nature. Heat does not
unite particles of water; rather, it dissipates them into vapor. It does not unite
particles of wine, nor those of any other liquid or fluid body you might choose,
not even those of quicksilver. On the contrary, it dissolves and separates all solid
and fluid bodies of the same and of different natures; and, if there are some
bodies whose parts fire cannot dissipate, it is not because they are of the same
nature but because they are too coarse and too solid to be lifted by the motion of
the particles of fire.
In the third place, heat in truth can neither unite nor dissipate the parts of a
body of the same or of a different nature; for to unite, to separate, to dissipate the
parts of some body, it is necessary to move them. Now, heat can move nothing,
or at least it is not evident that heat can move bodies; for even though we study
heat with all possible attention, we cannot discover that it can communicate to
bodies a motion it docs not have. We readily sec that tire moves and separates the
pans of bodies exposed to it; this is true, but perhaps it is not because of its heat.
sinl"c it is not even dear that it has any. It is rather through the action of its

The Search after Truth

475

particles, which are visibly in continuous motion. It is clear that particles of fire
must communicate part of their motion to a body they have just struck, whether
there is heat in fire or not. If the particles ofthese bodies are not very solid, fire is
bound to dissipate them; if they are very solid and coarse, fire can only agitate
them and make them slide over each other; finally, if they are a mixture of subtle
and coarse, fire is bound to dissipate only those it can push strongly enough to
separate them completely from the others. Thus, fire can only separate; and if it
unites, it is only by accident. But Aristotle claims the complete opposite.
Separating, he says, 8 which some people attribute to fire, is only to reunite
things of the same kind, for it is only by accident that fire raises things of
different kinds.
If Aristotle had first distinguished the sensation of heat from the particles
composing the bodies we call hot, and if he had then defined heat as the motion
of particles, saying that heat is what agitates and separates the invisible particles
of which visible bodies are composed, he would have given a tolerable enough
definition of heat. Nevertheless, we would still not be completely content because it would not precisely reveal the nature of the motion in hot bodies.
Aristotle defined cold as that which unites bodies of the same or of d(fferent
natures. This definition also is worthless, for it is false that cold unites bodies.
To unite them, it is necessary to move them; but if we examine his argument, it is
obvious that cold can move nothing. Indeed, by cold we understand either what
we feel when we are cold or what causes the sensation of cold. But it is clear that
the sensation of cold can move nothing, since it can impel nothing. When we
examine things with reason, we cannot doubt that what causes the sensation is
only rest or the cessation of motion. Thus, the coldness in bodies being only the
cessation of the sort of motion that accompanies heat, it is obvious that heat
separates but cold does not. Hence, cold does not unite either things of the same
or of different natures, since what can impel nothing can unite nothing; in a
word, as it does nothing, it unites nothing.
Aristotle, judging things by the senses, imagines that cold is as positive as
heat, because the sensations of heat and cold are both real and positive; and he
also thinks that these two qualities are active. Indeed, if we follow the impressions of the senses, we are correct in believing that cold is a very active
quality, since cold water instantly congeals, unites, and hardens molten gold and
lead when they are poured from a crucible on a little water, although the heat of
these metals might be still great enough to separate the particles of the bodies
they touch.
It is obvious from what we have said about the errors of the senses in the first
book that if we rely only on the senses to judge the qualities of sensible bodies. it
is impossible to discover any certain and incontestable truth that can serve as a
principle for advancement in the knowledge of nature. For we cannot even
discover by this means which things are hot and which are cold." Of several
"Dtgl'frrmtionr and cormptione. bk. 2. ch. 2.

•see Bk. I. ch. II tn ch. 15.

476

Nicolas Malebranche

people who touch tepid water, some find it hot and some find it cold. Those who
are hot find it cold, and those who are cold find it hot. And if one assumes that
fish are capable of sensation, to all appearances they will still find it hot when all
men find it cold. The same is true of air; it seems hot or cold according to the
different dispositions of the bodies of those exposed to it. Aristotle claims it is
hot, but I do not think that those who live toward the north share his opinion,
since even several healthy people whose weather is no less hot than Greece's
have held that it is cold. But this question, which has always been important in
school, will never be resolved, as long as no distinct idea is attached to the word
heat.
Aristotle's definitions of heat and cold do not give a precise idea ofthem. Air,
for example, and even water, no matter how hot and burning it may be, unites
particles of melted lead with those of any other metal. Air unites all fats joined to
resins and to any other solid bodies one may wish. And it would take a good
Peripatetic to think of exposing putty to the air to separate the cinder from the
pitch in it, or other compound bodies, to decompose them. Air is therefore not
hot according to the definition Aristotle gives of heat. Air separates liquids from
bodies that have absorbed them; it hardens mud and dries hung linens, though
Aristotle makes it moist. Air is therefore hot according to this definition. Thus,
we cannot determine from this definition whether air is hot. We can be sure that
air is hot with regard to mud, since it separates the water from the earth that is
mixed with it, but will it be necessary to experience the diverse effects of air on
all bodies to know if there is heat in the air we breathe? If so, we shall never
know anything about it. Accordingly, the shortest method is to philosophize not
about the air we actually breathe but about a certain pure and elemental air not
found here below, and to affirm positively, as Aristotle does, that it is hot
without giving any proof, and without even distinctly understanding what we
mean either by this air or its heat. For in this way we shall provide principles that
will not be easy to overthrow -not because of their clarity and solidity but
because they are obscure, like phantoms we cannot hurt because they have no
bodies.
I shall not pause over the definitions Aristotle gives of moistness and dryness,
because it is clear enough that they do not explain their nature. For according to
these definitions, fire is not dry, since it is not easily contained within its own
boundaries; and ice is not moist, since it is easily contained within its own
boundaries and since it is not easily adapted to external boundaries. It is true that
ice is not moist, if by moist we mean fluid. But if we mean this, it must be said
that flame is very moist, as well as melted gold and lead. It is also true that ice is
not moist if by moist we mean what adheres easily to things it touches; but in this
sense, pitch, grease, and oil are much more moist than water, since they are more
adherent than water. In this sense quicksilver is moist, since it adheres to metals;
and water itself is not completely moist, since it does not easily adhere to metals.
Therefore, we must not resort to the testimony of the senses to defend the views
of Aristotle.
But let us not further examine the marvelous definitions this philosopher has

The Search after Truth

477

given us of the four elementary qualities, and let us also assume that everything
the senses teach us about these qualities is incontestable. Let us rouse our faith
once more, and believe that all these definitions are quite correct. Then merely
let us see whether it is true that all qualities of sensible bodies are composed of
these elementary qualities. Aristotle claims it is, and he must claim this, since he
regards these four primary qualities as the principles of the things he wants to
explain in his Physics.
Thus, he teaches us that colors result from mixing the four elementary qualities: that white is produced when moistness surpasses heat, as in old people who
tum grey; black, when moistness becomes dry, as in the walls of cisterns; and all
the other colors from similar mixtures. He teaches that odors and flavors are also
made by different mixtures of the dry and the moist caused by heat and cold, and
that even heaviness and lightness depend on it. In a word, it is necessary according to Aristotle, in order that there be some plausible connection between his
principles and the conclusions he draws from them, for all sensible qualities to be
produced by the two active qualities heat and cold, and be composed of the two
passive ones, moistness and dryness.
However, it is even more difficult to be convinced of all these things than of all
those we have just recounted from Aristotle. It is difficult to believe that earth
and the other elements would not be colored or visible if they were in their
natural purity, without any admixture of the elementary qualities, even though
learned commentators on this philosopher assure us that this is so. One does not
understand what Aristotle means when he affirms that whiteness of hair is produced by moistness, because the moistness of old people is stronger than their
heat, even if, to try to clear up his thought, one puts the definition in the place of
the defined. For it appears to be incomprehensible gibberish to say that old
people's hair turns white because what is not easily contained within its own
boundaries, but within external foreign boundaries, overcomes what unites
things of the same nature. One has no less trouble believing he has given a good
explanation of flavor by saying it consists in the mixture of dryness, moistness,
and heat, especially when one substitutes for these words the definitions this
philosopher gives of them, which would be useful if they were good definitions.
And one might not even be able to keep from laughing if, in place of the
definitions of hunger and thirsr& that Aristotle gives, saying that hunger is the
desire for hot and dry, and thirst is the desire for cold and moist, one were to
substitute the definitions of these words, calling hunger the desire of that which
unites things of the same nature and is easily contained within its own boundaries, and with difficulty within external boundaries, and defining thirst as the
desire for that which unites things of the .~arne and of d(fferf'llt nature. mrd ji1r
that which, not easily contained within its own boundaries, is easily contained
within external boundaries.
Certainly it is a very useful rule for determining whether one has defined one's
terms accurately, and for avoiding mistakes in one's inferences. to frequently

•o, anima.

bk. 2. ch. 3.

478

Nicolas Malebranche

replace the defined with the definition; for in this way one knows whether the
terms are equivocal and whether the reasoning is valid, or if one is reasoning
correctly. That being the case, what can we say about Aristotle's inferences,
which become an absurd and ridiculous jumble when we use this rule? And what
should we say of those who reason only upon the basis of the confused and false
ideas of the senses, since this rule, which preserves light and evidence in all
correct and solid inferences, brings nothing but confusion to their discourse?
It is not possible to expose the oddity and extravagance of the explanations
Aristotle gives of all kinds of matters. When the subjects he treats are simple and
easy, his enors are simple, and it is easy enough to discover them. But when he
claims to explain complex things depending on several causes, his enors are at
least as complex as the subjects he treats, and it is impossible to develop them all
in order to expose them to others.
This great genius, who is said to have succeeded so well in the rules he has
given for good definition, does not even know which things can be defined,
because, not distinguishing between clear and distinct knowledge and knowledge
that is sensible, he imagines he can understand and explain to others things of
which he has no distinct idea. Definitions should explain the nature of things, and
the terms that compose them should awaken distinct and particular ideas in the
mind. But it is impossible to define the sensible qualities of heat, cold, color,
flavor, and so on, in this way, when the cause is confused with the effect, and the
motion of bodies with the sensation that accompanies it. The reason for this is
that since sensations are modifications of the soul, we do not know them by clear
ideas but only by inner sensation; and as I have explained in Book8 Three, it is
impossible to attach words to ideas we do not have.
As we have distinct ideas of a circle, a square, a triangle, and hence know their
natures distinctly, so we can give them good definitions and can even deduce all
the properties of these figures from our ideas of them, and explain them to others
by terms to which we attach these ideas. But we cannot define either heat or cold
insofar as they are sensible qualities, because we do not know them distinctly and
by idea, but only by consciousness or inner sensation.
Nor should we define the heat outside us by its effects, for if we substitute the
definition of these effects for the definition of the heat, we shall readily see that
this definition will serve only to throw us into enor. If, for example, one defmed
heat as that which unites things of the same kind, then without saying more, we
shall be able, in following this definition, to confuse heat with things that have no
relation to it. We shall be able to say that the magnet unites iron filings and
separates them from those of silver because it is hot, that a pigeon eats hemp seed
and leaves other grain because a pigeon is hot, that a miser separates his gold
louis from his silver because he is hot. In short, there is no extravagance in which
this definition would not involve us if we were stupid enough to follow it. This
definition then does not explain the nature of heat, and we cannot deduce all the
properties of heat from it; because if one takes its terms literally, one infers
"Pl. 2, ch. 7, n. 4.

The Search after Truth

479

irrelevancies, and if one substitutes it for what is defined, then one falls into
absurdities.
However, if we are careful to distinguish heat from its cause, then even though
it is indefinable, since it is a modification of the soul of which we have no clear
idea, we can define its cause, since we have a distinct idea of motion. But we
must be careful that the heat taken for such a motion does not always cause in us
the sensation of heat. Water, for example, is hot, since its parts are fluid and in
motion; and apparently fish find it hot, since at least it is warmer than ice, whose
parts are more at rest. But it is cold relative to us because it has less motion than
the parts of our bodies, whatever has Jess motion than another being in a certain
sense at rest relative to it. Thus, it is not in relation to the motion of the fibers of
our bodies that we must define the cause of heat or the motion that stimulates it.
We must, if we can, define this motion absolutely and in itself, for then the
definitions we give of it will enable us to understand the nature and properties of
heat.
I do not believe I am obliged to examine the philosophy of Aristotle further, or
to unravel the extremely confused and perplexing errors of this author. It seems
to me I have shown that ( l) he does not prove that his four elements exist, and he
defines them badly; (2) his elementary qualities are not as he claims, he does not
know their nature, and the secondary qualities are not all composed of the
elementary ones; finally, (3) even if one grants him that all bodies are composed
of the four elements, as the secondary qualities are from the primary, his whole
system would be useless in the search for truth, since his ideas are not sufficiently
clear to preserve the evidence in our reasoning.
If you do not believe I have set forth the genuine opinions of Aristotle, you can
see for yourself in the books he wrote, On The Hea1·ens and On Generation and
Corruption; for it is from these that I took almost everything I said about them. I
did not wish to relate anything from his eight books on physics, because this is
properly speaking only a kind of logic; and one only finds vague and indeterminate words there, by which he teaches how one can talk about physics without
understanding a thing about it.
As Aristotle often contradicts himself and as one can support nearly any kind
of opinion by passages drawn from him, I have no doubt that one can establish by
reference to Aristotle himself opinions contrary to those I have attributed to him.
But I do not guarantee it. It suffices that I have the books just cited to prove what
I said. And I hardly even put myself to the trouble of arguing whether these
books are by Aristotle or whether they are corrupted. I take Aristotle as he is and
as he is ordinarily received, since we should not take too much trouble to know
the true genealogy of things for which we have little respect: besides, it cannot be
satisfactorily clarified, as you can see from Patricius' Di.H"IIHion11m
Peripateticorum.

BOOK SIX: PART TWO
Chapter Six

General directions necessary for conducting an orderly search for truth and in
the choice of sciences.

Lest it be said that I only destroy without establishing anything certain and
incontestable in this work, it is appropriate that I here set forth in a few words the
order we must follow in our studies in order to avoid error, and even that I point
out some very necessary truths and sciences whose evidence is such that we
cannot withhold our assent from it without suffering the secret reproaches of our
reason. I shall not explain these truths and sciences at great length, for that has
already been done; I do not propose to reprint the works of others; I shall content
myself with reviewing them. I shall merely demonstrate the order we must follow
in any study we would wish to make of them, in order always to preserve the
evidence in our perceptions.
Of all our knowledge, the first is of the existence of our soul; all our thoughts
are incontestible demonstrations of this, since there is nothing more obvious than
that what actually thinks, is actually something. But if it is easy to know the
existence of our soul, it is not so easy to know its essence and nature. If one
wants to know what it is, it is above all necessary to be careful not to confuse it
with the things to which it is united. If one doubts, if one wills, if one reasons, it
is necessary only to believe that the soul is a thing that doubts, wills, and reasons,
and nothing more, provided one has not experienced other qualities in it; for one
knows the soul only by the inner sensation one has of it. One must not confuse
one's soul with one's body, nor with blood, animal spirits, fire, nor with an
infinity of other things for which philosophers have taken it. One must only
believe of the soul what one would not know how to avoid believing of it, and
what one is fully convinced of by the inner sensation one has of oneself, for
otherwise one would be mistaken. Thus, one will know by simple perception or
inner sensation all one can know of the soul, without having to construct arguments in which error might be found. For when we reason, the memory acts; and
where there is memory, there can be error, should there be some evil genius on
whom we depend in our knowledge and who amuses himself by deceiving us.
If I assumed, for example, that there was a God who delighted in beguiling
480

The Search after Truth

481

me, I am quite persuaded that he could not deceive me in my knowledge through
simple perception, such as that by which I know that I am, what I am thinking of,
or that twice two equals four. For even if I should really suppose such a God, a
God as powerful as I can imagine, I feel that in this extravagant supposition I
could not doubt that I am, or that twice two equals four, because I perceive these
things through simple perception without the use of memory.
But if I reasoned without perceiving the principles of my reasoning clearly,
merely recalling that I have so perceived them in the past, then if this deceiving
God were to join this recollection to false principles, as He could do if He willed
to, I would make only false inferences. The same thing happens to those who
perform long calculations, when they imagine that they clearly remember that
they knew that nine times nine makes seventy-two, or that twenty-one is a prime
number, or some similar error, on the basis of which they draw false conclusions.
Thus, it is necessary to know God, and to know that He is not a deceiver, if we
want to be fully convinced that the most certain sciences, (like arithmetic and
geometry), are true sciences; for without that, the evidence is not complete and
we can withhold our assent. It is also necessary to know by simple perception and
not by inference that God is not a deceiver, because reasoning can always be
mistaken if we assume God to be a deceiver.
All ordinary proofs of the existence and the perfections of God drawn from the
existence and the perfections of His creatures have, it appears to me, this defect:
they do not convince the mind through simple perception. All these proofs are
inferences that are intrinsically convincing; but being inferences, they are not
convincing on the supposition that there is an evil genius who deceives us. They
are sufficiently convincing that there is a power superior to us, as even this
extravagant supposition establishes; but they do not fully convince us that there is
a God or an infinitely perfect being. Thus, in these inferences the conclusion is
more obvious than the premise.
It is more obvious that there is a power superior to us than that there is a world,
since there is no supposition that can preclude the demonstration of this superior
power, whereas given the supposition of an evil genius who delights in deceiving
us, it is impossible to prove that there is a world. For we could always conceive
that this evil genius would give us sensations of things that would not exist (as
sleep and certain illnesses make us see things that never were), and even make us
actually feel pain in imaginary members we no longer have or that we never had.
But the proofs of the existence and the perfections of God drawn from our idea
of the infinite are proofs by simple perception. We see that there is a God as soon
as we see the infinite, because necessary existence is included in the idea of the
infinite, or to speak more clearly, because we can only apprehend the infinite in
the infinite itself. For the first principle of our knowledge is that nothingness is
not perceptible, whencea it follows that, if we think of the infinite, it must exist.
We also see that God is not a deceiver, because, knowing that He is infinitely
perfect and that the infinite cannot lack any perfection. we clearly see that He
"See the first two Dit~I<JKIU'S on Metuph_v.•ic.•, and all of Chapter 2. Book 4. of this work.

482

Nicolas Malebranche

does not want to beguile us, and even that He cannot, since He can only do what
He wills or what He is capable of willing. Thus, there is a God and a true God
who never deceives us, althou~h He does not always enlighten us; and we are
often mistaken when we do not have His enlightenment. All these truths are
known through simple perception by attentive minds, though it might appear that
I am constructing arguments in order to expose them to others. We can assume
them as incontestable principles on which we can reason; for having recognized
that God does not delight in deceiving us, it is then permissible for us to reason.
It is obvious that the certitude of faith also depends on this premise: that there
is a God who is not capable of deceiving us. For the existence of a God and the
infallibility of divine authority are items of natural knowledge, and common
notions to minds capable of serious attention rather than articles of faith, although it is a special gift of God to have a mind capable of concentration
sufficient to understand these truths as it should, and to want to apply oneself
diligently to understanding them.
From this principle, that God is not a deceiver, we might also conclude that in
actual fact we have a body to which we are united in a particular manner, and that
we are surrounded by many others. For we are inwardly convinced of their
existence by continuous sensations God produces in us, which we cannot correct
by reason without harming faith-although through reason we can correct the
sensations that represent them to us as having certain qualities and certain perfections they do not in fact have. Thus, we should not believe that these bodies are
as we see them, or as we imagine them, but only that they exist and that they are
as we conceive them by reason.
But to preserve the order in our reasoning, we need not reexamine whether we
have a body and whether there are others around us, or whether we only have the
sensations of them even though these bodies do not exist. This question contains
too many great difficulties, and it is perhaps not as necessary as might be
imagined to resolve it in order to perfect our knowledge, nor even to have an
exact knowledge of physics, morality, and some other sciences.
We have in us the ideas of numbers and extension, whose existence is incontestable and whose nature is immutable, that will eternally furnish us with matter
for thought, if we want to know all their relations. And it is necessary that we
begin to use our minds about these ideas, for reasons that it will not be useless to
set forth. There are three principal ones.
The first is that these ideas are the clearest and most evident of all. For if, to
avoid error, we should always preserve evidence in our reasonings, it is clear that
we should reason on the basis of ideas of numbers and extension rather than on
the confused or complex ideas of physics, morals, mechanics, chemistry, and all
the other sciences.
The second is that these ideas are the most distinct and most exact of all,
especially ideas of numbers. As a result, the habit we develop in arithmetic and
geometry of not being content until we know the relations of things precisely
gives to the mind a certain precision not possessed by those who content themselves with probabilities, with which the other sciences are filled.

The Search after Truth

483

The third and most important reason is that these ideas are the unchanging
rules and the common measures of all the other things we know and can know.
Those who know the relations of numbers and figures perfectly, or rather the art
of making the necessary comparisions to know their relations, have a kind of
universal science, and a very well founded way of discovering everything not
beyond the ordinary limits of the mind with evidence and certitude. But those
without this art cannot discover slightly complex truths with certainty, even
though they have very clear ideas of things whose complex relations they try to
know.
It is these or similar reasons that led some ancients to make young people study
arithmetic, algebra, and geometry. Apparently they knew that arithmetic and
algebra extend the scope of the mind and give it a certain acuteness we cannot
acquire from other studies, and that geometry rules the imagination so well that it
does not easily grow confused. For this faculty of the soul, so necessary for the
sciences, acquires through the practice of geometry a certain scope of accuracy
that impels and preserves the mind's clear perception even in the most perplexing
difficulties.
If we want, therefore, always to preserve evidence in our perceptions, together·
with a complete certainty in our reasonings, we should first study arithmetic,
algebra, analysis, and geometry, both simple and compound. Among the books
known to me, the best for learning arithmetic, algebra, and analysis (which is
properly the art of discovering truth in the exact sciences) are La Science du
calcul des grandeurs en general, and the first volume of L' Analyse demontree by
Father Reyneau, priest of the Oratory. For ordinary geometry, I recommend the
book by the duke of Burgundy. We should use analysis to learn compound
geometry, and read works where this science is treated by analysis. If you want
to learn only the principal properties of conic sections and their uses, you can be
satisfied with the first part of the second volume of L' Analyse demon tree. But if
you want to learn most of the properties of these sections together with their
uses, you will read the posthumous work of the marquis de I'Hopital, entitled
Traite analytique des sections coniques. You can add Descartes's Geometrie
because of the reputation of this learned man, but you will have no need of it after
reading the preceding books. Finally you will apply yourself to the new differential and integral calculi, and to the methods drawn from them for the understanding of curved lines, which are of use even in physics. You will also find differential calculus and its uses treated thoroughly and with a great deal of order and
clarity in the excellent work of the marquis de I'Hopital, entitled Des in_finiment
petits. You will also find the differential calculus and its uses in the second part
of the second volume of L' Analyse demontree, as well as the integral calculus,
together with the method for applying it to curved lines, and to problems of
mathematical physics in the third part. By reading these works, you will put
yourself in a state which will enable you to make discoveries on your own, and to
understand those found in the archives of the Academy of Sciences, and in the
works of foreigners.
When you have studied these general sciences with care and application. you

484

Nicolas Malebranche

will know with evidence a very great number of truths fruitful for all the exact
and particular sciences. But I believe I must say that it is dangerous to pause here
very long. We should, so to speak, scorn or neglect these general sciences to
study physics and morality, because these sciences are much more useful, although not so fit for making the mind precise and penetrating. And if we wish
always to preserve the evidence in our perceptions, we must beware not to let
some principle that is not evident go to our head; i.e., some principle such that
the Chinese, say, might conceivably not agree with it, after having carefully
considered it.
Thus, for physics it is necessary to admit only notions common to all men,
i.e., the axioms of geometers and the clear ideas of extension, figure, motion,
and rest, and others as clear as those, if there are any. It will be said perhaps that
the essence of matter is not extension, but of what importance is that? It suffices
that the world we shall conceive to be formed from extension appears similar to
the one we perceive, even if it is not made of this matter, which is good for
nothing, of which we know nothing, and about which they nevertheless make so
much fuss.
It is not absolutely necessary to examine whether there are actually beings
external to us corresponding to these ideas, as we do not reason on the basis of
these beings but on their ideas. We should only be careful that the reasonings we
make about the properties of things are in agreement with our sensations of them,
i.e., that what we think is in perfect agreement with experience, because in
physics we try to discover the order and connection of effects with their causes,
either in bodies, if there are any, or in our sensations, if they do not exist.
It is not that we can really doubt that there are actually bodies, when we
consider that God does not deceive and <when we consider> the regulated order
of our sensations in natural encounters and in those that happen only to make us
believe what we cannot naturally understand. The point is that it is not first
necessary to examine with great reflections something no one doubts, and
that is not of much use to the knowledge of physics considered as a true science.
Neither is it necessary to bother about knowing whether there are some qualities in the bodies around us other than those of which we have clear ideas, for we
should only reason according to our ideas; and if there is some other thing of
which we have no clear, distinct, and particular idea, we will never know
anything about it and we will never reason about it correctly. Perhaps in reasoning according to our ideas, we shall reason according to nature, and shall recognize that nature is perhaps not so obscure as we ordinarily imagine.
Likewise those who have not studied the properties of numbers often imagine
that it is impossible to solve certain problems even though they are very simple
and easy; thus, those who have not meditated on the properties of extension,
figure, and motion are extremely inclined to believe and defend the view that all
questions posed in physics are inexplicable. (But) we must not be stopped by the
opinions of those who have examined nothing, or who have not examined anything with the necessary application. For although there are few truths concern-

The Search after Truth

485

ing natural things that are fully demonstrated, it is certain that there are some
indubitable general ones, although it is quite possible not to think about them, to
be ignorant of them, and to deny them.
If we wish to meditate in an orderly way, with all the necessary time and
application, we shall discover many of these certain truths of which I speak. But,
in order to discover them more easily, the principles of Descartes's philosophy
must be read carefully, without accepting anything he says unless the force and
the certitude of his arguments will not permit us to doubt them.
Since morality is the most necessary of all the sciences, it is also necessary to
study it with more care; for it is especially in this science that it is dangerous to
follow the opinions of men. But in order to avoid mistakes and to preserve the
evidence in our perceptions, it is merely necessary to meditate on incontestable
principles, at least for all those whose hearts are not corrupted by debauchery and
whose minds are not blinded by arrogance; for there is no incontestable principle
of morality to minds of flesh and blood, who have aspirations to be clever wits.
These sorts of people do not understand the simplest truths, or, if they understand
them, they always contest them from a spirit of contradiction and to preserve
their reputation as clever wits.
Some of the most general of these principles of morality are: that God, having
made all things for Himself, made our minds to know Him and our hearts to love
Him; that being as powerful and as just as He is, we cannot be happy unless we
follow His orders, nor unhappy if we follow them; that our nature is corrupt, our
minds depend on our bodies, our reason on our senses, our will on our passions;
that we are powerless to do what we clearly see to be our duty, and that we need a
liberator. There are still many other principles of morals, such as: that retreat and
penitence are necessary to diminish our union with sensible objects, and to
augment what we have with intelligible goods, true goods, goods of the mind;
that we cannot taste violent pleasure without becoming its slave; that we must
never undertake anything through passion; that we must not search for security in
this life, and so on. But because these last principles depend on the preceding
ones and on the knowledge of man, they should not be immediately accepted as
incontestable. If we meditate on these principles with order and with as much
care and application as the scope of the subject merits, and if we accept as true
only conclusions that follow deductively from these principles, we shall have a
sure morality that will agree perfectly with that of the Gospel, although it might
not be as complete or as extensive. I tried to demonstrate the foundations of
morality in a special treatise, but I hope both for myself and others that someone
provides a work both more exact and more complete on the subject.
It is true that in moral reasoning it is not so easy to preserve evidence and
precision as in some other sciences, that knowledge of man is absolutely necessary to those who want to extend this science a little; and it is because of this that
the majority of men do not succeed in it. They do not want to study themselves in
order to recognize the weaknesses of their nature. They grow tired of interrogating the Master who teaches us His own desires inwardly, which are immutable

486

Nicolas Malebranche

and eternal laws and the true principles of morals. They do not listen with
pleasure to Him who does not speak to their senses, who does not respond
according to their senses, does not respond according to their desires, does not
flatter their secret arrogance. They have no respect for words that do not strike
the imagination with their brilliance, that are pronounced without noise, and that
we never hear clearly except in the silence of creatures. But they consider with
pleasure and respect Aristotle, Seneca, or some new philosophers who beguile
them, either by the obscurity of their words, the tum of their expressions, or the
plausibility of their reasons.
Since the sin of the first man, we esteem only what has relation to the preservation of the body and the convenience of life. And because we discover these sorts
of goods by way of the senses, we want to make use of them in all encounters.
The Eternal Wisdom that is our true life, and the only light that can illuminate us,
often shines only on blind men, and speaks only to the deaf when it speaks only
within the hidden depths of reason, for we are nearly always distracted by
externals. As we ceaselessly question all creatures to learn some news of the
good that we search for, it was necessary, as I have already said elsewhere,
that this wisdom be presented before us, without however going outside of us, in
order to teach us by sensible words and convincing examples the road leading to
true happiness. God unceasingly imprints in us a natural love for Him, in order
that we love Him unceasingly; and, by this same impulse of love, we constantly
remove ourselves from Him, by fleeing with all the forces He gives us toward the
sensible goods that He forbids. Thus, wanting to be loved by us, it was necessary
that He make himself sensible and present Himselfbefore us, to stop, through the
sweetness of His grace, all our vain agitations, and to begin our healing by
sensations or delights similar to the prevenient pleasures that had begun our
illness.
Thus, I do not claim that men can easily discover all the rules of morality
necessary for salvation by the strength of their minds and still less that they can
act according to their light, for their hearts are even more corrupted than their
minds. I say only that, if they admit only obvious principles and if they reason
deductively on these principles, then will they discover the same truths we learn
in the Gospel; because it is the same Wisdom that speaks immediately through
itself to those who discover truth in the evidence of arguments that speaks
through the Sacred Scriptures to those who interpret them well.
It is necessary, then, to study morality in the Gospel to save oneself the work
of meditation and to learn with certitude the laws according to which we should
regulate our ways. As for those who are not content with certitude, because it
only convinces the mind without enlightening it, they should meditate with care
on these laws, and deduce them from their natural principles, in order to know
through reason and with evidence what they already know through faith with
complete certitude. It is thus that they will convince themselves that the Gospel is
the most solid of all books; that Jesus Christ perfectly understood the malady and
disorder of nature; that He has cured it in the most useful manner for us, and the
most worthy of Him that can be conceived; but that the lights of the philosophers

The Search after Truth

487

are but obscure shadows; that their most brilliant virtues are but an intolerable
arrogance; in a word, that Aristotle, Seneca, and the others, to say nothing more,
are but men.

BOOK SIX: PART TWO
Chapter Seven

The use of the first rule, concerning particular questions.
We have paused sufficiently to explain the general rule of method, and to show
that Descartes followed it exactly enough in this system of the world, and that
Aristotle and his cultists did not observe it at all. It is now appropriate to descend
to the particular rules needed to resolve all kinds of questions.
The questions we can form about all kinds of subjects are of several types not
easy to enumerate, but here are the main ones: sometimes we search for unknown
causes through known effects; sometimes we search for unknown effects through
their known causes. Fire burns and dissipates wood; we search for the cause of it.
Fire consists of a massive motion of the parts of wood; we want to know what
effects this motion is capable of producing, whether it can harden mud, melt
iron, and so on.
Sometimes we search for the nature of a thing through its properties; sometimes we search for the properties of a thing whose nature is known. We know or
suppose that light is instantly transmitted, and that nevertheless it is reflected and
collected by means of a concave mirror in such a manner that it dissipates or
melts the most solid bodies; and we want to use these properties to discover its
nature. We know on the other hand, or we suppose, that the entire space stretching from the earth to the sky is full of small, extremely agitated spherical
vortexes, which tend constantly to move away from the sun: and we want to
know if the force of these tiny vortexes can be instantaneously transmitted, and
whether, being reflected in a concave mirror, they must be reunited, dissipating
or melting the most solid bodies.
Sometimes we search for all the parts of a whole; sometimes we search for a
whole through its parts. We search for all the unknown parts of a known whole
when we search for all the aliquot parts of a number, all the roots of an equation,
all the right angles a figure contains, and so on. And we search for an unknown
whole, all of whose parts are known, when we search for the sum of several
numbers, the area of many figures, the capacity of several vessels. Or we seek a
whole of which one part is known and whose other parts, although unknown,
contain some known relation to what is unknown, as when we search for the
488

The Search after Truth

489

number whose one known part is fifteen and whose other unknown part is half or
a third of the whole unknown number; or when we search for an unknown
number equal to fifteen and to twice the root of this unknown number.
Finally, we sometimes seek to discover whether certain things are equal or
similar to others, or by how much they are unequal or different. We want to
know if Saturn is larger than Jupiter, or by about how much; whether Rome's
weather is hotter than Marseilles', and by how much.
What is common to all the questions is that one frames them only to discover
some truth; and, because all truths are but relations, we can generally say that in
all questions we search only for the knowledge of some relations, be they relations between ideas or between things and their ideas.
There are several types of relations. There are some between the natures of
things, between their size, their parts, attributes, qualities, effects, their causes,
and so on. But we can reduce them all to two, namely, to relations of magnitude
and relations of quality, by calling all those relations between things considered
as capable of quantitative variation relations of magnitude, and all the others
relations of quality. Thus, we can say that all questions tend to the discovery of
some relations, be they of magnitude or of quality.
The first and principal rule is that it is necessary to know very distinctly the
state of the question to be resolved, and to have sufficiently distinct ideas of its
terms, to be able to compare them, and thus to recognize their unknown relations.
Therefore, it is first necessary to perceive very clearly the unknown relation
we are searching for there, since it is obvious that if we had no certain sign by
which to recognize this unknown relation once found, the search for it would be
vain.
Second, it is necessary, so far as possible, to make the ideas corresponding to
the terms of the question distinct by removing ambiguity from the terms, and to
clarify them by considering them as attentively as possible. For if these ideas are
so confused and obscure that we cannot make the comparisons necessary to
discover the relations we seek, then we are not yet in a position to resolve the
question.
In the third place, it is necessary to consider as attentively as possible the
conditions expressed in a question, if there are any, because without that we
understand the state of the question only confusedly, besides which the conditions ordinarily lead the way to resolving it. Hence, as soon as the state of a
question and its conditions are well understood, we know what we seek and
sometimes even where we must go to discover it.
It is true that conditions are not always completely expressed in the questions.
but this is because these questions are indeterminate, and because we can resolve
them in several ways. as when we ask for a square number, a right-angled
triangle whose base is given, or two numbers whose product is equal to their
sum, and so on, without specifying anything more. Or it may be that he who
proposes them does not know the ways to resolve them, or that he hides them to
confuse; as if one were to ask that two mean proportionals be found between two

490

Nicolas Malebranche

lines, without adding by the intersection of the circle and the parabola, or of the
circle and the ellipse, and so forth.
It is, then, absolutely necessary that the sign by which we conceive what we
seek be very distinct, that it not be ambiguous, and that it can designate only
what we seek; otherwise we could not be assured of having resolved the proposed
question. Likewise, it is necessary to carefully separate all conditions of the
question that make it puzzling, and without which it subsists in its entirety; for
they fruitlessly divide the capacity of the mind. And besides, when the conditions
that accompany it are useless, we do not yet distinctly conceive the state of a
question.
For example, if we proposed a question in these terms: make it impossible for
a man, being perfumed and covered with a crown of flowers, to remain at rest,
although he sees nothing capable of agitating him. We must know whether the
word man is used metaphorically; whether the word rest is equivocal, whether it
is not understood in relation to locomotion, or the passions, as these words
although he sees nothing capable of agitating him seem to indicate. We must
know if the conditions being perfumed and covered with a crown of flowers are
essential. After this, with the state of this ridiculous and indeterminate question
clearly known, we will be able to resolve it easily by saying that one has only to
put a man in a vessel under the conditions expressed in the question.
The skill of those who propose such questions consists in adding conditions
that appear necessary although they are not, in order to tum the minds of their
listeners to useless things of no help in resolving the question. As in this question, often posed by maidservants to children: I have seen, they say, hunters, or
rather fishermen, who carried with them what they did not catch, and who threw
what they did catch into the water. The mind, being preoccupied with the idea of
fishermen who catch fish, cannot imagine what is meant; and the whole difficulty
in resolving this silly question arises from what is not clearly conceived, because
we do not stop to consider that hunters and fishermen, as well as other men,
sometimes seek in their clothes certain small animals they toss away if they do
catch them, and carry with them if they cannot.
Also, sometimes we do not state all the conditions necessary for resolution in
the problems, and that makes them at least as difficult as when we add useless
conditions, as in this one: to make a man immobile without tying or hurting him,
or rather having placed the little finger of a man in his ear, make him immobile so
to speak in that he cannot leave where he was until he removes his little fmger
from his ear. This appears impossible at first, and it is indeed because we can
walk quite well even though we have our little finger in our ear. Thus, there is
still one condition missing, which would remove all difficulty if it were expressed. This condition is that we should make the one who puts his little finger
in his ear embrace a bedpost or something similar, so that the post is enclosed
between his arm and his ear, for he will not be able to leave his place without
extricating himself and drawing his finger from his ear. It is not added as a
condition of the problem that there is still something to do, so that the mind will

The Search after Truth

491

not stop searching for it, and hence it cannot be discovered. But those who
undertake to resolve these kinds of problems should make all inquiries necessary
to enlighten themselves on the point where the difficulty lies.
These arbitrary problems seem to be trifling, and indeed they are in one sense,
for we learn nothing when they are resolved. Nevertheless, they are not so
different from natural problems as might be imagined. It is necessary to do
roughly the same things to solve the one as the other. For if the skill or the malice
of men make arbitrary problems puzzling and difficult to resolve, natural effects
are by nature surrounded by obscurities and uncertainties. And we must dispel
these uncertainties with the mind's attention and by experiments that are the
kinds of inquiries we make of the Author of nature, just as we omit ambiguities
and useless circumstances from arbitrary problems with the mind's attention and
with adept inquiries made of those who propose them to us. Let me explain these
things in order, and in a more serious and instructive manner.
There is a large number of questions that seem vecy difficult because they are
not understood, but that should be taken as axioms (which would still need some
explanation) rather than for true problems. For it seems to me that we should not
put certain incontestable propositions in the class of problems when we distinctly
perceive their terms.
For example, the question of the immortality of the soul is posed as a difficult
question to resolve, because those who ask this question or who claim to resolve
it do not distinctly perceive its terms. Since the words soul and immortal mean
different things, and since they do not know how they understand it, they cannot
resolve whether the soul is immortal; for they do not precisely understand either
what they ask or what they seek.
By this word soul we can understand a substance that thinks, desires, feels,
and so on. We can take the soul for the motion or circulation ofthe blood, and for
the configuration of the parts of the body; and finally, we can take it to be the
blood itself and animal spirits. Likewise, by this word immortal we mean what
cannot die through the ordinal}' forces of nature, or cannot change, or finally that
which can be neither corrupted nor dispersed like a vapor or smoke. Thus,
assuming that we take the words soul and immortal in one of these meanings, the
slightest attention of the mind will judge whether it is immortal.
For, first, it is clear that soul taken in the first sense -that is to say. for a
substance that thinks -is immortal. if we also take immortal in the first sense, as
that which cannot perish by the ordinary forces of nature. For it is not even
conceivable that any substance should become nothing. We must resort to a quite
extraordinary power of God to conceive of that being possible.
Second, the soul is immortal, if we take immortal in the second sense. as that
which can be neither corrupted nor dispersed into vapor or smoke; for it is
obvious that a thing that cannot be divided into an infinity of parts cannot he
corrupted or resolved into vapor.
Third, the soul is not immortal. taking immortal in the third sense. as signifying that whil·h cannot change; for we have enough convincing pruofs of the

492

Nicolas Malebranche

changes of our souls: that now it feels pain, and now pleasure; that it sometimes
wants certain things and that it stops wanting them; that being united to the body,
it can be separated from it, and so on.
If we take the word soul in some other way, it will likewise be very easy to see
whether it is immortal, by taking the word immortal in a fixed and determined
sense. Hence what makes these questions difficult is that they are not distinctly
conceived, and the terms that explain them are ambiguous; they need explanation
rather than proof.
It is true that there are some people stupid enough and others imaginative
enough to constantly take the soul for a certain configuration of the parts of the
brain, and for the motion of spirits. And it is certainly impossible to prove to
these sorts of people that the soul is immortal and cannot die, for on the contrary,
it is obvious that the soul, taken in the sense they understand it, is mortal. Thus,
it is not that it is a difficult question to resolve; but rather it is a proposition
difficult to make understandable to people who do not have the same ideas as we
do, and who make every effort not to have them and to blind themselves.
When therefore we ask if the soul is immortal, or some other question, we
must first get rid of the ambiguity in the terms and know in what sense they are
taken in order to distinctly conceive the state of the question; and if those who
propose it do not know how they mean it, we must ask them questions in order to
enlighten and determine them. If in questioning them we recognize that their
ideas do not agree with ours, it is useless to answer them. For what do we reply to
a man who imagines that a desire, for example, is nothing but the movement of
spirits; that a thought is but a trace or image of objects where spirits have formed
in the brain; and that all reasonings of men consist only in the different placement
of certain tiny bodies diversely arranged in the head? To answer him that the
soul, taken in the sense he understands, is immortal, is to deceive him, or to
make yourself ridiculous in his mind. But to answer him that it is mortal is in a
sense to confirm him in an error of very great consequence. We must therefore
not answer him, but only try to make him retreat into himself, in order that he
may receive the same ideas as we, from Him who alone is capable of enlightening him.
Another question that appears difficult to resolve is to know whether animals
have a soul. Yet, when we remove the ambiguities, it no longer seems difficult,
and most of those who think animals do have souls are, without knowing it, of
the same opinion as those who think they do not.
We can take the soul for a spiritual thing or else for a corporeal thing diffused
throughout the whole body that gives it motion and life. Those who say that
animals do not have a soul mean it in the second sense; for man never will deny
that there is something corporeal in animals that is the principle of their life or
movement, since we cannot even deny this of timepieces. On the other hand,
those who claim that animals have souls mean it in the first sense, for there are
few who believe that animals have a spiritual and indivisible soul. So the
Peripatetics and the Cartesians believe that animals have a soul, i.e .. a corporeal
principle of their movement. and they hoth believe they do not have u soul. i.e.,
that there is nothing spiritual and indivisible in them.

The Search after Truth

493

Thus, the difference between Peripatetics and those we call Cartesians is not
that the former believe animals have souls and the latter do not, but only that the
former believe animals are capable of feeling pain and pleasure, of seeing colors,
hearing sounds, and that they generally have all the sensations and passions we
have, and that the Cartesians believe the opposite. The Cartesians distinguish
terms of sensation to remove the equivocation from them. For example, they say
that when we are too close to fire, parts of wood strike against the hand, disturbing its fibers, and that this disturbance is transmitted to the brain, where it
determines the animal spirits contained there to be spread through the exterior
parts of the body in a manner appropriate for making the hand withdraw. They
agree that all these things or similar ones can be found in animals, and that they
really are found there because they are but properties of the body. And the
Peripatetics agree with this.
The Cartesians say further that in men the disturbance of brain fibers is accompanied by the sensation of heat, and that the flow of animal spirits toward the
heart and viscera is followed by the passion of hatred or aversion. But they deny
that these sensations and passions of the soul are encountered in animals. The
Peripatetics claim on the contrary that animals feel this heat as well as we, that
they are like us in their aversion to everything that inconveniences them, and
generally that they are capable of all the sensations and passions that we experience. The Cartesians do not think that animals feel pain or pleasure, or that they
hate or love anything, because they do not admit anything but the material in
animals, and they do not believe that either sensations or passions are properties
of matter in whatever form. Some Peripatetics, on the contrary, think that matter
is capable of sensation and passion when it is, as they say, refined, that animals
can sense by means of animal spirits, i.e., through an extremely subtle and
delicate matter, and that even the soul is capable of sensation and passion only
because it is joined to this matter.
Thus, to resolve the question of whether animals have a soul, we must retire
within ourselves and consider our idea of matter as attentively as we can. And if
we conceive that matter, shaped in a given way, such as a square, round, or oval,
be pain, pleasure, heat, color, odor, sound, and so on, we can affirm that the soul
of animals, however material it be, is capable of sensing. If we do not conceive it
to be so, we must not assert it to be so, since we should affirm only what we
conceive. Likewise, if we conceive that matter agitated upward, downward, in a
circular, spiral, parabolic, or elliptical path, and so forth, be love, hate, joy, or
sadness, and so forth, then we can say that animals have the same passions as we.
If we do not perceive it to be so, we should not assert it to be so, unless we want
to talk without knowing what we say. But I think I can aflirm that no one will
ever believe that any movement of matter can be Jove or joy, provided he thinks
about it seriously. Hence, to resolve this question of whether animals sense. we
have only to be careful to remove the ambiguities, as do those whom it pleases us
to call Cartesians. By so doing. we shall reduce it to a question so simple that a
middling concentration of mind will be sufficient to resolve it.
It is true that Saint Augustine. assuming with the common pn·judin: of all men
that animals have a soul (at least I did not read that he evcr seriously examined it

494

Nicolas Malebranche

in his works, or that he called it into question) and clearly perceiving that there is
a contradiction in saying that a soul or a substance that thinks, feels, desires, and
so on, is material, believed the soul of animals was indeed spiritual and indivisible.• He proved by very evident arguments that every soul, i.e., everything that
feels, imagines, fears, desires, and so on, is necessarily spiritual; but I did not
notice that he had any argument for asserting that animals have souls. He does
not even put himself to the trouble of proving it, because there is every indication
that in his time no one doubted it.
Currently, because there are people who try to deliver themselves from their
prejudices completely and who call into question all opinions not founded upon
clear and demonstrative reasoning, we begin to doubt whether animals have a
soul capable of the same sensations and passions as ours. But there are always
defenders of prejudice to be found, who claim to prove that animals sense, will,
think, and reason even as we do, although in a more imperfect manner.
Dogs, they say, know their masters; they love them, suffer their blows with
patience, because it is to their advantage not to abandon them, but they hate
strangers in such a way that they cannot even tolerate being petted by them. All
animals love their children; and those birds who make their nests at the ends of
branches make it sufficiently apparent that they fear certain animals will devour
them: they judge these branches too weak to support their enemies, and strong
enough to support both their babies and nests. There are none, down to the
spiders and most vile insects, that do not indicate some intelligence that animates
them; for we cannot help admiring the conduct of an animal who, weak as it is,
finds a way to surprise others with eyes and wings in its webs, and is hardy
enough to attack the largest animals we see.
It is true that all actions performed by animals show intelligence, for everything regular signifies it. Even a watch shows it; it is impossible that its wheels
are due to accident, and there has to be an intelligence that regulates its movements. We plant a seed upside down, and the roots, rising out of the ground, sink
back into it of themselves; the seed that was turned downward in the earth also
turns itself right side up to leave it; that indicates intelligence. The plant branches
at intervals to strengthen itself, covers its seed with skin to protect it, surrounds
itself with thorns to defend it; this indicates intelligence. In the end, everything
we see done by plants as well as by animals, certainly signifies intelligence. All
true Cartesians agree. But all true Cartesians make distinctions, for they try as
best they can to remove ambiguity from terms.
The movements of animals and plants indicate intelligence, but this intelligence is not material; it is distinct from animals, as the intelligence that arranges
the wheels of a watch is distinct from the watch. For at bottom this intelligence
appears infinitely wise, infintely strong, and is the same one that formed us in our
mothers' womb and gives us growth to which we cannot, by all the efforts of our
mind and will. add a cubit. Thus. in animals, there is neither intelligence nor
souls as ordinarily meant. They eat without pleasure, cry without pain, gn>w
•Bonk 4 of D<' unima

<'I •')us ort!(im•,

chapter 23, '"De quantitate animac," and clscwhcn:.

The Search after Truth

495

without knowing it; they desire nothing, fear nothing, know nothing; and if they
act in a manner that demonstrates intelligence, it is because God, having made
them in order to preserve them, made their bodies in such a way that they
mechanically avoid what is capable of destroying them. Were this not the case,
we should have to say that there is more intelligence in the smallest of animals, or
even in a single seed, than in the most spiritual of men; for it invariably has more
different parts and produces more regulated movements than we are capable of
knowing.
But as men are accustomed to confusing everything, they imagine their soul
produces almost every movement and change that occurs in their bodies; they
falsely attach to the word soul the idea of producer and guardian of the body.
Thus, thinking that their soul produces in them all that is absolutely necessary for
the preservation of their lives, although it does not even know how the body it
animates is composed, they judge that there must be a soul in animals to produce
in them all the motions and changes occurring in them because they are similar
enough to those that occur in our bodies. For animals breed, nourish, fortify
themselves like our bodies; they drink, eat, and sleep like us, because we are
completely similar to animals as far as the body is concerned, and because we
differ from them only in that we have a soul and they do not. But our soul does
not form our body, it does not digest our food, it gives no movement and heat to
our blood. It senses, wills, reasons; it animates the body in the sense that it has
sensations and passions related to it. But it is not diffused in our members to
communicate sensation and life to them, for our body can receive nothing from
what is found in our mind. It is therefore clear that the reason we would not know
how to resolve most questions is that we do not distinguish, and do not even think
of distinguishing, the different things a single word means.
It is not that we do not sometimes think about distinguishing, but often we do it
so badly that, instead of removing ambiguity from terms by the distinctions we
give, we only make them more obscure. For example, when we ask if the body is
alive, how it lives, and in what manner the rational soul animates it; whether the
animal spirits, blood, and other humors are alive; whether teeth, hair, and nails
are animated, and so on, we distinguish the words to live and to be animated into
living or being animated by a rational soul or by a sensitive soul or by a vegetative soul. But this distinction only confuses the state of the question, for these
words themselves need explanation; and it could even be that the last two,
1•egetath·e soul and sensiti1·e soul, are inexplicable and incomprehensible in the
way they are ordinarily meant.
But, if we want to attach some clear and distinct idea to the word [U"e, we can
say the life of the soul is the knowledge of truth and the love of good; or rather
that its thought is its life, and that the life of the body consists in the circulation of
blood and in the exact constitution of humors; or rather that the life of the body is
the movement of its parts appropriate for its preservation. Then, the idea-; attached to the word lifi' being clear, it will be clear enough: (I) that the soul cannot
transmit its life to the body, since it cannot make it think; (2) that it cannot give
the body the life with which it nourishes itself, believes, and so on. since it does

496

Nicolas Malebranche

not even know what must be done to digest what we eat; (3) that it cannot make it
sense, since matter is incapable of sensation, and so forth. We can finally resolve
all other questions we can ask about this subject without difficulty, provided the
terms that enunciate them arouse clear ideas; and it is impossible to resolve them,
if the ideas of the terms that express them are confused and obscure.
Nevertheless, it is not always absolutely necessary to have ideas that perfectly
represent the things whose relations one wants to examine. It often suffices to
have an imperfect or initial knowledge of them, because often one does not seek
to know their relations precisely. I shall explain this.
There are truths or relations of two kinds; there are some known exactly and
others known only imperfectly. We know the relation between a particular square
and a particular triangle precisely, but we know the relation between Paris and
Orleans only imperfectly. We know that the square is equal to the triangle, or that
it is double its size, or triple, and so on, but we know only that Paris is larger than
Orleans without knowing by exactly how much.
Furthermore, there is an infinity of degrees among instances of imperfect
knowledge, and in fact all of them are imperfect only in relation to more perfect
ones. For example, we know perfectly that Paris is larger than the Place Royale;
and this knowledge is imperfect only in relation to an exact knowledge, according to which we would know exactly by how much Paris is larger than this square
it encloses.
Thus, there are questions of several sorts: (I) there are some in which we seek
a perfect knowledge of all exact relations between two or more things; (2) there
are some in which we seek perfect knowledge of some exact relation between
two or more things; (3) there are some in which we seek perfect knowledge of
some relation that approximates the exact relation between two or several things;
(4) there are some in which we seek only to recognize a rather vague and
indeterminate relation.
It is obvious, first, that to resolve the first type of question and to know
perfectly all exact relations of quantity and quality between two or more things, it
is necessary to have distinct ideas of them that represent them perfectly, and to
compare these things in all possible ways. We can, for example, resolve all
questions that lead to discovering exact relations between two and eight because,
since two and eight are exactly known, we can compare them in all ways
necessary for recognizing their exact relations of quantity or quality. We can
know that eight is four times bigger than two, that eight and two are even
numbers, that eight and two are not square numbers.
It is clear, in the second place, that to resolve questions of the second type, and
to know exactly some relation of quantity or of quality between two or more
things, it is necessary and sufficient to know their surfaces very distinctly,
according to which we should compare them to discover the relation we seek
between them. For example, to resolve some of the questions that lead to the
discovery of exact relations between four and sixteen, such as that four and
sixteen arc even and square numbers, it is sufficient to know exactly that four and
sixteen can be divided by half without fractions, and that both are the pn)ducts of

The Search after Truth

497

a number multiplied by itself, and it is useless to investigate their true magnitude.
For it is obvious that to recognize exact relations of quality between things, it is
sufficient to have a very distinct idea of their quality without thinking of their
quantity, and that to know their exact quantitative relations, it is sufficient to
know their quantity exactly without seeking their true quality.
It is clear, in the third place, that to resolve questions of the third type, and to
know some relation that approximates the exact relation between two or more
things, it suffices to know the surfaces or sides according to which one should
compare them approximately in order to find the approximate relation one seeks,
whether of quantity or of quality. For example, I can clearly know that V8 is
greater than 2, because I can nearly know the true magnitude of v'8; but I cannot
know by how much V8 is greater than two, because I cannot know the true
magnitude of V8 exactly.
Finally, it is obvious that to resolve questions of the fourth type, and to find
vague and indeterminate relations, it suffices to know things in a manner proportionate to the need one has to compare them in order to find the relations one
seeks. As a result, it is not always necessary, to resolve all sorts of questions, to
have very distinct ideas of their terms, i.e., to know perfectly the things their
terms signify. But our knowledge must be the more exact, since the relations we
try to find are more exact and more numerous. For, as we have just seen, it
suffices in imperfect questions to have imperfect ideas ofthe things we consider,
in orderto resolve these questions perfectly, i.e., according to what they contain.
And we can even resolve quite a number of questions although we do not have a
single distinct idea of the terms expressing them. For when we ask if fire is
capable of melting salt, of hardening mud, of evaporating lead, and a thousand
other similar things, we understand these questions perfectly, and we can resolve
them quite well although we have no distinct idea of fire, salt, mud, and so on,
for those who ask these questions only want to know if we have some sensible
evidence that fire produced these effects. That is why we answer in a manner that
satisfies them if we reply according to knowledge drawn from our senses.

BOOK SIX: PART TWO
Chapter Eight

t

An application of the other rules to particular questions.

There are two kinds of questions: simple and complex. The resolution of the first
kind depends only on the singular attention of the mind to the clear ideas of the
terms that express them. The other kind can be resolved only by comparison with
a third or with several other ideas. We cannot find unknown relations expressed
by the terms of the question by comparing the ideas of these terms directly, for
they cannot be joined or compared. One or more intermediary ideas are needed
then to make the comparisons necessary for finding these relations, and we must
see to it that these intermediary ideas are the more clear and distinct, to the
degree that we try to find more exact and more numerous relations.
This rule is but a conclusion from the first, and it is of equal importance. For if
in order to know the relations of things being compared exactly we must have
clear and distinct ideas of them, then for the same reason, it is necessary to have
sound knowledge of the intermediary ideas by which we claim to make comparisons, since the relation of the measure to each thing measured must be known
distinctly in order to discover its relations. Here are examples.
An explanation of magnetism.

When a very small and light vessel containing a magnet is allowed to float
freely, if we present to the septentrional pole of this magnet the same pole of
another magnet held between the hands, then at that moment we see that the first
magnet withdraws as if it had been pushed by a violent wind. Now we wish to
know the cause of this effect.
It is clear enough that to explain the movement of this magnet, it is not enough
to know its relations to the other one, for even though they were all perfectly
known, we could not understand how these two bodies could repel each other
without meeting.
We must, then, investigate which things we know distinctly to be capable,
according to the order of nature, of moving a body; for this is a question of
finding the natural cause of the movement of the magnet, which is certainly a

The Search after Truth

499

body. Thus, we must not resort to any quality, fonn, or to any entity not clearly
known to be capable of moving bodies, not even to some intelligence, for we do
not know with certitude that intelligences are the ordinary causes of the natural
motions of bodies, nor even if they can produce motion.
We clearly know it to be a law of nature that bodies move each other when
they collide. We should therefore try to explain the motion of the magnet by
means of some body that comes in contact with it. It is true that something other
than a body might possibly move it; but if we have no distinct idea of this thing,
we should not use it as an admissible means for finding what we seek, nor for
explaining it to others. For it is not giving an explanation of an effect to give as
its cause a thing that no one clearly conceives. We must not, then, trouble
ourselves about whether there is, or is not, some natural cause of the motion of
bodies other than their collison; rather, we must assume that there is none, and
then carefully consider which body can collide with and move this magnet.
We see first of all that it is not the magnet held in the hand, since it does not
touch the one that moves. But because it moves only at the approach of the one
that is held in the hand, and not by itself, we must conclude that even though it is
not the magnet in the hand that moves the magnet in the water, there must be
some small bodies that leave the hand-held magnet, and are pushed by it toward
the other magnet.
To discover these tiny bodies, we need not open our eyes and approach this
magnet; for the senses will impose upon reason, and we shall perhaps judge that
nothing emanates from the magnet because we see nothing emanating from it.
Perhaps we shall not recall that we do not see winds, even the most impetuous
ones, nor the subtle matter that initially produces all natural effects. 8 We must
finnly adhere to this very clear and intelligible method, and carefully examine all
the effects of the magnet, in order to discover how it can constantly push these
tiny bodies outside itself without being diminished. For our experiments will
reveal that these tiny bodies, which leave through one side, immediately reenter
through the other, and they will serve to explain all difficulties we form against
this resolution of the question. But it must be carefully observed that this method
should not be abandoned, even though one could not respond to certain difficulties because of our ignorance of many things.
If we wish to investigate the explanation not of why magnets repel one another
when their poles are opposed, but rather of their mutual attraction and the fact
that they unite when the north pole of one is presented to the south pole of the
other, the question will be more difficult, and a single method will not suffice to
resolve it. It is not enough to know the relations between the poles of these
magnets precisely, nor to resort to the method used for the preceding question.
for this method seems on the contrary to impede the effect whose cause we would
seek. Neither must we resort to any of the things we do not clearly know to be the
natural and ordinary causes of corporeal motions. nor deliver ourselves from the
"The proof of this will be found in the sixteenth Elucidation.

500

Nicolas Malebranche

difficulty of the question by the vague and indetenninate idea of an occult quality
in the magnets by which they attract each other; for the mind can clearly conceive
only that one body can attract another body.
The impenetrability of bodies makes it clearly conceivable that motion can be
communicated by impulsion, and experience proves, without the slightest
obscurity, that in actual fact it is communicated in this way. But there is not a
single argument or experiment that clearly demonstrates the motion of anraction:
for, in the experiments that seem the most proper to prove this type of motion, we
readily acknowledge, when we discover its true and certain cause, that what
appeared to happen by attraction really happens only by impulsion. Thus, we
must not be detained by any theory of the communication of motion other than
that which states that motion occurs through impulsion, because this manner of
communication is certain and incontestable, and because there is at least some
obscurity in all the others imaginable. But even though it could be demonstrated
that purely corporeal things have causes of motion other than the collision of
bodies, we could not reasonably reject this theory. This is even preferable to any
other, since it is the clearest and most obvious, and appears so incontestable that I
am not afraid to assert that it has been accepted by all peoples and in all times.
Experience shows that a magnet, floating freely on water, approaches one held
in the hand when a certain side is presented to it; it must then be concluded that it
is pushed toward it. But since it is not the magnet we hold that pushes the floating
one, since the floating one approaches it, and since nevertheless the floating one
would not be moved if it were not presented to the one held in the hand, it is
obviously necessary to resort to at least two methods to explain this question if
we want to resolve it through the accepted principle of the communication of
motion.

Magnet (d) approaches magnet (C); therefore, the air, or the fluid, invisible
matter that surrounds it, pushes it, since there is no other body that can. That is
the first method. Magnet (d) approaches only at the presence of magnet (C);
therefore, it is necessary that magnet (C) causes the air to push magnet (d), and
that is the second method. It is obvious that these two methods are absolutely
necessary. Thus, the difficulty is presently reduced to a matter of joining them
together, which can be done in two ways: either by beginning with some known

The Search after Truth

501

thing in the air around magnet (d), or by beginning with some known thing in
magnet (C).
If you know that the particles of air and of all fluid bodies are in continual
agitation, you will be unable to doubt that they strike constantly against magnet
(d), which they surround. And because they strike it equally from all sides, they
do not press upon it more on one side than another, so long as there is as much air
or subtle matter on one side as on the other. This being the case, it is easy to
judge that magnet (C) prevents there being as much of this air we speak of around
(a) as around (b). But that can only be done by scattering some other bodies in the
space between (C) and (d); there must be, then, some tiny bodies emitted by the
magnets to occupy this space. And this is also what experiment shows, • when
filings of iron are scattered around a magnet; for these filings make the path of
these tiny invisible bodies visible. Since these tiny bodies drive the air around (a)
away, magnet (d) is less pressured by the air on this side than on the other, and
consequently it must draw near magnet (C), since every body must move in the
direction from whence it receives the least thrust.
But if magnet (d) did not have several pores toward pole (a) suited for receiving the tiny bodies emitted from pole (8) of the other magnet, and too small to
receive those of the air, heavy as well as light, it is obvious that these tiny bodies,
being more agitated than this air (since they must drive it away from between the
magnets), would push magnet (d) and move it away from (C). Thus, since
magnet (d) approaches or draws away from (C) when it is presented with different poles, we must conclude that the tiny bodies emitted from magnet (C) pass
freely and without repelling magnet (d) through side (a) while repelling it from
side (b). What I say of one of these magnets must also be understood of the other.
It is clear that we always Jearn something through this manner of reasoning on
clear ideas and incontestable principles. For it has been discovered that the air
around magnet (d) was driven from between the magnets by bodies constantly
emitted from their poles, and which find their passage free on one side and
blocked on the other. And if we wanted to discover the approximate size and
number of the pores of the magnet [through] which these tiny bodies pass, it
would be necessary to perform still more experiments; but that would take us
where we do not want to go, and where we could very well be Jed astray. We can
consult the principles of Descartes's philosophy on these questions, not in order to
follow the views of this learned philosopher blindly, but to accustom ourselves to
his method of doing philosophy. To respond to an objection that occurs at the
outset, namely, the explanation of how it happens that these tiny bodies cannot
re-enter through the pores from which they left, I say only this: that aside from a
determined size or shape capable of producing this effect, the inflexion of the
tiny branches that compose these pores can conform to the tiny bodies that
traverse them in one direction, and become bristled and close the passage to them
in the other direction. The continual flow of the subtle matter from one pole to
the other in the pores of the magnet even suffices to keep it from reentering by the
"See Dcscllltes's Principles of Philosophy, part 4.

502

Nicolas Malebranche

pores from which it was emitted; for a part of this matter cannot overcome this
current in order to make a passage for itself through the pores from which it was
emitted nor through those of the same pole which have an opposite flow. Thus,
we need not be too surprised at the difference in the poles of the magnet; for this
difference can be explained in many ways, and the only difficulty is in recognizing the true one.
If we had tried to resolve the question just examined by beginning with the tiny
bodies supposedly emitted from magnet (C), we would have found the same
thing; and we would also have discovered that air, gross as well as subtle, is
composed of an infinity of parts in a state of continual agitation. For without that
it would be impossible for magnet (d) to draw near magnet (C). I do not pause to
explain this because it is not difficult.

The search for the cause of the movement of our members.
Here is a more complex question than the preceding ones, which requires us to
use several rules. The question is: what can be the natural, mechanical cause of
the movement of our members?
The idea of a natural cause is clear and distinct, if it is understood as I
explained it in the preceding question; but the term mo~·ement when applied to
our members is ambiguous and confused, for there are several kinds of these
movements; voluntary, natural and convulsive ones. There are also different
members in the human body. Thus, according to the first rule, I must ask which
ofthese movements it is whose cause we wish to know. But if the question is left
indeterminate, to be used at my discretion, then I examine it as follows:
I attentively consider the properties of these movements; and because I
discover at the outset that voluntary movements are ordinarily made more
promptly than convulsive ones, I conclude from this that their cause might be
different. Thus, I can and consequently should examine the question in parts; for
it appears to require a long discussion.
First of all, I confine myself to considering only voluntary movement; and
because we have several parts used in these movements, I consider only the
arms. I observe then that the arm is composed of several muscles, nearly all of
which have some action when we lift or move an object in various ways. But I
confine myself only to one, being willing to assume that the others are formed in
approximately the same manner. I learn of its composition from some anatomy
book, or rather from sensibly seeing its fibers and tendons, which I have had
dissected by some skillful anatomist of whom I ask questions that could later on
bring to mind some means of finding what I seek.
Therefore, considering all things with care, I cannot doubt that the principle of
my arm's movement depends on the wntraction of the muscles composing it.
And if I am willing, in order not to burden myself with too many things, to
suppose according to common opinion that this contraction occurs by means of
animal spirit~ that fill the insides of these muscles and that thus approach their
extremitic~. the whole question regarding voluntary movement will be reduced to
knowing how the ~mall quantity of animal spirits contained in an arm can sud-

The Search after Truth

503

denly swell its muscles according to the orders ofthe will with sufficient force to
lift a load of a hundred pounds and more.
When we meditate upon this with some concentration, the first method that
presents itself to the imagination is usually that of some swift and violent effervescence similar to that of gunpowder, or of certain liquors filled with alkaline
salts, when they are mixed with those that are fixed or full of acid salt. A small
amount of gunpowder is capable, when lit, of lifting not only a load of a hundred
pounds but a tower or even a mountain. Earthquakes that tum cities upside-down
and jolt entire provinces are also made by spirits ignited underground approximately like gunpowder. Thus, by assuming the existence of a cause of the
fermentation and expansion of spirits in the arm, this cause might be said to be
the principle of the strength men have for making such swift and violent movements.
Nevertheless, since we should be suspicious of these methods that enter the
mind only through the senses and of which we have no clear and evident knowledge, we should not be so quick to use this one. For in the end it does not suffice
to explain the strength and swiftness of our movements through a comparison.
This explanation is confused, and, furthermore, it is imperfect; for here a voluntary movement must be explained, and fermentation is not voluntary. Blood is
fermented to excess in fevers, and it cannot be stopped. The spirits are inflamed
and agitated in the brain, and their agitation does not diminish in accordance with
our wishes. When a man moves his arm in various ways, it would be necessary,
according to this explanation, that he cause a million fermentations, large and
tiny, swift and slow, which begin, and (what is still more difficult to explain
according to this supposition) which end the moment he wants them to. It would
be necessary for these fermentations not to disperse all their matter, and for this
matter to be always ready to ignite. When a man has walked ten leagues, how
many thousand times must the muscles used in walking be filled and emptied?
And what quantity of spirits must there be if fermentation dissipates and deadens
them with every step? This explanation is therefore imperfect for explaining the
movements of our bodies that depend entirely on our will.
It is obvious that the essence of the present question consists in this problem of
mechanics: to find through pneumatic machines the means to Ol'ercome a force
such as a hundredweight by another force as tiny as we may wish, such as one of
an ounce: and that the application of this lesser force be dependent upon the will
in order to produce its effect. Now, this problem is easy to resolve and its
demonstration is clear.
It can be resolved with a vessel with two openings, one slightly more than
1,600 times bigger than the other. in which the pipes of two bellows of equal size
are inserted. Apply a force only 1,600 times greater than the other to the bellows
in the larger opening, and the force that is 1,600 times smaller will overcome the
larger. And the proof ofthis is clear in mechanics, since the forces are not exactly
in proportion to the openings. and because the relation of the small force to the
small opening is greater than the relation ofthe greater force to the large opening.
But to resolve this problem with a machine that represents the effect of mus-

504

Nicolas Malebranche

cles better than did the one just given, we blow slightly into a balloon and then
put a stone weighing 6 or 7 hundredweight on this half-inflated balloon; or,
having laid it on a table, cover it with a board and cover the board with a large
stone, or make a very heavy man sit down on this board, even allowing him to
keep hold of something in order to resist the swelling of the balloon; for if
someone blows anew into this balloon, even with the unaided mouth, it will raise
the stone that compresses it or the man sitting on it, provided the channel through
which the wind enters the balloon has a plug that keeps it from leaving when it is
necessary to take a breath. The reason for this is that the opening of the balloon is
so small, or must be assumed so small in relation to the entire capacity of the
balloon resisting the weight of the stone, that a very small force is thus capable of
overcoming a very great one.
If we also consider that the breath alone is capable of violently propelling a
lead ball by means of a blowgun (because the force of breath is not dissipated and
is constantly renewed), we will clearly recognize that, given the necessary proportion between the opening and the capacity of the balloon, breath alone can
easily overcome very great forces.
If, therefore, we conceive that entire muscles or each of the fibers composing
them, like this balloon, have a capacity appropriate for receiving animal spirits;
that the pores through which the spirits thread their way are perhaps proportionately smaller than the neck of a bladder or the hole of a balloon; that the
spirits are retained and pushed in the nerves approximately like the breath in the
blowgun, and that the spirits are more agitated than the air of the lungs, and
pushed with more force in the muscles than the air is in balloons; then we will
recognize that the motion of spirits that expand in the muscles can overcome the
force of the heaviest loads we carry, and that if we cannot carry heavier ones, the
lack of strength is due not so much to the spirits as to the fibers and skins
composing the muscles, which would burst if we made too much effort. Furthermore, if we notice that by virtue of the laws of the union of soul and body,
the motions of these spirits, with respect to their determination, are dependent
upon the will of men, then we will see clearly that the movements of the arms
must be voluntary.
It is true that we move our arms with such swiftness that at first it seems
unbelievable that the effusion of spirits in the muscles that compose it could be
swift enough to explain this. But we should consider that these spirits are extremely agitated, always ready to pass from one muscle into another, and that it
does not take very much of them to swell the muscles the little bit necessary to
move just them alone, or when we lift something very light. When we have
something heavy to lift, we cannot do it very swiftly, because if loads are heavy,
the muscles must be tightened and swelled a great deal; and to swell them in this
way, there must be more spirits than there are in the neighboring or opposing
muscles. It therefore takes a little time to make these spirits come from some
distance, and in order to push a quantity of them capable of resisting the weight.
Thus, those who are laden cannot run, and those who lift a heavy object from the
ground do not do it as swiftly as those who lift a straw.

The Search after Truth

505

Let us reflect further that those who have more fire or a little wine in their
heads are swifter than others; that among animals, those who have more agitated
spirits, such as birds, move more swiftly than those with cold blood such as
frogs, and that there are even some, such as the chameleon, the tortoise, and
some insects, whose spirits are agitated so little that their muscles are not filled
any more swiftly than a small balloon into which one would blow. If we carefully
consider all these things, we may find the explanation just given acceptable.
But although this part of the proposed question concerning voluntary movement be sufficiently resolved, we nevertheless should not assert that it is entirely
resolved and that there is nothing more in our bodies that contributes to these
movements than what has been said. For apparently there are a thousand springs
in our muscles that facilitate these movements with the motion they receive from
the subtle matter and blood of the arteries, and which will be eternally unknown
even to those who make the best guesses about the works of God.
The second part of the question to be examined is concerned with natural
movements, or those involving nothing extraordinary, as do convulsive movements, but which are absolutely necessary for the preservation of the machine,
and which consequently do not depend upon our wills.
I therefore consider first of all, with all the attention of which I am capable,
what motions meet these conditions, and whether they are entirely similar. But
because I recognize from the outset that they are nearly all different from one
another, I stop only with the movement of the heart, in order not to burden
myself with too many things. This part is the best known, and its movements the
most sensible. I therefore examine its structure, and notice two things among
several others; first, that it is composed of fibers like other muscles; second, that
it has two very considerable cavities. I judge, therefore, that since it is a muscle,
its movement can occur by means of animal spirits, and that since it has cavities,
the blood is fermented and dilated there. The first of these judgments is based
upon what I have just said, and the second upon the fact that the heart is much
hotter than the other parts of the body; that it is the part that diffuses heat with the
blood throughout all our members; that these two cavities could have been
preserved only by the diffusion of blood, and that therefore they are useful to the
cause that produced them. I can then sufficiently explain the movement of the
heart through the spirits that agitate it and the blood that diffuses it when this
blood is fermented; for even if the cause of its movement that I posit is not the
true one, it appears certain to me that it is sufficient to produce it.
It is true that the principle of fermentation or dilation of liquors is perhaps not
sufficiently well known to all those who will read this for me to claim to have
explained an effect when I have generally shown that its cause is fermentation.
But one should not resolve all particular questions by going back to first causes.
It is not that we cannot go back and thus discover the true system on which all
particular effects depend, provided we accept only clear ideas; but this manner of
doing philosophy is neither the shortest nor the most correct.
To understand what I mean, it is necessary to know that there are two kinds of
questions. In the first, it is a matter of discovering the nature and properties of

506

Nicolas Malebranche

some thing; in the others, we wish only to know whether such and such a thing
has such and such a property; or, if we know that it has such a property, we want
only to discover its cause.
To resolve questions of the first type, things must be considered in their origin,
and they must be conceived as being constructed in the simplest and most natural
ways. One must undertake the resolution of the others in a very different manner:
it is necessary to resolve them through hypotheses, and to examine whether these
hypotheses lead to some absurdity or to some clearly known truth.
If, for example, we want to discover the properties of the cycloid or one of the
conic sections, we must consider the construction of these lines, and form them
according to the simplest and least confusing means; for that is the best and
shortest road for discovering their nature and properties. We see without difficulty that the subtangent of the cycloid is equal to the circle that formed it; and if
we do not easily discover many of its properties by this means, it is because the
circular line forming it is not sufficiently understood. But for purely mathematical lines, or those whose relations can be more clearly known such as conic
sections, it is sufficient for discovering many of their properties to consider their
construction. We must only be careful that since construction is possible by
regulated motions in several ways, every type of construction is not equaUy
appropriate for enlightening the mind; the simplest are the best, and it happens
nevertheless that certain particular ways are more appropriate than others for
demonstrating certain particular properties.
But if it is not a question of discovering the properties in general of a thing but
of knowing whether a thing has a certain property, then we must assume that it
does in fact have it, and carefully examine what must follow from this assumption, whether it leads to a manifest absurdity or to some incontestable truth that
can serve as a means for discovering what we seek. This is the method that
geometers use to resolve their problems. They assume what they seek and investigate what must follow from it; they carefully consider the relations resulting
from their hypothesis; they represent all these relations, which set the conditions
of the problem by equations, and they then reduce the equations according to the
rules they have for them, so that the unknown element is found to be equal to one
or several completely known things.
If then it is a question of discovering the nature of fire and of the different
fermentations generally, which are the most universal causes of natural effects, I
say that the shortest and surest method is to examine the question at its roots. We
must consider the formation of the most agitated bodies, whose motion is spread
among those that arc fermented. It is necessary, through clear ideas and by the
simplest methods, to investigate what this motion can produce in matter; and
because fire and the different fermentations are very general things, which consequently depend upon few causes, we shall not need to consider what matter can
do when animated by motion for very long in order to recognize the nature of
fermentation in its principle. 8 At the same time we shall learn several other things
•See the sixteenth Elucidation, fmm my diacussiun of Ihe genenuiun uf fire In the end.

The Search after Truth

507

absolutely necessary for understanding physics. On the other hand, if we wanted
to reason upon this question by using hypotheses, in order thus to go back to first
causes and right to the natural laws according to which all things are fonned, we
would make many false assumptions that would accomplish nothing.
We could easily recognize that the cause of fennentation is the motion of an
invisible material transmitted to the parts of the agitated matter; for it is well
known that fire and the different fennentations of bodies consist in their agitation, and that, by the laws of nature, bodies only receive their motion immediately through collision with other, more agitated ones. Thus, we could
discover that there is an invisible material whose agitation is transmitted to
visible bodies through fennentation. But it would be morally impossible to
discover how this happens if we use the hypothetical method !Par Ia voye des
suppositions], and it is not nearly so difficult to discover it by examining the
fonnation of the elements or bodies, of which there are more of like nature, as we
can see in part through Descartes's system.
The third part of the question, which concerns convulsive movements, will not
be extremely difficult to resolve, provided we assume there are animal spirits in
the body capable of some fennentation, and humors sufficiently penetrating to
thread their way through the pores of the nerves through which the spirits are
distributed in the muscles; and provided also that we do not claim to detennine
the true disposition of the invisible parts that contribute to these convulsive
movements.
When a muscle has been separated from the rest ofthe body and is held by the
extremities, we see that it makes an effort to contract itself when it is pricked
through the middle. It appears that this depends on the construction of the
imperceptible parts composing it that, like so many springs, are caused to move
in certain ways by the puncture. But who could be assured of having found the
true disposition of the parts that produce this movement, and who could give it an
incontestable demonstration? Certainly this appears impossible, although
perhaps, by dint of thinking about it, we could imagine a construction of muse Ies
appropriate for causing all the movements of which we see them to be capable. It
is not necessary then to worry about detennining the actual construction of
muscles. But because we cannot reasonably doubt that there are spirits susceptible to some fennentation through the mixture of some subtle material, and
because acrid and pungent humors cannot thread their way into the nerves, we
can assume this construction.
To resolve the proposed question, it is therefore first of all necessary to
examine how many kinds of convulsive movements there are; and because their
number appears infinite, we must deal only with the principal ones, whose causes
seem to be different. It is necessary to consider the parts in which they occur, the
illnesses preceding and following them, whether they occur with or without pain,
and above all, their rapidity and violence. For there are some that occur with
rapidity and violence, others with rapidity but no violence, still others with
violence but no rapidity, and finally others without either violence or rapidity.
Some of them are constantly stopping and then recurring, and there are some that

508

Nicolas Malebranche

keep the limbs still and immobile for some time, while others make them completely useless and disfigure them.
All these things considered, it is not difficult to explain in general how these
convulsive movements can occur after what was just said about natural and
voluntary movements. For if we imagine that some matter capable of fermenting
the spirits contained in muscle is mixed with those spirits, the muscle will be
swollen and will produce a convulsive movement in this part.
If this movement can be easily resisted, it will be a sign that the nerves are not
plugged by some humor, since we can empty the muscle of the spirits that have
entered it and cause them to swell the opposing muscle; but if we cannot do so, it
must be concluded that sharp and penetrating humors play at least some role in
this movement. It can sometimes even happen that these humors are the only
cause of the convulsive movements; for they can direct the flow of the spirits
toward certain muscles by opening the passages that carry them there and by
closing the others, in addition to which they can contract the muscles' tendons
and fibers by penetrating their pores.
When a very heavy weight hangs at the end of a cord, we noticeably raise it by
merely wetting this cord, because particles of the water threading their way like
so many tiny wedges between the threads composing the cords, shorten the cord
by thickening it. Likewise the sharp and penetrating humors contract the nerves
by threading their way into their pores, and pull the parts attached to them,
producing extremely slow, violent, and painful convulsive movements in the
body, which leave the part extraordinarily contorted for a considerable time.
Convulsive movements that occur rapidly are caused by spirits; but it is not
necessary that the spirits undergo any fermentation. For that, it suffices that the
channels through which they pass are more open from one side than from
another.
When all parts of the body are in their normal state, the animal spirits expand
in them equally and swiftly in relation to the need of the machine, and they
faithfully execute the orders of the will. But when the humors disturb the disposition of the brain, and when they change or move the openings of the nerves in
various ways, or when penetrating into the muscles, they elasticize them, the
spirits are distributed in the parts in a totally new way and produce extraordinary
movements without the will having any part in it.
Nevertheless, we can sometimes, through strong resistance, hinder some of
these movements, and even gradually diminish the traces that produce them,
even though the habit be completely formed. Those who are careful about them
avoid grimacing or assuming an indecent air or posture easily enough, although
the body be disposed to do so. They even surmount these things when fortified by
habit, but with much more difficulty, for it is always necessary to combat them at
the start and before the flow of the spirits has made a path too difficult to block.
The cause of these movements is sometimes in the agitated muscle, some
irrating humor. or fermenting spirits. But we must judge that the cause is in the
brain, especially when the convulsions agitate not only one or two parts of the
body in particular but nearly all of them, and again in several illnesses that
change the natural constitution of blood and spirits.

The Search after Truth

509

It is true that <since> a single nerve sometimes has different branches spread
through remote parts of the body, as in the case of the face and entrails, it often
happens that the convulsion, having its cause in a part in which one of the nerve's
branches is inserted, can be transmitted to those where the other branches correspond, without the brain being the cause of the convulsion, or the spirits being
corrupted.
But when convulsive movements are common to nearly all parts of the body, it
must be said that the spirits are fermented in an extraordinary manner, or that the
order and arrangement of the parts of the brain is disturbed, or both. I shall not
spend any more time upon this question, for it becomes so complex and depends
on so many things, when one descends to the particular, that it cannot easily
serve to illustrate clearly the rules that have been given.
There is no science that furnishes more examples appropriate for showing the
usefulness of these rules than geometry, and especially algebra. For these two
sciences make constant use of them. Geometry clearly shows the ncesssity of
always beginning with the simplest things containing fewest relations. It always
investigates these relationships through clearly known measures; it removes
whatever is of no use in order to discover them; it divides complex questions into
parts; it arranges these parts and examines them in order. In the end, the only
fault encountered in this science is, as I have already said elsewhere, that it has
no really appropriate way to simplify the ideas and relations that are discovered.
Thus, although it regulates the imagination and makes the mind precise, it does
not add much to its scope, and does not make it capable of discovering very
complex truths.
But algebra, by teaching us to simplify continually, and in the shortest way,
greatly augments the capacity of the mind. For we can conceive nothing so
complex in relations of size that the mind cannot, with time, discover it through
the means furnished by algebra, once we know the path it must take.
The fifth rule and the others, where the way to simplify ideas is discussed,
considers only this science, for we do not fmd a convenient way to simplify them
in the other sciences. Thus, I shall not pause to explain them. Those who have a
strong· inclination toward mathematics and who want to give their minds all the
strength and breadth of which they are capable, and thereby to place themselves
in a position to discover for themselves an infinity of new truths, will if they
seriously apply themselves to algebra recognize that this science is useful in the
quest for truth because it observes the rules we have prescribed. But I warn that
by algebra, I mean principally the algebra that Descartes and some others used.
Before finishing this work, I am going to give a slightly extended example, the
better to illustrate the utility to be derived from this sixth book. In this example, I
present the steps to be taken by a mind wishing to free itself from its prejudices in
order to consider a fairly important question. I even cause it to fall into some
error at first so that the memory of what I have stated elsewhere will be revived.
But since the mind's attention leads it in the end to the truth it searches after, I
cause it to speak positively, like a man who claims to have resolved the question
he has examined.

BOOK SIX: PART TWO
Chapter Nine

A last example to show the utility of this work. In this example, we seek the
physical cause of hardness or of the union of the parts of bodies.
Bodies are bound together in three ways: continuity, contiguity, and in a third
manner that has no particular name, but that I shall call by the general term
union.
By continuity. or by the cause of continuity, 1 mean that unknown something I
am trying to discover that makes the parts of a body hold so tightly to each other
that effort is needed to separate them, and that causes them to be regarded not as
just together, but as a whole.
By contiguity, I mean that unknown something that makes me judge that two
bodies touch immediately so there is nothing between them, but not that they are
closely bound because I can easily separate them.
By this third term, union, I mean once more an unknown something that
causes two glasses or two slabs of marole, whose surfaces have been used and
polished by rubbing them against each other, to be attached in such a way that
even though they can be very easily separated by sliding them, we still have some
difficulty doing it in any other way.
Now this is not continuity, since these two glasses or slabs of marole, being
united in this manner, are not conceived merely as making a whole, because
there is a way they can be separated with great ease. Neither is it simply contiguity although it is very near to it, because these two pieces of glass or marble
are quite tightly united, even much more than the parts of soft or liquid bodies,
such as those of butter and water.
Our terms being defined, we must now seek the cause that unites bodies and
the differences between the continuity, contiguity, and union of bodies according
to the sense I have determined. I will first seek the cause of continuity, or what
that unknown thing is which makes the parts of a hard body hold so tightly to
each other that effort is required to separate them, and which causes them to be
regarded not as being together but as a whole. I hope that once this cause is
found, there will not be great difficulty in discovering the rest.

510

The Search after Truth

511

It now seems to me that this indefmable something that binds even the tiniest
parts of this piece of iron I hold in my hands must be something very strong,
since I must make a very great effort to break off a small part. But ant I not in
enur? Is it not possible that this difficulty I have in breaking off the tiniest piece
of iron comes from my weakness and not from the resistance of this iron? For I
remember that at other times I made more effort than I am making now to break
off a piece of iron like the one I am holding; and if I were sick, perhaps I could
not succeed even with very great effort. I see clearly that I should not judge so
absolutely of the firmness with which the parts of iron are joined together on the
basis of the efforts I make to disunite them. I should only judge that they hold
very strongly to one another in relation to my small strength; or that they are held
more strongly than the parts of my flesh, since the sensations of pain I have when
I exert too much effort warn me that I will disunite the parts of my body sooner
than those of the iron.
I recognize then that even as I am neither absolutely strong nor absolutely
weak, likewise iron or other bodies are neither absolutely hard nor absolutely
flexible, but only in relation to the cause acting against them, and that the efforts
I make can serve as a rule to measure the magnitude of the force needed to
conquer the resistance and hardness of iron. For rules must be invariable, and
these efforts vary according to the times, the abundance of animal spirits, and the
hardness of flesh, since I cannot always produce the same effects by making the
same efforts.
This reflection delivers me from a prejudice I had that made me imagine <that
it would take> strong bonds to unite bodies, which bonds perhaps do not exist;
and I hope that it will not be useless to me in what follows, for I have an extreme
propensity to judge everything in relation to myself and to follow the impressions
of my senses, which I will guard against with more care. But let us continue.
After having thought a while and searched with some application for the cause
of this tight union without having been able to discover anything, I feel carried by
my simplicity and my nature to judge, like several others, that it is the form of
bodies that preserves the union between their parts, or the attraction and inclination they have for their fellows, for there is nothing easier than letting oneself be
beguiled and thus becoming wise all at once, at little cost.
But since I do not want to believe anything that I do not know, I must not let
myself be defeated in this way by my own laziness, nor must I surrender to mere
glimmerings [simples /ueurs]. Therefore, let us leave these forms and inclinations of which we have no distinct and particular ideas but only confused and
general ones that we form, it seems to me, only in relation to our nature, and
whose very existence several people and perhaps even entire nations doubt.
I seem to see the cause of this tight union of the parts composing hard bodies
without admitting in it anything else except what everyone agrees is there, or at
least everything everyone distinctly conceives to be capable of being there. For
everyone knows distinctly that all bodies are composed, or can be composed, of
small parts. Thus, it might happen that some will be crooked and branched, like

Nicolas Malebranche

512

tiny bonds capable of forcefully binding the others; or that they will completely
intertwine themselves in their branches, so that we will not be able to disunite
them easily.
I have a strong inclination to give in to this thought, and it is all the stronger
when I see that the visible parts of heavy bodies are bound and united to each
other in this manner. But I could hardly distrust the preoccupations and impressions of my senses too much. I must therefore once again examine the thing
more closely, and I must even seek the explanation of why the tiniest and least
solid parts of bodies (in a word, the very parts that make up each of these bonds)
are held together. For they cannot be united by other, still smaller bonds, since I
assume them to be solid. Or if I say that they are united in this way, I will be
asked, and with reason, what will unite these others together, and so on to
infinity.
As a result, the knot of the question now is to know how the parts of these tiny
bonds or branched parts can be as tightly united together as they are, A, for
example, with B, which I assume to be parts of a tiny bond. Or (what is the same
thing), since bodies are all the harder as they are the more solid and have fewer
pores, the question now is to know how the parts of a column composed of a
material that would not have a single pore can be strongly joined together and
compose a very hard body, for it cannot be said that the parts of this column are
held by tiny bonds, since, being supposedly without pores, they have no particular figures.

ACJ')B
I still feel extremely inclined to say that this column is hard by its nature, or
that the tiny bonds with which hard bodies are composed are atoms whose parts
cannot be divided as being the essential and last parts of bodies, and which are
essentially crooked or branched, or of a confused figure.
But I frankly recognize that this is not to explain the difficulty and that, leaving
the preoccupations and illusions of my senses, I would be wrong to resort to an
abstract form and to embrace a phantom of logic as the cause I see; I mean that I
would be wrong to conceive the vague idea of nature or essence, which expresses
only what is known, as something real and distinct, and thus to take an abstract
and universal form as a physical cause of a very real effect. For there are two
things I can hardly distrust enough. The first is the impression of my senses, and
the other is the facility I have for taking abstract natures and the general ideas of
logic for real and particular ones, and I remember having been beguiled several
times by these two sources of error.
For, to return to the difficulty, it is not possible for me to conceive how these
tiny bonds would be indivisible by their essence and nature, nor how they would
consequently be inflexible, since on the contrary I conceive them to be very
divisible, and necessarily so, by their essence and nature. For part A is very
certainly a substance as well as B. and consequently it is clear that A can exist

The Search after Truth

513

without B or separated from B, since substances can exist without one another,
because otherwise they would not be substances.
To say that A is not a substance-that cannot be; for I can conceive it without
thinking of B, and everything that can be conceived of alone is not a mode, since
only modes or ways of being cannot be conceived alone or without the beings
whose modes they are. Therefore A, not being a mode, is a substance, since
every being is necessarily either a substance or a mode of being. For in the end all
that is can either be conceived of alone or it cannot; there is no middle in
contradictory propositions, and being or substance is called that which can be
conceived of and consequently created alone. Part A can therefore exist without
part B, and to state it more strongly, it can exist separately from B. So that this
bond is divisible in A and B.

Furthermore, if this bond were indivisible or crooked by its nature and essence, the complete opposite of what we see through experience would occur, for
one would not be able to break off any body. Let us suppose, as previously, that a
piece of iron is composed of an infinity oftiny bonds intertwined with each other,
of which A, a, and 8, b, are two. I say that we could not disengage them, and
consequently we could not break this iron apart; for in order to break it apart, it
would be necessary to bend the bonds composing it, which, however, are assumed to be inflexible by essence and nature.
But if one does not suppose them to be inflexible but only indivisible by their
nature, the supposition will serve no purpose in resolving the question. For then
the difficulty will be to know why it is that these tiny bonds do not obey an effort
to bend a bar of iron. Nevertheless, if we do not suppose them to be inflexible,
we should not suppose them to be indivisible. For if the parts of these bonds
could change situations in relation to one another ,...lt is obvious that they could be
separated, since there is no reason why, if one part could be removed from the
other at all, it could not be completely removed. Therefore, we cannot resolve
the question whether we suppose these tiny bonds to be inflexible or indivisible.
For whether we suppose them to be indivisible, or inflexible, it will be impossible to break it, since the tiny bonds composing the iron being entangled in each
other, it will be impossible to disengage them. Therefore, let us try to resolve the
difficulty through clear and incontestable principles and to find the explanation of
why this tiny bond has these two parts, A and 8, so strongly attached to each
other.
I clearly see that it is necessary for me to divide the subject of my meditation
into parts in order to examine it more exactly and with less mental effort since I
could not at first, from a simple view and with all the attention of which I am
capable, discover what I was seeking. And that is what I was able to do from the
beginning, for when the subjects one is considering are somewhat obscure, it is

514

Nicolas Malebranche

always best to examine them only by parts, and not to tire oneself uselessly with
false hopes of luckily encountering the answers.
What I seek is the cause of the tight union found between the tiny parts that
compose the tiny bond A, B. Now there are only three things I distinctly conceive that might be the cause I seek, namely: the parts of this tiny bond themselves, or the will of the Author of nature, or fmally the invisible bodies that
surround these tiny bonds. I might still produce, as a cause for these two things,
the form of the bodies, the qualities of hardness or some occult quality, the
harmony that would exist between parts of the same type, and so on. But because
I have no distinct idea of these lovely things, I neither should nor can apply my
reasonings to them. As a result, if I do not find the cause I seek in things of which
I have distinct ideas, I will not fruitlessly trouble myself with the contemplation
of these vague and general ideas of logic; and I will stop wanting to speak about
things I do not understand. But let us examine the first ofthese things that can be
the cause of the strong attachment of the parts of this tiny bond, namely, the parts
composing it.
When I consider only the parts of which hard bodies are composed, I feel
inclined to believe that: one cannot imagine any cement uniting the parts of this
bond, other than the parts themselves and their own rest; for of what nature
could it be? It will not be a thing that subsists in itself; for, all these tiny parts
being substances, how would they be united by substances other than themselves? Neither will it be a quality different from rest, because there is no quality
more contrary to motion that could separate these parts than the rest that is in
them; but aside from substances and their qualities, we do not know that there
are other kinds of things. 8
It is quite true that the parts of hard bodies remain united to the extent that they
are at rest beside each other, and that once they are in a state of rest, they
continue by themselves to remain so as much as possible. But this is not what I
am seeking; I am not looking for the explanation of why the parts of hard bodies
are in rest next to each other; I am trying here to discover why it is that the parts
of these bodies have the force to remain in a state of rest alongside each other,
and why they resist any effort made to stir or separate them.
I could still tell myself1' that each body truly has the force to remain in the state
it is in, and that this force is equal for motion and rest. But the thing that makes
the parts of hard bodies remain at rest alongside each other,C and that causes
difficulty in separating and agitating them, is that not enough motion is employed
to overcome their rest. This is probable, but I seek certitude, if it can be found,
and not merely probability. And how can I know with certitude and clarity that
each body has this force to remain in the state it is in, and that this force is equal
for motion and rest, since matter appears on the contrary to be indifferent to
motion and rest, and absolutely without any force? Let us go, then, as did
•[)eo;<·artes. l'rilwiple1·, art. 55 nf pt. 2.
"De"-·artc,, art. 43 nf the same part.

··Art. 63.

The Search after Truth

515

Descartes, to the will of the Creator, which perhaps is the force that bodies
appear to have in themselves. That is the second thing we previously said could
keep the parts of this tiny bond of which we were speaking so strongly attached to
one another.
Certainly it could be that God wills each body to remain in the state it is in, and
that His will is the force uniting their parts to one another; just as I also know that
it is His will that is the motor force which puts bodies in motion. For, since
matter cannot move by itself, it seems to me that I must judge that it is a mind,
and even the Author of nature, who preserves and puts it in motion by preserving
it successively in several places through His simple will, since an infinitely
powerful being does not act with instruments, and because effects necessarily
follow from His will.
I realize then that it could be that God wills each thing to remain in the state it
is in, a whether in rest or in motion, and that this will is the natural power bodies
have for remaining in the state in which they were once placed. If that is so, it
will be necessary, as Descartes did, to measure this power, to conclude what its
effects must be, and thus to provide the laws of force and the communication of
motion for the collision of different bodies, in proportion to their relative volumes [par Ia proportion de Ia grandeur qui se trouve entre ces corps] since we
have no other way of knowing this general immutable will of God, which causes
the different power of bodies to act upon and resist each other, than their different
volumes and speeds.
Nevertheless, I have no certain proof that God wills, through a positive volition, that bodies remain at rest; and it seems to suffice that God wills matter to
exist, in order not only that it exist, but also that it exist at rest.
Such is not the case with motion, because the idea of matter in motion certainly includes two powers or efficacies to which it is related, to wit, what
created it, and further, what activated it. But the idea of matter at rest includes
only the idea of the power that created it, without the necessity of another power
to put it at rest, since if we simply conceive of matter without considering any
power, we will necessarily conceive of it at rest. This is how I conceive things, I
must judge of them according to my ideas; and according to my ideas, rest is
merely the privation of motion; I mean that the alleged force which makes rest is
merely the privation of that which makes motion; for it is sufficient, it seems to
me, that God cease to will that a body be moved, in order that it stop moving, and
that it be at rest.
Indeed, reason and thousands upon thousands of experiments teach me that if
two bodies of equal volume are moved, the one with one rate of speed, and the
other with half that rate, then the force of the first will be double that of the
second. If the speed of the second is only a quarter, a hundredth, a millionth that
of the first, then the second will only have the fourth, the hundredth, the millionth fraction of the force of the first. From this it is easy to conclude that if the
speed of the second is infinitely small, or finally null, as when at rest, then the
"Descartes, [Principles), art. J I [sic; actually, 37), of part 2, art. 45 ff.

516

Nicolas Malebranche

force of the second will be infinitely small, or finally null, if it is at rest. Hence, it
seems evident to me that the state of rest has no force for resisting the force of
motion.
But I remember having heard from several very enlightened persons that it
appeared to them that motion was equally the privation of rest as rest the privation of motion. Someone even asserted, for reasons I could not understand, that it
was more probable that motion was a privation than rest. I do not distinctly
remember the reasons they gave, but they must make me fear that my ideas are
false. For even though most men say anything it pleases them to say about things
that appear to be of little importance, nevertheless, I believe that the persons of
whom I speak took pleasure in relating their conceptions. I must therefore
examine my ideas with care once more.
That it is the will of God that moves bodies is a thing that seems indubitable to
me, and these gentlemen of whom I speak would agree. Therefore, the force that
this ball I see rolling has is the will of God making it roll; what is it necessary for
God to do to stop it now? Is it necessary for Him to will with a positive volition
for it to be at rest, or is it sufficient that He stop willing it to be active? It is
obvious that if God only stops willing this ball to be active, the cessation of this
volition of God will cause the cessation of the ball's motion, and consequently it
will cause it to be in a state of rest. For the will of God, which was the force
moving the ball no longer existing, this force will no longer exist and the ball will
therefore no longer be moved. Thus, the cessation of the force of motion causes
rest. Therefore, rest has no force that causes it. It is therefore nothing but a pure
privation that assumes no positive will in God. Thus, to give bodies some force
for remaining at rest would be to admit in God a positive will without reason or
necessity.
But let us reverse this argument if possible. Let us suppose for the moment that
there is a ball at rest instead of in motion; what must God do to activate it? Does it
suffice that He stops willing it to be at rest? If that is so, I have as yet advanced
nothing; for motion will as soon be the privation of rest as rest the privation of
motion. I therefore assume that God stops willing it to be at rest. But, this
assumed, I do not see that the ball is stirred; and, if there are some who conceive
that it is moved, I beg them to tell me in which direction, and with what degree
of motion it is moved. Certainly, it is impossible that it be moved and that it not
have some determination and some degree of motion. And from the single
conception that God stops willing it to be at rest it is impossible to conceive that it
moves with some particular degree of motion, because <the cases of> motion
and rest are not the same. Motions have an infinity of modes; they vary quantitatively; but since rest is nothing, one state of rest cannot differ from another. The
same ball that goes twice as fast as another in a given time has twice as much
force or motion in that time as the other; but we cannot say that the same ball has
twice as much rest in a given time as another.
Therefore, there has to be in God a positive will to put a ball in motion, or to
cause a ball to have such a force to be moved, and it is sufficient for it to be at rest
that He stops willing it to be moved. Similarly, in order for God to create a

The Search after Truth

517

world, it is not sufficient that He stop willing it not to exist, but He must
positively desire the mode in which it must exist. But to annihilate it, God need
not will it not to exist, since God cannot will nothingness through a positive act
of will; it suffices only that He stop willing it to exist.
I am not considering motion and rest here according to their relative being; for
it is obvious that bodies at rest have relations just as real to those around them as
those in motion. I conceive only that bodies in motion have a motor force, and
that those at rest have no force for their state of rest, because the relation of
moving bodies to those around them is always changing; and therefore there has
to be a continuous force producing these continuous changes, for in effect it is
these changes which cause everything new that happens in nature. But there need
be no force to make nothing happen. When the relation of a body to those around
it is always the same, nothing happens; and the preservation of this relation, I
mean the action of God's will that preserves this relation, is no different from
what preserves the body itself.
If it is true, as I conceive it to be, that rest is merely the privation of motion,
then the slightest movement, I mean that of the tiniest activated body, will
contain more force and power than the rest of the largest body. Thus, the slightest
effort of the tiniest body one can conceive, activated in the void 8 against a very
large and vast body, will be capable of moving it slightly, since this large body,
being at rest, will have no force to resist that of this tiny body striking against it.
Consequently the resistance generated by the parts of hard bodies to hinder their
separation necessarily comes from something other than their state of rest.
But what we have just proved by abstract arguments must be demonstrated
through sensible experiments to see if our ideas are in agreement with the sensations we receive from objects, for it often happens that such arguments deceive
us, or at least that they cannot convince others, especially those prejudiced to the
contrary. The authority of Descartes has such a great effect on the reason of some
people that this great man must be proved mistaken in every way to disabuse
them. What I have just said enters easily into minds that have not filled themselves with the contrary opinion, and I even clearly see that they will be critical
of me for stopping too long to prove things that appear incontestable to them. But
the Cartesians well deserve the efforts one makes to satisfy them. The others can
pass over whatever might annoy them.
Here then are some experiments that sensibly prove that rest has absolutely no
power to resist motion, and that consequently show that the will of the Author of
nature, which creates the power and force that each body has for continuing in
the state it is in, concerns only motion and not rest, since bodies have no power
whatsoever in themselves.
Experience teaches that very large vessels, floating in water, can be agitated
by very small bodies that knock against them. From this I conclude, in spite of all
the evasions of Descartes and the Cartesians, that if these large bodies were in a
•By a body in a void. I mean a body so separated from others. solid or liquid, that there is notlling
that either helps or hinders the communication of motion.

518

Nicolas Malebranche

void they could be agitated still more easily. For the reason there is some slight
difficulty in moving a vessel in water is that the water resists the force of the
motion communicated to it, which would not happen in a void. And what
manifestly shows that water resists the motion communicated to the vessel is that
the vessel stops being agitated some time after it has been moved; for that would
not happen unless the vessel lost its motion by communicating it to the water, or
if the water yielded to it without resisting it, or finally if the water gave it its
motion. Thus, since an agitated vessel in water gradually stops moving, it is an
indubitable sign that the water resists its motion instead of facilitating it as
Descartes claims; and consequently it would be infinitely easier to agitate a large
body in a void than in water, since there would be no resistance on the part of the
surrounding bodies. It is therefore obvious that rest has no force for resisting
motion, and that the slightest motion contains more power and force than the
greatest body at rest; and that thus we should not compare the force of motion and
of rest according to the proportion we find between the size of bodies in motion
and those at rest, as did Descartes.
True, there is some reason to believe that a vessel is agitated from the moment
it is first in the water because of the continual change occurring in the particles of
the water surrounding it, although it appears to us not to change place. And this is
what makes Descartes and some others believe that the one pushing it is not the
only force making it advance in the water, but that, on the contrary, it has already
received a good deal of motion from the tiny particles of the liquid body that
surround it and push upon it equally from all sides, and that this motion is only
determined by a new motion of the one that pushes it, so that what agitates a body
in water could not do so in the void. It is thus that Descartes and those of his
opinion defend the rules of motion he gave us.
Let us suppose, for example, that there is a piece of wood, a square foot in
size, in a liquid body, and that all the tiny parts of the liquid body act and are
moved against the wood; and that because they push it equally in all directions,
as much toward A as toward B, it cannot advance in any direction at all. If,
therefore, I push another piece of wood from a half-foot away against the first
piece in direction A, I see that it advances. And from this I conclude that it could
be moved in the void with less force than that with which this piece of wood
pushes it, for the reasons I have just stated. But those of whom I speak deny this,
and they reply that the reason the large piece of wood advances from the instant it
is pushed by the small one is that the small one, which could not move it if it
were by itself, being joined with the agitated particles of the liquid body, determines them to push it and to communicate a part of their motion to it. But it is
obvious that, according to this reply, the piece of wood, once agitated, should
not have diminished its motion, but that on the contrary it should have continuously augmented it. For according to this reply, the piece of wood is pushed by
the water more in direction A than in direction B, and therefore it must always
advance. And because this impulsion is continuous, its motion must always
increase. But, as I have already said, water, far from facilitating its motion,
constantly resists it and, since its resistance always diminishes this motion,
finally renders it completely imperceptible.

The Search after Truth

519

It is now necessary to prove that the piece of wood, which is equally pushed by
the tiny particles of the water surrounding it, has no motion or force whatsoever
capable of moving it, even though it continually changes its immediate place, or
the surface of the water surrounding it is never the same at different times. For if
it is the case that a body equally pushed in all directions like this piece of wood
has no motion, it will be indubitable that it is only the external force striking
against it which gives it motion, since while this external force pushes it, the
water resists it and even gradually dissipates the motion communicated to it, for
it gradually stops moving.
Now this much appears obvious, for a body equally pushed from all directions
can be compressed; but certainly it cannot be transported, since the addition or
subtraction of forces has no effect.
Those to whom I speak maintain that there is never more motion at one time
than at another in nature, and that bodies at rest are moved only by collision with
some agitated bodies that transmit their motion to them. From this I conclude that
a body I assume to be created perfectly at rest in water will never receive a single
degree of motion nor a single degree of force to move from the particles of water
that surround it and that continually strike against it, provided that they push it
equally in all directions, because all these particles that strike against it equally
from all sides rebound with all their motion and communicate none of it to the
body. Consequently, this body must always be considered at rest and without any
motor force, although the surface of the body changes continually.
Now, my proof that these particles rebound this way with all their motion is,
besides the fact that the thing cannot be conceived otherwise, that the water
touching this body would have to be cooled a great deal or even frozen, and
become about as hard as wood is on its surface, since the motion of the particles
of water must be equally distributed in the tiny parts of the bodies they surround.
But to compromise with those who defend Descartes's view, I am willing to
grant that one should not consider a boat in the water as being at rest. I also grant
that all particles of the water surrounding it are in harmony with the new motion
the boat communicates to the water, although it is only too obvious, from the
lessening of the boat's motion, that they resist it more in the direction it is
moving than in the direction from which it was pushed. That nevertheless assumed, I say that according to Descartes, of all the particles of water in the river,
only those that touch the boat immediately on the side from which it was pushed
can aid in its motion. For, according to this philosopher, a water being fluid, all
the particles of which it is composed do not act together against the body we want
to mol'e. It is only those that, in touching it, press jointly upon it. Now, those that
jointly press against the boat, together with the boatman, are a hundred times
smaller than the whole boat. It is therefore obvious, by the explanationb Descartes gives in this article on the difficulty we have in breaking a nail between
our hands, that a tiny body is capable of activating one much larger than itself.
For after all, our hands are not as fluid as water, and when we want to break a
"Principl<-s, pl. 2. art. 63.
hJbid.

520

Nicolas Malebranche

nail, there are more parts joined together that act jointly in our hands than there
are in the water pushing a boat.
But here is a more obvious experiment. Take a very solid plank or some other
extremely hard surface. Drive a nail halfway into it and incline the plane a bit. I
say that, if an iron bar a hundred times thicker than the nail is put on the plane,
one or two inches above it, and is allowed to slide, the nail will not break.• And
yet it must be noted that according to Descartesb all the particles of the bar jointly
push and act against this nail, for the bar is hard and solid. If therefore there is no
cement other than rest to unite the parts that compose the nail, the iron bar being
a hundred times thicker than the nail, it must, according to Descartes's fifth rule
and according to reason, transmit some small amount of its motion to the part of
the nail it would strike against, that is to say, [it should] break it and pass beyond,
even though this bar slides with a very slow motion. Thus, it is necessary to look
for a cause other than the rest of the parts for making bodies hard, or capable of
resisting the effort made to break them, since rest has no force to resist motion,
and I believe these experiments suffice to show that the abstract proofs we
provided are not false.
It is therefore necessary to examine the third thing we previously said might be
the cause of the tight union found between the parts of hard bodies, namely. an
invisible matter that surrounds them and that, being very agitated, pushes the
interior and exterior parts of these bodies with a great deal of violence, and
compresses them in such a way that to separate them requires more strength than
this extremely agitated invisible matter possesses.
It seems I can conclude that the union of the parts composing hard bodies
depends on the subtle matter surrounding and compressing them, since the two
other things that could conceivably be the causes of this union are not truly the
causes, as we have just seen. For, since I find resistance in breaking off a piece of
iron, and since this resistance comes neither from the iron nor from the will of
God, as I believe I have proved, it must necessarily come from some invisible
matter, which can be none other than the matter that immediately surrounds and
compresses it. I shall now explain and prove this opinion.<
Let someone take a globe of some metal, hollow inside and cut into two
hemispheres, and let him join these two hemispheres by attaching a small strip of
wax where they meet, and then, draw the air from them. Experience shows that
these two hemispheres are joined to each other in such a way that several horses,
harnessed to them with buckles, some on one side and some on the other, cannot
separate them, assuming the hemispheres to be large in proportion to the number
of horses. Nevertheless, if the air is let back in, a single person can separate them
with no trouble whatsoever. It is easy to conclude from this experiment that what
united these two hemispheres so strongly to each other was the fact that being
pressured on their convex exterior surface by the air surrounding them, they were
•Art. 6.1.
"Art. ~0.
··See the Expt'riment.< at MaKdeht'rK nf Otto de Guericke. hk. 3.

The Search after Truth

521

not pressured at the same time on their concave interior surface. So that the
actions of the horses pulling the two hemispheres from two directions could not
overcome the effort of an infinity of particles of air that resisted them by pressing
the two hemispheres. But the slightest effort is capable of separating them when
the air, being reintroduced into the copper sphere, pressures the concave interior
surfaces as much as the air from outside pressures the convex exterior surfaces.
If, on the contrary, we take the bladder of a carp and put it in a vessel from
which the air is drawn, then this bladder, being full of air, will burst and break
because then there is no air outside the bladder to resist that inside. It is also
because of this that two planes of glass or marble, having been rubbed against
each other, are joined so that we feel resistance when we try to separate them,
because these two parts of marble are pressed and compressed by the outside air
that surrounds them, and are not so strongly pushed by that on the inside. I could
supply an infinity of other experiments to prove that the heavy air that presses on
the bodies it surrounds strongly unites their parts, but what I said suffices to
explain my thinking clearly on the present question.
I say, then, that the reason for the very strong union of the parts of hard bodies,
and of these tiny bonds of which I previously spoke, is that there are other tiny
bodies outside, infinitely more agitated than the gross air we breathe, that push
and compress them, and that the reason we have trouble separating them is not
their state of rest but the agitation of these tiny bodies that surround and compress
them. a Consequently, the thing that resists motion is not rest, which is nothing
but its privation and has no force in itself, but some contrary motion that must be
overcome.
This simple exposition of my opinion might seem reasonable; nevertheless, I
can well foresee that several people will have a great deal of difficulty accepting
it. Hard bodies make such a great impression on our senses when they strike us or
when we make a strong effort to break them that we are led to believe their parts
are united much more tightly than they really are. And, on the contrary, the tiny
bodies that I said surround them, to which I attributed the strength to cause this
union, seem too weak to produce such a noticeable effect because they make no
impression on our senses.
But, to destroy this prejudice, which is based only on the impressions of our
senses and on the difficulty we have in imagining bodies any tinier and more
agitated than those we see every day, it is necessary to notice that the hardness of
bodies is not measured in relation to our hands or to the efforts we are capable of
making, which are different at various times. For in the fmal analysis, if the
greatest strength of men were not almost nothing in comparison with that of
subtle matter, we would be very wrong to believe that diamonds and the hardest
rocks cannot have their hardness caused by the compression of the tiny, very
agitated bodies that surround them. Now, we will clearly recognize that the
strength of men is very insignificant if we consider that their power to move their
bodies in so many ways comes only from a very minute fermentation of their
•see the sixteenth Elucidation, toward the end, where I calculate the centrifugal force of the
vortexes of the subtle matter.

522

Nicolas Malebranche

blood, which agitates its tiny parts somewhat, thus producing animal spirits. For
it is the agitation of these spirits that constitutes the strength of our bodies and
gives us the power to make these efforts we unreasonably regard as something
very great and powerful.
But it must be noted carefully that this fermentation of our blood is nothing but
a very small communication of the motion of this subtle matter of which we have
just spoken; for all fermentations of visible bodies are merely communications of
the motion of invisible bodies, since every body receives its agitation from some
other one. We must not be surprised therefore if our strength is not as great as
that of this same subtle matter from which we receive it. But if our blood were
fermented as strongly in our hearts as gunpowder is fermented and agitated when
set on fire, i.e., if our blood received a communication of motion from subtle
matter as great as the one gunpowder receives, we could do extraordinary things
fairly easily, such as breaking iron, turning houses upside down, and so on,
provided we assume there was an appropriate proportion between our members
and the blood agitated in this way. We should therefore get rid of our prejudice
and not imagine, in accordance with the impression of our senses, that the parts
of hard bodies are so strongly united to each other just because we have so much
trouble breaking them apart.
But if we also consider the effects of fire in mines, on the weight of bodies,
and on several other effects of nature that have no cause other than the agitation
of these invisible bodies (as Descartes proved in several places), we shall realize
clearly that it is not beyond their strength to unite and compress the parts of hard
bodies together as powerfully as they do. For in the end, 1 am not afraid to say
that a cannonball, whose motion appears so extraordinary, does not even receive
the thousandth part of the motion of the subtle matter surrounding it.
You will not doubt what I am proposing if you consider, first, that gunpowder
does not catch fire completely or all at the same instant; and second, that when it
catches fire completely and instantaneously, it floats only a very short time in the
subtle matter. Now bodies that float for a very short time in others cannot receive
very much motion from them, as we can see in boats that are abandoned to
currents of water and only receive their motion gradually. In the third and most
important place, <this is the case> because each part of the powder can receive
only that motion which conforms to the subtle matter; for the water transmits to
the boat only the direct motion common to all its parts, and that motion is
ordinarily very slight in relation to the others.
I could further prove the magnitude of the motion of subtle matter to those who
accept the principles of Descartes by the motion of the earth and the weight of
bodies, and I would even thence draw several proofs that would be certain and
exact enough, but that is not necessary for my topic. In order to have a sufficient
proof for the agitation of subtle matter (which I give as the cause of the hardness
of bodies) without having seen the works of Descartes, it suffices, I say, to read
with some application what I have already said about it in Book 4, Chapter 2,
number 5, or rather what I will say of it in the 16th Elucidation from number II
to the end.

The Search after Truth

523

Therefore, being presently delivered from the prejudices that led us to believe
that our efforts are very powerful, and that those of the subtle matter that surrounds and compresses hard bodies are very weak, and being persuaded besides
of the violent agitation of this matter in virtue of the things I said about gunpowder, it will not be difficult to see that it is absolutely necessary that this matter
must be the cause of the hardness of bodies or of the resistance we feel when we
try to break them apart.
Now, as there are always a great many parts of this invisible matter that enter
and circulate in the pores <of hard bodies>, they not only make them hard, as
we have just explained, but furthermore they are the reason why some spring
back and return to their original shape, others remain bent, and <still> others
are fluid and liquid; 8 and finally, they are the cause not only of the strength found
in the parts of hard bodies for remaining beside each other but also of that found
in the parts of fluid bodies for separating from each other; i.e., it is the same
force that makes some bodies hard and others fluid; hard, when their parts touch
immediately; fluid, when their parts do not touch because the subtle matter slides
between them.
Neither shall I pause to resolve a very great number of objections that I foresee
might be made against what I have just established; because if those who make
these objections have no knowledge of true physics, I will only bore and anger,
instead of satisfying, them; but ifthey are enlightened people and their objections
are very strong, I could only respond to them with a great number of figures and
lengthly discourse. So that I believe I must entreat those who will fmd some
difficulty in the things I have just said to reread this chapter with more care, and
the 16th Elucidation. For I hope that if they read and meditate upon it as is
necessary, all their objections will vanish. But in the end, if they fmd my entreaty
troublesome, let them relax, for there is no great danger in being ignorant of the
cause of the hardness of bodies.
I do not speak here of contiguity, for it is obvious that contiguous things touch
each other so slightly that there is always a great deal of subtle matter passing
between them, and, in making an effort to continue its motion in a straight line, it
hinders their union.
I have explained the union found between two slabs of marble that have been
polished against each other, and it is easy to see that although subtle matter
constantly passes between these two parts, as unified as they are, air cannot pass
through; and thus it is the weight of the air that compresses and presses these two
pieces of marble upon each other, causing us to have trouble disuniting them
unless we slide them along one another.
It is clear from all this that the continuity, contiguity, and union of the two
slabs of marble would only be the same thing in the void, because we do not also
have separate ideas of them; consequently, to make them differ absolutely and
not in relation to the bodies around them is to say what is incomprehensible.
"To under.;tand distinctly what I have just said, it is necessary to read what I have said about the
nature and effects nf subtle matter in the sixteenth Elucidation, number 14 and following.

524

Nicolas Malebranche

Here now are some reflections on Descartes's opinion and on the source of his
error. I call his opinion an error because I find no way of defending what he says
about the rules of motion and the cause of the hardness of bodies toward the end
ofthe second part of his Principles in several places, and because he seems to me
to have fairly proved the truth of the opposite opinion. I shall give the rules of
motion that experience confirms, and the reasons behind these rules.
This great man, conceiving very distinctly that matter cannot move itself and
that the natural motor force of all bodies is none other than the general will of the
Author of nature, and that hence the communication of the motion of bodies at
their collision can come only from this same will, let himself believe that we
could provide the rules of the various communication of motions only through
the proportion found between the different sizes of the bodies struck, since it is
not possible to penetrate the designs and will of God. And because he judged that
each thing had the force to remain in the state it was in, whether in rest or motion
(because God, whose will makes this force, always acts in the same way), he
concluded that rest had as much force as motion. Thus, he measured the effects
of the force of rest (like those of the force of motion) by the size of the body at
rest, which made him give the rules of the communication of motion in his
Principles, and the cause of the hardness of bodies I have tried to refute.
It is fairly difficult not to yield to Descartes's opinion when we adopt his
viewpoint and when we do not pay attention. But even if God's positive will and
efficacy were necessary for rest as well as motion, it does not follow that what
would cause rest would be equal to what would produce motion, God having
been able to subordinate one to the other and to will that the first always yield to
the second.
I am therefore not surprised that Descartes was ofthis opinion, for it is difficult
to think of everything; but I am only surprised that he did not correct it when,
having further advanced his knowledge, he recognized the existence and some
effects of the subtle matter that surrounds bodies. I am surprised that, in article
132 of the fourth part, he attributes to this subtle matter the force that certain
bodies have to rebound, and that in articles 55 and 43 of the second part and
elsewhere he does not attribute to it their hardness or the resistance they give
when we try to bend and break them, but only to the <state of> rest of their
parts. It appears obvious to me that the cause of the elasticity and stiffness of
certain bodies is the same as what gives them the force of resistance when we
want to break them apart, for in the end the force we use actually to break steel
differs only insensibly from that by which it is bent to the point of almost
breaking.
I do not want to supply very many reasons here that can be given for proving
these things, nor to respond to certain difficulties that might be fashioned about
the is~ue of hard bodies that arc not sensibly clastic and that we nevertheless have
trouble bending. For it suffices, in order to make these difficulties vanish, to
consider that subtle matter cannot easily make new paths for itself in brittle
bodies, such as glass and tempered steel. and that it can do so more easily in
bodies l·omposcd of branched and malleable parts, as with gold and lead; and

The Search after Truth

525

finally <to consider> that there is no hard body that does not have some
elasticity.
It is fairly difficult to be persuaded that Descartes positively believed that the
cause of hardness was different from that of elasticity; what appears more probable is that he did not reflect enough upon this matter. When one has meditated on
some subject for a long time and is satisfied about the things one wanted to know,
one often thinks of it no more. One believes that the thoughts he has are incontestable truths and that it is useless to investigate further. But there are so many
things in man that discourage his concentration, and that lead him into overly
hasty assent and render him subject to error, that even though the mind remains
apparently satisfied, it is not always well informed of the truth. Descartes was a
man like us; we have never seen more soundness, accuracy, scope and penetration of mind· than appear in his works, I admit, but he was not infallible. Thus, he
apparently remained so strongly convinced of his opinion that he did not reflect
that he affirmed in consequence of his principles something contrary to them. He
had founded it upon quite specious and quite probable reasons, but nevertheless
they were not irresistible. He could have further suspended his judgment, and
consequently he should have. It did not suffice to examine a hard body to find out
what in that body makes it so; he should also have thought about the invisible
bodies that can make it hard, as he did at the end of his Principles of Philosophy,
when he attributes the cause of elasticity to them. He should have made an exact
division that encompassed everything that could have contributed to the hardness
of bodies. It was not sufficient to look for its cause in general in the will of God,
since His volitions, which cause all motion and rest, can be subordinated-that
which causes rest to that which produces the motion of bodies. He should have
thought further about the subtle matter that surrounds them. For although the
existence of this extremely agitated matter was not yet proved in his Principles
where he speaks of hardness, neither was it rejected. He should therefore have
suspended his judgment and carefully recollected that what he had written about
the cause of hardness and the rules of motion should have been reviewed all over
again, which I believe he did not do with enough care. Or else he did not give
enough consideration to the true explanation of a thing that is very easy to
recognize, and that nevertheless is ofthe ultimate importance in physics. Let me
explain.
Descartes knew very well that to support his system, the truth of which he
perhaps could not doubt, it was absolutely necessary that large bodies always
communicate some of their motion to the small ones they encountered, and that
the small ones rebound upon colliding with larger ones, with no similar loss of
their own. For without this his first element would not have the excess of motion
required over the second, nor the second over the third; and his whole system
would be absolutely false, as those who have meditated upon it a little know
fairly well. But in assuming that rest has force to resist motion and that a large
body at rest cannot be stirred by another smaller than it, even though the smaller
strikes it with a furious agitation, it is obvious that large bodies must have much
less motion than a like volume of smaller ones (since according to this assump-

526

Nicolas Malebranche

tion they can always communicate what motion they have) and that they cannot
always receive it from smaller ones. Hence, since this assumption is not contrary
to everything Descartes had said from the beginning until the establishment of his
rules of motion in his Principles, and since it adapted very well to the consequences of these same principles, he believed that the rules of motion he thought
he had demonstrated through their cause had again been sufficiently confinned
by their effects.
I essentially agree with Descartes that large bodies communicate their motion
much more easily than small ones, and that hence his first element is more
agitated than the second, and the second than the third. But the cause of this is
clear without recourse to his hypothesis. Small bodies and fluid ones, water, air,
and such, can communicate to large bodies only that motion uniform and common to all their parts; the water of a river can communicate to a boat only the
movement of descent common to all the tiny particles composing the water, and
each of these tiny particles, beyond this common movement, has an infinity of
other particular ones. Thus, it is obvious from this explanation that a boat, for
example, can never have as much motion as an equal volume of water, since the
boat can receive from the water only that direct motion common to all the
parts composing it. If twenty particles of a fluid body push some other body from
one direction, there are as many that push it from the other; it therefore remains
immobile, and all the tiny parts of the fluid body in which it floats spring back
without losing any of their motion. Thus, heavy bodies whose parts are united
with each other can receive only circular and uniform movement from the vortex
of subtle matter that surrounds them.
It seems to me that this suffices to explain why gross bodies are not as agitated
as small ones, and that it is not necessary for explaining these things to assume
that rest has some force to resist motion. Thus, the certitude of the principles of
Descartes's philosophy cannot be used as a proof for defending his rules of
motion; and there is room to believe that if Descartes himself had once more
examined his Principles without prejudice and by thinking of explanations similar to those I have stated, he would not have believed that the effects of nature
had confirmed his rules, and would not have fallen into contradiction by attributing the hardness of bodies only to the state of rest of their parts, and their
elasticity with regard to the effort of subtle matter.
Moreover, I believe I should warn that what damages Descartes's physics most
is this false premise that rest has force; for from this he inferred false rules of
motion; from this he concluded that the balls of his second element were hard in
and of themselves; from which he drew false explanations of the transmission of
light and the variety of colors, of the generation of tire, and gave very imperfect
explanations of weight. In a word. this false principle that rest has force has
influence almost everywhere in his system which aside fmm that marks a genius
superior to the philosophers who preceded him; I hope everyone will agree with
all this when they have read anti completely understood the sixteenth Elucidation. I admit nevertheless that I owe to Des~.:artes, or to his manner of doing
philosophy, the opinions I oppose to his own, muJ the holdness to ~.:ritici1.c him.

CONCLUSION OF THE LAST THREE BOOKS

I have, it seems to me, sufficiently shown in books four and five that the natural
inclinations and passions of men often make them fall into error, because they
lead them not so much to investigate things carefully as to judge them with haste.
In the fourth book, I showed that the inclination for the good in general is the
cause of the restlessness of the will; that restlessness of the will puts the mind in a
state of continual agitation, and that an incessantly agitated mind is utterly
incapable of discovering slightly obscure truths; that the love of new and extraordinary things often prejudices us in their favor, and that everything that bears the
mark of the infinite is capable of dazzling our imagination and beguiling us. I
explained how our inclination toward grandeur, high position, and independence
engages us insensibly in false erudition or in the study of all those vain and
useless sciences that flatter our secret pride, because they cause us to be admired
by common men. I showed that the inclination for pleasures incessantly diverts
the mind's vision from the contemplation of abstract truths, which are the
simplest and most productive, and that this inclination does not permit the mind
to consider anything with sufficient attention and disinterestedness to judge it
well; that pleasures, being modes of our souls, necessarily divide the mind's
capacity, and that a divided mind cannot fully comprehend anything of any
scope. Finally I showed that the relation and natural union we have with all those
with whom we live is the occasion of many errors into which we fall, and which
we communicate to others, as others communicate to us those errors into which
they have fallen.
In the fifth book, in trying to give some idea of our passions, I have, it seems
to me, adequately shown that they are established to unite us to all sensible
things, and to make us choose among them the disposition we should have for
their preservation and our own; that just as our senses unite us to our bodies and
distribute (so to speak) our soul into all the parts that compose it, so our emotions
make us go outside ourselves to distribute ourselves into everything around us:
that finally they ceaselessly represent things to us, not according to what they are
in themselves in order to form judgments of truth, but according to the relation
they have to us, in order to form judgments useful for the preservation of our
being and the being of those with whom we are united either by our will or by
nature.
527

528

Nicolas Malebranche

After having tried to discover errors in their causes, and to deliver the mind
from the prejudices to which it is subject, I believed that fmally it was time to
prepare it for the search for truth. Thus, I explained in the sixth book the means
that seem to me the most natural for increasing the attention and scope of the
mind, by showing the use we can make of our senses, passions, and imaginations
to give the mind all the strength and penetration of which it is capable. Next I
established certain rules that must necessarily be observed in order to discover
any particular truth; I explained them through several examples to render them
more intuitive, and I chose those that appeared to me the most useful, or that
encompassed the most productive and general truths, in order that they be read
with more application and that they be made more sensible or obvious and
familiar to the reader.
Perhaps you will recognize through this essay on method the necessity for
reasoning only upon clear and evident ideas with which you are inwardly convinced that all nations will agree, and the necessity of never going on to complex
things before having sufficiently examined the simple ones on which they depend.
But if you consider that Aristotle and his followers did not observe the rules I
explained (of which you must be convinced, as much by my proofs of this as by
the knowledge ofthe opinions ofthe most zealous defenders of this philosopher),
perhaps you will scorn his doctrine, in spite of all the favorable impressions
given to us by those who let themselves be dazed by words they do not understand.
But if you take note of Descartes's manner of doing philosophy, you will not
be able to doubt its soundness; for I have adequately shown that he argues only
upon clear and evident ideas, and that he begins with the simplest things before
going on to the more complex ones that depend upon them. Those who will read
the works of this learned man will be fully convinced of what I say about him,
provided they read them with all the attention necessary for understanding them;
and they will feel a secret joy at having been born in a century and a country
fortunate enough to deliver us from the trouble of searching in past centuries
among the pagans, and in the extremities of the earth among barbarians or
foreigners, for a Doctor to instruct us in the truth, or rather for a prompter
sufficiently trustworthy to dispose us to being instructed by truth.
Nevertheless, as we should not put ourselves to much trouble to know the
opinions of men, even were we convinced on other grounds that they had
discovered the truth, I should be quite sorry if the esteem I appear to have here
for Descartes prejudiced anyone in his favor, and if anyone was content to read
and retain his opinions without concern for being illuminated by the light of
truth. This would be to prefer man to God, to consult him in place of God, and to
be content with the obscure responses of a philosopher who does not enlighten
us, in order to avoid the difficulty of questioning through meditation Him who
answers and enlightens us all together.
It is an unworthy thing to become a partisan of any sect, whatever it may be,
and to regard its authors as infallihle. Descartes too, wanting to make men

The Search after Truth

529

disciples of the truth rather than obstinate sectarians of his opinions, expressly
warned: that we not place any faith at all in what he wrote, and that we accept
from it only what the strength and evidence of reason might constrain us to believe. a He does not want, as some philosophers do, to be believed on his word; he
always remembers that he is a man, and that, spreading light only through
reflection, he must tum the minds of those who want to be enlightened as he is
toward sovereign reason, which alone can render them more perfect through the
gift of intelligence.
The principal utility to be drawn from application to study is to make the mind
more accurate, enlightened, penetrating, and more fit for discovering all the
truths we wish to know. But those who read philosophers to retain their opinions
and to recite them to others do not draw near to Him who is the life and
nourishment of the soul; their minds are weakened and blinded by the commerce
they have with those who can neither enlighten nor fortify them; they are filled
with a false erudition whose weight overwhelms them and whose glamour dazzles them; and imagining that they become very wise when they fill their heads
with the opinions of ancient philosophers, they do not reflect that they are
making themselves disciples of those whom Saint Paul said had "become fools
by calling themselves wise": DJCENTES "se esse sapientes stulti facti sunt"
[Rom. l :22].
The method I have given can, it seems to me, be quite useful to those who
want to make use of their reason or who want to receive from God the replies He
gives to all those who know how to question Him properly; for I believe I have
said the main things that can fortify and guide the attention of the mind, which is
the natural prayer we make to the true master of all men in order to receive some
instruction from Him.
But as this natural means of searching after truth is very troublesome, and is
ordinarily useful only in resolving questions oflittle use (the knowledge of which
serves more often to flatter our pride than to perfect our minds), I believe that to
finish this work usefully, I must say that the shortest and surest method to
discover the truth and to unite oneself to God in the most pure and perfect manner
possible is to live as a true Christian: it is to follow closely the precepts of the
eternal Truth, which united itself with us only to reunite us with it. It is to listen
to our faith rather than our reason, and to strive after God, not so much by our
natural forces (which since Original Sin are totally languid), as by the aid of
faith, through which alone God wills to guide us into this immense light of truth
that will dispel all our shadows; for in the end it is much better, like good people,
to spend some years in ignorance of certain things and then in one moment to fmd
ourselves enlightened forever, than to acquire by natural means, with much
application and difficulty, a very imperfect science that leaves us in darkness for
all eternity.

• At the end of his Principle.<.

ELUCIDATIONS OF THE SEARCH AFTER TRUTH

Contents

Translator's Preface
Preface by Nicolas Malebranche
Foreword by Nicolas Malebranche

537
539
545

ELUCIDATION ONE
God Produces Whatever Is Real in the Mind's Impulses and the Determinations of
These Impulses; Nevertheless, He Is Not the Author of Sin. God Produces
Whatever Is Real in Sensations of Concupiscence, and Yet He Is Not the Author of
Our Concupiscence
547
ELUCIDATION TWO
On the First Chapter of the First Book, Where I Say: That the Will Can Variously
Determine the Impression It Has for the Good, Only by Ordering the Understanding to Represent Some Particular Object to It
559
ELUCIDATION THREE
On the Third Chapter, Where I Say: That We Should Not Be Surprised If We Have
No Evidence for the Mysteries of the Faith, Since We Do Not Even Have Any
561
Ideas of Them
ELUCIDATION FOUR
On the Following Passage from the Fifth Chapter: This Being So, Adam Cannot Be
Said to Have Been Brought to Love of God and to His Duty by Prevenient
Pleasures, Because the Knowledge He Had of His Good and the Joy He Continually Felt as a Necessary Result of the Perception of His Happiness in Being United
to God, Could Have Sufficed to Attract Him to His Duty and Make Him Act More
Meritoriously Than If He Had Been Determined, As It Were, by Prevenient
Pleasure
563
ELUCIDATION FIVE
On the Fifth Chapter. Where I Say: That Prevenient Delight Is the Grace of Jesus
Christ
566
533

534

Contents

ELUCIDATION SIX
On What I Said at the Beginning of the Tenth Chapter of the First Book and in the
Sixth Chapter of the Second Book on Method: That It Is Very Difficult to Prove
That There Are Bodies. What Ought to Be Thought of the Proofs Given of Their
Existence
568
ELUCIDATION SEVEN
On the Fifth Chapter of the Second Book, Where I Speak about Memory and
Spiritual Habits
577
ELUCIDATION EIGHT
On the Seventh Chapter of the Seventh Book. Summary of My Proofs for, and
Explanations of, Original Sin. And Replies to Those Objections That Seem to Me
Strongest
579
ELUCIDATION NINE
On the Third Chapter of the Third Part of the Second Book, in Which I Speak about
607
the Force of Imagination of Authors, Especially Tertullian
ELUCIDATION TEN
On the Nature of Ideas, in Which I Explain How All Things, Eternal Laws and
Truths, Are Seen in God
612
ELUCIDATION ELEVEN
On the Seventh Chapter of the Second Part of the Third Book, Where I Prove That
We Have No Clear Idea Either of Our Soul's Nature or of Its Modifications 633
ELUCIDATION TWELVE
On the Eighth Chapter of the Second Part of the Third Book. Vague and General
Terms Which Signify Nothing in Particular. How to Distinguish Them from
639
Others
ELUCIDATION THIRTEEN
On the Conclusion of the First Three Books. That Physicians and Spiritual
Directors Are Absolutely Necessary to Us, but That on Many Occasions It Is
Dangerous to Consult Them and to Follow Them
644
ELUCIDATION FOURTEEN
On the Third Chapter of the Fifth Book. That Love Is Different from Pleasure and
Joy
653
ELUCIDATION FIFTEEN
On the Third Chapter of the Second Part of the Sixth Book. Concerning the
Efficacy Attributed to Secondary Causes.
657
ELUCIDATION SIXTEEN
On Light and Colors, the Generation of Fire, and Several Other Effects of Subtle
687
Matter

Contents

535

LAST ELUCIDATION
Containing the Description of the Parts of Which the Eye Is Composed and the
Principal Explanations of Their Construction as an Aid to Understanding What Is
Said in the First Book concerning the Errors of Vision
721
ADDENDUM

749

Translator's Preface

Andre's Vie du R. P. Malebranche (publiee par le P. Ingold, Paris, 1886;
Geneva: Slatkin Reprints, 1970) relates that after the publication of the Search
after Truth (1674-5) Malebranche followed the example of Descartes and
sought objections to his work "which might give him occasion to test its principles by replying to them, to educate himself more thoroughly by meditation on
these first truths, or even to recant any errors which might have escaped him'' (p.
35). The fate of "poor Foucher," however, discouraged all but informal objections communicated to Malebranche by certain uimamed friends. According to
Andre the objections generally concerned ''only incidental propositions, which
were of no improtance to the system'' (p. 36). However, the Elucidations Malebranche published in reply to them contain important material on a variety of
important topics, especially Malebranche's theories of ideas and causation.
These Elucidations were published with the third edition of the Search after
Truth (1677-8), and with the rest of that work underwent significant and
extensive modification with each successive edition.
The translation history of the Elucidations is largely that of the main body of
the Search; the shortcomings of the English translations discussed in the Translators' Preface to Search after Truth are to be found here as well. In addition,
Elucidations 16 and 17, the two longest, appeared only after the English translations; hence they are here translated into English for the first time. (Taylor did
offer a translation of Elucidation 16 with the second edition of his translation in
1700; but it was based on a badly incomplete text of little use.) The text here
translated is that of the sixth and last edition of 1712, exactly as established by
Genevieve Rodis-Lewis (OC Ill, 1964).
TML

537

538

Translator's Preface

suggestions and comments on the commentary were had from Robert Muehlmann, John Nicholas, and Reinaldo Elugardo. Robert E. Butts provided encouragement at crucial points and Robert G. Turnbull gave me the original idea for
this as for so much else. Finally, Madeline Lennon contributed in ways both
material and spiritual that I cannot begin to recount. To all I express my sincere
thanks.
T.M.L.
September 1975

Preface

t

Wherein is shown what must be thought of the various judgments ordinarily
passed on books opposing prejudice.
When a book first sees the light of day, one knows not whom to consult to learn
of its destiny. The stars do not preside over its birth, their influences do not act on
it, and the boldest of astrologers would not dare predict anything of the various
risks of fortune it must run. Since the truth is not of this world, celestial bodies
have no power over it; and since the truth is· of an entirely spiritual nature, the
various arrangements of matter can contribute nothing to its success or ruin.
Furthermore, the judgments of men vary so much with regard to the same things
that no more rash a prophecy can be made than that concerning a book's degree
of success. Consequently, everyone who risks being an author at the same time
risks being interpreted however other men wish. But among authors, those who
oppose prejudices should expect to be condemned, for their works are too difficult for most men; and if they escape the passions of their enemies, they owe
their salvation only to the truth, which protects them.
It is a common fault of all men to be too quick to judge; for all men are liable to
error, and they are so liable only because of this fault. Now all precipitous
judgments are always in agreement with prejudices. Thus, authors who oppose
prejudices cannot fail to be condemned by all those who consult their long-held
opinions as if they were laws according to which they should always decide. For
in the final analysis, most readers are at the same time both judges of and
plaintiffs against such authors. That they are their judges cannot be contested,
and they are plaintiffs because these authors disturb them in the possession of
their prejudices over which they have the right of prescription and to which they
have been accustomed for many years.
I grant that there is a great deal of fairness, good faith, and common sense in
many readers, and that sometimes judges are found reasonable enough not to
follow commonly held opinions as the infallible rules of truth. There are some
who, withdrawing into themselves, consult the inner truth according to which we
must judge all things. But there are very few who do so in all cases, and none
with all the attention and fidelity necessary in order always to pronounce true
S39

540

Preface

judgments. Thus, even if we supposed that there was nothing to criticize in a
work attacking prejudice (which we could hope to do only through excessive
vanity), I do not think we could find a single man who would approve every
aspect of it, especially if the work opposed his prejudices, because it is naturally
impossible that a judge who is constantly offended, irritated, and outraged by a
plaintiff should give him complete justice, or that he should willingly take the
trouble to concentrate his every effort in order to consider arguments that would
initially seem to him like extravagant paradoxes or ridiculous paralogisms.
But although we might find in a work many things that please us, if we happen
to encounter certain things that shock us it seems to me that we would hardly fail
to point out the bad part while often forgetting to point out the good. Self-love
has countless motives for leading us to condemn what displeases us, and in this
case reason fully justifies these motives, for we imagine ourselves condemning
error and defending the truth when we defend our prejudices and condemn those
attacking them. Thus, the fairest judges of books opposing prejudice pass general
judgments unfavorable to those who have written them. They will say perhaps
that there is something good in a given work, and that the author is right to
oppose certain prejudices; but they will not fail to condemn him, and to decide as
judges with graveness and authority that he pushes things too far in such and such
cases. For when the author opposes prejudices toward which the reader is not
favorably disposed, everything the author says seems reasonable enough; but the
author always overdoes things when he opposes prejudices to which the reader is
too closely tied.
Now since the prejudices of different people are not always the same, if we
carefully collected all the different judgments passed on the same things, we
would often enough see that according to these judgments there is nothing good
and at the same time nothing bad in these kinds of works. There would be
nothing good, because every prejudice is espoused by somebody; and there
would also be nothing bad, because every prejudice is condemned by somebody·
Thus, these judgments are so equitable that if one wanted to use them to improve
his book, he would either have to wipe out the whole thing lest anything that was
condemned should remain, or not touch it at all lest anything that was approved
should be altered. As a result, the poor author, who does not want to offend
anyone, is perplexed by all these different judgments pronounced on all sides
both for and against him. If he decides to remain firm and appear obstinate in his
opinions, he must necessarily contradict himself at every tum, and he would have
to take as many different forms as there are heads in the populace.
Nonetheless, time does all men justice, and the truth, which initially appears
as a chimerical and ridiculous phantom, gradually makes itself felt. We open our
eyes, consider it, discover its charms, and are affected by it.
Somebody who condemns an author over an opinion that offends him, by
chance meets someone who approves of the same opinion and who, on the other
hand, condemns certain opinions that the other receives as beyond question.
Each expresses his thoughts and contradicts the other. Each examines both his
own and the other's arguments afresh. They dispute, consider, hesitate, and their

Preface

541

judgments on what they have not examined no longer come so easily. And if they
finally change their opinion and realize that the author is more reasonable than
they thought, a secret inclination arises in their heart that sometimes leads them
to speak as well of him as they had spoken ill of him. Thus, he who clings
steadfast to the truth, although he at first annoys people and seems to be a fool,
must not despair of someday seeing the truth he defends triumph over the prejudice of men. For there is this difference between good books and worthless ones,
between those that enlighten the mind and those that gratify the senses and
imagination: that the latter at first appear pleasant and delightful and then fade
with time, whereas the former, on the contrary, have something strange and
repellent that is troubling and upsetting, but in time, as they are read and meditated on, they begin to be appreciated, for time usually determines the worth of
things. Since books opposing prejudice arrive at the truth by new paths, they
require more time than others to bear the fruit their authors expect of them. For
since those who write these kinds of books often give us false hope, there are few
people who read them, still fewer who approve of them, and practically everyone
condemns them whether they have read them or not. And although we might be
certain that the most commonly traveled ways do not lead where we wish to go,
yet we have an overriding fear of entering upon untrod paths. We do not make
use of our sight to direct ourselves, but blindly follow our predecessors. The
company offers diversion and consolation. We give no thought to what we are
doing, and have no knowledge of where we are going; often we even forget
where we intended to go.
Men were created to live in society; but to maintain a society, it is not enough
to speak the same language-we must all use the same expressions, we must
think like one another, and we must live by opinion as we act through imitation.
The good of the body and the establishment of our fortune are easily, pleasantly,
and surely attended to when we agree with others' opinions and let ourselves be
persuaded by the sensible manifestation of the imagination of those with whom
we speak. But we undergo much suffering and risk our fortune to great dangers
when we want to listen only to the inner truth and scornfully reject all the
prejudices of the senses and all the opinions we have uncritically accepted.
Thus, all writers who oppose prejudice are deceived if they expect renown
because of their work. Perhaps, should they succeed, a small number of learned
people will speak of their work with praise, but after they themselves have been
reduced to ashes; but during their lifetime they should expect to be ignored by
most men, and to be scorned, libeled, and persecuted even by people held to be
wise and reasonable.
Indeed, there are so many powerful and persuasive reasons for acting as those
around us that we are often justified in condemning as frivolous and capricious
spirits those who do not do as others, and because acting and thinking are not
sufficiently distinguished, it is ordinarily found regrettable that there are people
who oppose prejudice. External confonnity to our country's customs and opinions
is not regarded as sufficient to safeguard the rules of civil society. To examine
commonly accepted views is held to be rashness, and to inquire after truth is

542

Preface

taken to be a breach of charity, for it is not so much truth as opinion and custom
that unifies civil societies.
Aristotle is received in the universities as the rule of truth; he is cited as
infallible; to deny what he proposes is philosophical heresy; in short, he is
honored as the genius of nature; and for all that, those best versed in his physics
cannot account for (and perhaps are not convinced oO anything, and students of
philosophy dare not even speak before intelligent people of what they have
learned from their teachers. This is perhaps enough to show anyone who reflects
on them what ought to be thought of such studies, for a doctrine that must be
forgotten in order to become reasonable does not seem very solid. Yet you would
be held rash were you to expose the falsity of the arguments authorizing such
strange conduct, and if you were skillful enough to disillusion the public, you
would still have to deal with those who profit from it.
Is it not evident that we must make use of what we know in order to learn what
we do not know, and that to give a Frenchman a grammar in German verse in
order to teach him German would be to make fun of the fellow? Yet the Latin
verses of Despautere are put in the hands of children to teach them Latincompletely obscure verses for children, who find even the easiest things difficult
to understand. Reason and even experience clearly oppose this practice, for
children spend a long time only to learn Latin badly. Yet to criticise the practice
is considered rash. A Chinese could not help laughing at this practice, but in this
part of the world, the wisest and most learned men cannot help approving of it.
If such false and gross prejudices and such unreasonable customs of such great
consequence have an infinite number of supporters, how could anyone submit to
arguments that oppose prejudice of a purely speculative nature? Very little attention is needed to see that the instruction given children is not the best, yet men do
not realize this; opinion and custom prevail over reason and experience. How •
then, could anyone be convinced that works which upset a great number of
prejudices would not be condemned on many counts, even by those who are
regarded as the wisest and most learned of men.
It should be carefully noted that those who are regarded as the cleverest and
most enlightened of men are those who have studied most (both good and bad
books), who have a better memory, and whose imagination is livelier and of
wider scope than others'. Now these sorts of people usually judge things hastily
and without examination. They consult their memory and find there the law or
prejudice according to which they decide without much reflection. Since they
believe themselves cleverer than other people, they give little attention to what
they read. Thus, it often happens that women and children recognize the falsity
of certain prejudices that have been attacked, because they do not dare judge
without first examining, and because they concentrate as much as they can on
everything they read. The learned, on the contrary, stick close to their opinions
because they do not bother to examine anyone else's opinions if they are completely contrary to what they already think.
As for those in high society, they arc conl·emed with so many things that they
cannot easily withdraw into themselves, nor attend sufficiently to distinguish the

Preface

543

true from the probable. However, they are not overly attached to certain prejudices; for to remain in society, neither truth nor probability must be valued. Since
apparent humility or external moderation and honesty are qualities that are admired by everyone and that are absolutely necessary to maintain society among
proud and ambitious men, men in high society find their virtue and merit in
asserting nothing, and believing nothing to be indubitable. It always has been and
always will be their fashion to consider everything as problematic and to speak
cavalierly of even the most sacred truths in order not to appear opinionated about
anything. For since those about whom I am speaking attend to nothing but their
own success, no disposition is more convenient or seems more reasonable to
them than that justified by fashion. Thus, anyone attacking prejudice on one side
flatters the pride and indolence of men in society and is well received by them;
but those asserting anything as indubitable, and showing the truth of Christian
morality and religion, they would regard as obstinate, and as avoiding one
precipice only to fall into another.
I think that what I have just said is enough to show what I could answer to the
different judgments certain people have delivered against The Search after
Truth, and I will not perform an exercise that everyone usefully and easily can
do. I realize that not everyone will do it, but I would seem to be my own judge
were I to give as complete a defense of myself as possible. I cede my right, then,
to attentive readers, who are the natural judges of books; and I entreat them to
remember the request I have already made to them in the preface of The Search
after Truth and elsewhere: to judge my views only according to the clear and
distinct replies they will receive from our only Master, after they ha\'e attentil'ely
consulted Him. For if they rely on their prejudices as laws decisive of what
should be thought of The Search after Truth, I grant that it is a worthless book,
because it was written expressly to show the falsity and impropriety of these
laws.

Foreword

Since the following Elucidations were written to satisfy the desires of some
people who wanted me to explain certain very important truths in greater detail
than I had done, I feel that I must warn that for a clear understanding of what I am
going to say, some knowledge of the principles I laid out in The Search after
Truth is required. Thus, a careful reading of the entire work for which they are
produced should precede any effort devoted to these remarks, and only during a
second reading should they be examined as referred to in the margin. Yet this
warning I give is not absolutely necessary for all intelligent people, because I
have tried to write these Elucidations in such a way that they could be read as if
they had no connection to the work for which they are produced. I realize that
truth is usually one of the last things in the world given any concern. We do not
willingly relate the different parts of a book that go together; rather, we make the
best we can of a serial reading. Thus, to accommodate this attitude, I have tried
to make these remarks intelligible even to those who have forgotten the passages
in The Search after Truth to which they are related. Yet I beg those who do not
wish to make the effort to carefully examine these Elucidations not to condemn
them on the basis of the false and extravagant conclusions that might be drawn
from them when they are not understood. I have cause to make this request, not
only because I have the right to require of the readers judging me that they not
condemn me without understanding me, but also for other reasons I need not set
out here.

S4S

ELUCIDATION ONE

God produces whatever is real in the mind's impulses and in the determinations
of these impulses; nevertheless. He is not the author of sin. God produces
whatever is real in sensations of concupiscence, and yet He is not the author of
our concupiscence.
Some people hold that I gave up the mind's comparison with matter too soon,•
and they imagine that it is no more capable than matter of determining the
impression God gives it. They would have me explain, if I can, what God does in
us and what we ourselves do when we sin, because in their opinion, my explanation would make me either agree that man is capable of giving himself some new
modification, or else recognize that God is the true cause of sin.
I answer that faith, reason, and the inner sensation I have of myself force me to
abandon my comparison where I do; for I am entirely convinced that I have
within myself a principle of my determinations, whereas I have reasons to believe that matter has no such principle. This will be proved later. But here is what
God does in us and what we ourselves do when we sin.
First, God unceasingly impels us by an irresistible impression toward the good
in general. Second, He represents to us the idea of some particular good, or gives
us the sensation of it. Finally, He leads us toward this particular good.
God unceasingly impels us toward the good in general, for (I) God made and
preserves us for Himself, (2) He wills that we love everything that is good, (3)
He is the prime, or rather, the only, mover. Finally, this is clear from an infmity
of things I have said elsewhere, and those to whom I am speaking agree with it.
God presents to us the idea of a particular good or gives us the sensation of it,
for only He can enlighten us. The bodies that surround us cannot act on our mind,
nor are we our own light or happiness. This I have proved at length in the third
book and elsewhere.
Finally, God leads us toward this particular good; for since God leads us
toward all that is good, it is a necessary consequence that He lead us toward
"Ch. I.

547

548

Nicolas Malebranche

particular goods when He produces the perception or sensation of them in our
soul. This is all that God does in us when we sin.
But since a particular good does not contain all other goods, and since the
mind when it considers this good clearly and distinctly cannot believe that it
contains them all, God does not lead us either necessarily or invincibly to the
love of this good. We feel that we are free to halt this love, that we have an
impulse to go farther-in short, that the impression we have for the universal
good (or, to speak as others do, our will) is neither constrained nor necessitated
to halt at this particular good.
Here then is what the sinner does. He stops, he rests, he does not follow God's
impression-he does nothing, for sin is nothing. He knows the great rule he must
observe is that he must make as much use of his freedom as he can, and that he
must not be content with any good unless he is inwardly convinced that not to
will to rest with it would be to contravene order. If he does not discover this rule
through the light of his reason, he will at least come to know it through the secret
reproaches of his conscience. He ought, then, to follow the impression hereceives for the universal good and to think of goods other than the one he is
actually enjoying and of which he should only make use. For by thinking about
goods other than the one he is enjoying, he can excite in himself new determinations of his love, and make use of his freedom by consenting to these new
determinations. Now I shall prove that through the impression God gives him for
the good in general he can think about goods other than the one he is enjoying,
because it is in precisely this that the difficulty consists.
It is a law of nature that the ideas of objects are presented to the mind as soon
as we will to think of them, provided that our capacity for thought is not
exhausted by the lively and confused sensations we receive upon occasion of
bodily events. Now, we can will to think about all things, because the natural
impression carrying us toward the good extends to all the goods we can think
about-and we can at all times think about all things, because we are joined to
Him who contains the ideas of all things as I have proved elsewhere. a
If it is true, then, that we can will to consider more closely what we already
see, as it were, at a distance (since we are joined to Reason, which contains the
ideas of all beings), and if it is certain that in virtue of the laws of nature ideas
come to us as soon as we will so, then we must conclude:
First, that we have a principle of our own determinations. For the actual
presence of particular ideas positively determines toward particular goods our
impulse toward the good in general and changes our natural love into voluntary
love when we rest. Our consent or our inactivity upon perceiving a particular
good is nothing real or positive on our part, as I shall explain below.
Second, that this principle of our determinations is always free with regard to
particular goods. For we are not invincibly lead to love them, since we can
examine them in themselves and compare them with the idea we have of the
sovereign good or with other particular goods. Thus, the principle of our freedom
"Read the chapter of the third book entitled, ''That we see all things in God,'' and the Elucidation
on this chapter( I0).

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

549

is that as we are made for God and are joined to Him, we can always think of the
true good or of goods other than those of which we are actually thinking-we can
always withhold our consent and seriously examine whether the good we are
enjoying is or is not the true good.
I assume, however, that our sensations do not occupy the full capacity of our
mind; for in order for us to be free in the sense I am speaking of, not only must
God not irresistibly impel us toward particular goods, but we must also be able to
make use of our impression toward the good in general to love something other
than what we are actually loving. Now since we can love only objeclo; that we can
think about, and since we presently cannot think about objects other than those
which cause exceedingly lively sensations in us, it is clear that our dependence
on the body diminishes our freedom and in many cases even prevents ilo; use
altogether. Therefore, since (I) our sensations obliterate our ideas, and since (2)
our union with the body (by which we perceive what is related to it) weakens our
union with God (by which all things are present to us), the mind must not Jet
itself be divided by confused sensations if it wants to preserve the principle of its
determinations as perfectly free.
It is clear from all this that God is in no way the author of sin, and that man in
no way gives himself new modifications. God is not the author of sin because He
constantly impresses the impulse to continue on whoever sins or stops at some
particular good, because He gives the sinner the power of thinking of other things
and of proceeding to goods other than the one that is actually the object of his
thought and love, because He commands him not to love whatever he can refuse
to love without being troubled by remorse, and because He unceasingly reminds
him of Himself through the secret reproaches of his reason.
It is true that in a sense God leads the sinner to love the object of his sin; for, as
practically all theologians put it, whatever matter, act, or impulse there is in sin
comes from God. But only through a false judgment on the part of our mind do
creatures appear good, i.e., capable of acting on us and making us happy. Man's
sin consists in the fact that he does not relate all particular goods to the sovereign
good, or rather in that he does not consider and love the sovereign good in
particular goods,• and thus does not regulate his love according to the will of
God, or according to that necessary and essential order which all men know the
more perfectly as they are more closely united with God and less sensitive to the
impressions of their senses and passions. For as our senses diffuse our soul
throughout our body, and our passions transport it, as it were, into the bodies
surrounding us, they lead us away from the light of God that enters and fills us.
Nor does man give himself new modifications that materially change or modify his substance, for the impulse of love, which God unceasingly impresses in
us, neither increases nor diminishes, whether we are actually loving or not, i.e.,
whether or not this natural impulse of love is determined by some particular idea
of our mind. This impulse does not cease even with rest in the possession of good
(as the motion of bodies ceases with their rest). Apparently God always urges us
"See the Elucidation [IS) on chapter 3 of the second pan of book 6 near the end, where I explain
my meaning more distinctly.

550

Nicolas Malebranche

with a constant force toward Himself; for He urges us toward the good in general
to the extent that we are capable of it, and we are at all times equally capable of it
because our will, or natural capacity for willing, is always equal to itself. Thus,
the impression or natural impulse that leads us toward the good never increases or
diminishes.
I grant that we have no clear idea, nor even an inner sensation, of this constancy of impression or natural impulse toward the good. But this is because we
do not know ourselves by idea, as I have proved elsewhere, a and because we are
not aware of our faculties when they are not actually in operation. Whatever is
natural, commonplace, and always the same in us, such as the warmth and
beating of our heart, goes unnoticed. We are not even aware of our habits, and
whether we are worthy of the love or wrath of God. b Perhaps there are countless
faculties or capacities in us of which we know nothing, for we do not have an
inner senation of all that we are, but only of what is actually taking place in us. If
we had never felt pain or desired particular goods, the inner sensation we have of
ourselves would not enable us to discover whether we were capable of feeling
pain or of wishing for such goods. Our memory, and not inner sensation, informs
us that we are capable of feeling what we no longer feel. Thus, nothing precludes
us from believing that God always urges us toward Himself with a constant force,
though in quite different ways, or that He always conserves in our soul an equal
capacity for willing, or the same will, as He conserves in all matter taken as a
whole an equal quantity of force or motion in the same direction. But even if this
were not certain, I do not see how the increase or decrease of our soul's natural
impulse could be said to depend on us, because we cannot be the cause of the
scope of our own will, and because it does not depend on us to wish to be happy.
It is also certain from what I have said before that God also produces and
preserves in us whatever is real and positive in the particular determinations of
our soul's impulse, viz., our ideas and sensations. For this is what naturally
determines our impulse for the good in general toward particular goods, though
not in a way that is invincible, because we have an impulse to carry on farther.
Consequently, all that we do when we sin is not to do all that we nonetheless
have the power of doing as a result of the natural impression we have toward Him
who contains all goods, which impression gives us this power, for we can do
nothing except through the power we receive from our union with Him who does
all things in us. And it seems evident to me that if we did not desire to be happy,
or if we did not have an impression for the good in general, we would be
incapable of loving any particular good. Now principally what makes us sin is
that since we prefer enjoying things to examining them (on account of the
pleasure we feel in enjoying them and the pain we feel in examining them), we
cease using the impulse given us for seeking out and examining the good and we
stop at the enjoyment of things we ought only to usc. But if you attend to this
closely, you will see that in it there is nothing real on our part except a lack or
'See the 'iCWnd part of lxH>k 3. <·hapler 7. number 4. and the Elucidation where I return to this
maucr Ill).
""'N.,mn !ICit utrum amure. vel odin dignu sit." f.ccles. 41 !9: 1).

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

551

discontinuation of examining or searching that, as it were, corrupts God's action
in us, but that nevertheless cannot destroy it. What, then, do we do when we do
not sin? We do everything that God does in us, for we do not limit to a particular
good, or, rather, to a false good, the love that God impresses in us for the true
good. And what do we do when we sin? Nothing. We love a false good that God
does not make us love through an invincible impression. We give up seeking the
true good and frustrate the impulse God impresses in us. All we do is stop and
rest. This is certainly done by an act, but by an immanent act that produces
nothing material in our substance-by an act that in this case does not even
require of the true cause some material effect in us, neither new ideas nor
sensations, in short, that is, by an act that does nothing and makes the general
cause do nothing insofar as it is general, disregarding His justice, for the soul's
inactivity, like the body's, has no force or material efficacy. Now when we love
a particular good by itself or contrary to order, we receive from God as great an
impression of love as if we did not pause over this good. Furthermore, this
particular, natural determination, which is neither necessary nor invincible in
relation to our consent, is also given to us by God. Thus, when we sin, we
produce in ourselves no new modification at all.
I grant, however, that when we do not sin and when we resist temptation, we
can be said to give ourselves a new modification in this sense, that we actually
and freely will to think of things other than the false goods that tempt us, and we
will not to rest in their enjoyment. But we will it only because we will to be
happy only through the impulse toward the good in general that God constantly
impresses in us-in short, only if our will is aided by grace, i.e., illumined by a
light and urged on by a prevenient delight. For in the final analysis, if willing
different things is said to be a matter of giving oneself different modifications, or
if our consent, which I view as inactivity or voluntary suspension of seeking and
examining, is taken to be a material reality, then I agree that in this sense the
mind can modify itself in different ways through the action or desire to be happy
that God places in it, and that in this sense it has a real power. a But it seems to me
that there is no more reality in the consent we give to good than in that we give to
evil, that that which is a consequence of a true judgment is right and that that
which depends on a false judgment is disordered, and that the morality of our
consent is derived solely from objects. The soul's repose in God is just, for He is
the true good, the true cause of happiness. The same repose in some created thing
is unjust, because no creature is a true cause of happiness. But I do not see that
our inactivity, whether ordered or disordered, which makes us either just or
criminal, of itself materially changes the substance of our soul.
It even seems to me that it is a contradiction and that therefore God cannot give
to his creatures any real power or make them the cause of some material reality.
For I believe it certain that conservation is but continued creation, for it is but the
same will of God, who continues to will what He has willed, and this is the
general view among theologians. A body, for example, exists because God wills
"See the second volume of my Riponsts

a M.

Arna11/d, p. 412 and ff.

552

Nicolas Malebranche

that it exist, and He wills it to exist either here or there, for He cannot create it
nowhere. And if He creates it here, is it conceivable that a creature should
displace it and move it elsewhere unless God at the same time wills to create it
elsewhere in order to share His power with His creature as far as it is capable of
it? But if this be assumed possible or not to contain a metaphysical contradiction,
for only that is impossible for God, by what principle of reason or religion can
the dependence of creatures be diminished? But I shall speak elsewhere of the
supposed efficacy of secondary causes. a I shall now return to the topic.
I say, then, that this action, or rather this impression or natural desire we have
for happiness, depends on us in this sense, that it is not invincible with regard to
particular goods. For when a particular good is presented to us, we have an inner
sensation of our freedom with regard to it, just as we have of pleasure and pain
when we feel them. We are even convinced of our freedom by the same reason
that convinces us of our existence, for it is the inner sensation we have of our
thoughts that informs us of our existence. And if, while we sense our freedom
with regard to a particular good, we must doubt that we are free because we have
no clear idea of our freedom, then we would also have to doubt our pain and our
existence while we are miserable, because we have no clear idea of our soul or of
our pain, but only an inner sensation of them.
Inner sensation is different from our external senses. The latter always deceive
us in some way when we follow their reports; but our inner sensation never
deceives us. Through my external senses I see colors on the surface of bodies,
hear sound in the air, feel pain in my hand, and I fall into error if I judge these
things on the basis of what my senses report. But through inner sensation I know
that I see color, hear a sound, suffer pain; and I do not err in believing that I see
when I see, that I hear when I hear, that I suffer when I suffer-provided that I
let it go at that. I do not explain these things at greater length because they are
clear by themselves. Thus, since we have an inner sensation of our freedom
while a particular good is present to our mind, we must not doubt that we are free
with regard to this good. Nonetheless, since we do not always have this inner
sensation and since we sometimes consult only its confused residue in our memory, we can by thinking about abstract reasons, which prevent us from being
aware of ourselves, convince ourselves that it is not possible that man should be
free-just as a Stoic who has everything and who philosophizes in comfort might
imagine that pain is not an evil because the inner sensation he has of himself does
not actually convince him of the contrary. Like Seneca he may prove by reasons
which in a sense are quite true that it is even a contradiction that the wise man
should be unhappy.
Yet even if the inner sensation we have of ourselves were not enough to
convince us that we are free, we could persuade ourselves of our freedom
through reason. For, convinced as we are through the light of reason that God
acts only for Himself and that He cannot give us an impulse that does not tend
toward Himself, the impression toward the good in general might be invincible;
"See lhe Elucidaliun [IS) un !his subjccl and !he scvcnlh DialoR'"' "" M••tar>hyJicl.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

553

but it is clear that the impression He gives us toward particular goods must
necessarily be such that it is up to us to follow it or withhold our consent with
regard to it. For if this impression were invincible, we would have no impulse to
lead us to God, although He gives us impulse only for Himself; and we would be
required to stop at particular goods, although God, order, and reason prohibit us
from doing so. As a result, we would sin through no fault of our own, and God
would truly be the cause of our disorders, because they would not be free but
purely natural.
Thus, even if we were not convinced of our freedom through the inner sensation we have of ourselves, we could discover through reason that man is necessarily created free -given that he is capable of desiring particular goods and that
he can desire these goods only through the impression or impulse that God
continuously gives him for loving Him, which can also be proved through reason. But the same is not true of the capacity we have for suffering pain. In order
to discover that we have this capacity, there is but one means, inner sensation;
and yet nobody doubts that man is subject to pain.
When I say that we have an inner sensation of our freedom, I do not maintain
that we have inner sensation of a power determining us to will something without
any material motive, a power that some people call pure indifference. Such a
power seems to me to contain a manifest contradiction. You can see this well
enough if you have attended to what I have just said, for it is clear that some
motive is necessary, that before consenting [consentir] we must, as it were, be
aware of something [sentir]. It is true that we often do not think about the motive
that makes us act, but this is because we do not reflect on it, especially in matters
of little consequence. Certainly there is always some secret and confused motive
in the least actions, and it even leads certain people to suspect, and sometimes to
maintain, that they are not free, because upon careful examination of themselves
they find hidden and confused motives that make them will. I grant that they have
been acted upon, as it were, that they have been moved; but they have also acted
through the act of their consent, an act that they had the power of not giving at the
moment they gave it-a power, I say, of which they had an inner sensation at the
moment they used it and which they would not have dared to deny if at that
moment they had been questioned. When I say, then, that we have an inner
sensation that cannot deceive us about our freedom, I do not mean some pure
indifference that would grant us a kind of independence of God's control over us
or of the material motives that He produces in us, by which He knows and can
make us will and voluntarily cany out everything that He wills. I mean, rather,
the actual power we have of withholding our consent with regard to the motives
that urge us to give our consent when these motives do not, as it were, fill the
soul's entire capacity. I admit, however, that this power is not equal in all men,
nor even in the same person at different times, as I have explained elsewhere. a
I shall not pause to prove our freedom by detailing the horrible consequences
of the error of those who deny it. You can see well enough that this error destroys
"Discourse 3. Tr.-atise on Nature and Grace.

554

Nicolas Malebranche

from top to bottom every kind of religion and morality, divine as well as human
justice-an irrefutable proof that we are free.
Since we do not know our soul through a clear idea, as I have explained
elsewhere, a it is in vain that we attempt to discover what in us terminates the
action that God impresses in us, or what it is in us that lets itself be overcome by
an impulse that is not invincible, and that we can change by our will, or our
impression toward everything good, and by our union with Him who contains the
ideas of all beings. For in the final analysis we do not have a clear idea of any of
our soul's modifications. Only inner sensation tells us that we are and what we
are. We must consult this sensation, therefore, in order to convince ourselves that
we are free. Its response on this matter is clear enough when we are considering
some particular good, for nobody can doubt that he is not invincibly led to eat
some fruit or avoid some mild pain. But if instead of listening to our inner
sensation we attend to abstract reasoning that distracts us from thinking about
ourselves, then perhaps in losing sight of ourselves we shall forget what we are,
and in wishing to reconcile God's knowledge with His absolute power over our
wills, we shall doubt that we are free and shall fall into an error that upsets all the
principles of religion and morality.
The most common and apparently strongest objection that can be made against
freedom is the following. Conservation, you will say, is nothing but continued
creation on God's part, i.e., the same constantly efficacious will. Thus, when we
speak or walk, when we think and will, God makes us such as we are-He
creates us speaking, walking, thinking, willing. If a man perceives and tastes an
object, God creates him perceiving and tasting this object; and if he consents to
the impulse that is excited in him, if he rests with this object, God creates him
stopping at and resting with this object. God makes him such as he is at that
moment. He creates in him his consent in which he has no greater role than do
bodies in the motion that moves them.
I answer that God creates us, speaking, walking, thinking, willing, that He
causes in us our perceptions, sensations, impulses, in a word, that He causes in
us all that is real or material, as I have explained above. But I deny that God
creates us as consenting precisely insofar as we are consenting or resting with a
particular good, whether true or apparent. God merely creates us as always being
able to stop at such a good. This is clear, because it is clear that it is not God who
makes us stop at such a good, since (a) He constantly creates us wishing to be
happy, and (b) He constantly urges us toward the good in general, toward all
good. He leads us toward such a good according to the laws concerning the union
of the body and soul or in some other way -agreed; but it is a contradiction that
He should invincibly lead us toward this good insofar as it does not fulfill the
natural and invincible desire we have for all good. God creates us, then, not
precisely insofar as we are consenting or withholding our consent, but insofar as
we are able to give or withhold it. For since God constantly creates us, not being
able to will, but willing to be happy. and since our mind is limited, a certain
"Chapter 7 of the second part of book 3. and Elucidation [II) below.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

555

amount of time is necessary to detennine whether some good is a true or false
good, and even whether while pausing over some good represented or felt as a
true good or cause of some actual pleasure, this good might not become an evil
because while pausing over it possession of some greater good might be lost.
It follows from what I have just said, first, that we are materially predetermined toward the good in general, because we necessarily will to be happy and
because the desire for happiness is in us independently of us.
Second, that we are also materially predetennined toward particular goods in
this sense, that we are urged toward what we know and relish as good. The soul's
natural impulse toward particular goods is, in effect, but a natural consequence of
its impulse toward the good in general. Thus, all pleasure is by itself efficacious
in relation to the will, for it moves and urges it, as it were, toward the object.
Third, that every pleasure or material motive, although efficacious by itself in
relation to the will it moves, is not efficacious by itself in relation to the will's
consent; for it does not remove the soul's desire to be genuinely happy, or the
power to withhold its consent and to examine whether such a pleasure accords
with the sovereign happiness it invincibly desires.
Fourth, that therefore the grace of Jesus Christ, 8 prevenient delight, although
efficacious by itself in relation to the will that it excites and moves, is not
efficacious by itself in relation to the consent of the will, which can consent to it,
and which resists it only too often-either because as the soul withholds its
consent too long spiritual delight does not continue, or because concupiscence
constantly provides motives that are contrary to it.
Fifth, that it is nonetheless God who through His grace operates in us our
volition and conduct, for it is He who begins our conversion. His grace must
dispose our will, for we must be aware [sentir] before consenting [consentir].
Thus, God does not cooperate as the Pelagians would have it; rather, He operates
and it is we who cooperate-for He who begins, and without whom nothing is
possible, is He who, strictly speaking, operates. God's grace travels, as it were,
both before the will and with the will, not by producing the act of consent, but by
letting the active faculty of the soul, the will that it moves, produce it. And God's
omnipotence seems all the greater in that He makes use of free causes as successfully as He does of necessary ones, and His goodness all the greater in that in
making us act in complete freedom, He (through the help of His entirely gratuitous grace) makes us worthy oftbe rewards He bas promised and wills to bestow
with justice upon those who cooperate with Him. "His ergo modis," says Saint
Augustine, "quando Deus agit cum anima rationali, ut ei credat, neque enim
credere potest quodlibet libero arbitrio, si nulla sit suasio vel vocatio cui credat;
perfecto & ipsum velle credere Deus operatur in homine, & in omnibus misericordia ejus praevenit nos: consentire autem vocationi Dei, vel ab ea dessentire,
sicut dixi, propriae voluntatis est" (De spiritu & littera, ch. 34).
Here is an objection usually raised against what I said above, that God produces everything of a real nature in us when we sin; and although it is quite weak,
"This is explained at greater length in the first of four letters in the second volume of my replies to
Arnauld.

556

Nicolas Malebranche

it nonetheless troubles a great many people. The hatred of God, they say, is an
action in which there is nothing good. Therefore, it belongs entirely to the sinner;
God has no part in it. Consequently, man acts and gives himself new modifications that in no way come from God. This is true in a sense; but I answer that
sinners hate God only because they freely and falsely judge that He is evil, since
the good cannot be hated as such. Thus, by the same impulse of love God
impresses in them for the good, they hate God. Now they judge that God is not
good because they make improper use of their freedom. Since they are not
convinced by invincible evidence that God is not good, they should not believe
Him evil, nor consequently, hate Him.
Three things must be distinguished in hatred: the soul's sensation, the will's
impulse, and the consent to this impulse. The sensation cannot be evil, for it is a
modification of the soul that is neither morally good nor bad. Nor is the impulse
evil, since it is not different from the impulse of love. For, since the evil that is
external to us is but the privation of good, it is clear that to flee evil is to flee the
privation of good, i.e., to tend toward the good. Thus, everything of a real or
positive nature even in the hatred of God contains nothing evil. Only in the
consent of a soul disordered by false judgment is the formal evil of sin to be
found. And the sinner can hate God only by making abominable use of the impulse
He constantly gives him to lead him to His love; and he can so misuse it only
because he confusedly perceives and falsely judges that God is not good, and
ceases to examine the false reasons that lead him to believe that creatures rather
than the Creator are the causes of his happiness. In short, only in moral evil, or
the disorder of the sinner's love, does God have no part.

God produces whatever is of a real nature in sensations of
concupiscence, and yet He is not the author of our concupiscence. a
Since the difficulties raised concerning concupiscence are closely related to
those I have just explained, this is an appropriate place to show that God is not
the author of concupiscence, even though He does everything and produces even
sensible pleasures in us.
For the reasons I have given in the fifth chapter of the first book of the Search
after Truth. and elsewhere, you must agree, it seems to me, that according to the
laws concerning the union of the body and soul, man even before his sin was led
by prevenient pleasures to the use of sensible goods, and that each time certain
traces were formed in the principal part of his brain, certain thoughts were
generated in his mind. Now, these laws were quite appropriate for the reasons
related in this same chapter. All this is taken for granted. Since before sin all
things were perfectly ordered, man necessarily had the power over his body to
prevent, when he so wished, the formation of these traces, for order requires that
the mind dominate the body. Now, this power of man's mind over his body
consisted precisely in the fact that according to his different interests and desires,
he halted the communication of motion produced in his body by surrounding
"This Elucidation relates to chapter 5 of book I of I he The Search ajia Truth.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

557

bodies, over which his will did not have the same immediate and direct power as
over his own. It seems to me inconceivable that he could have prevented the
formation of traces in his brain in any other way. Thus, the will of God, or the
general law of nature, which is the true cause of the communication of motion,
on certain occasions depended on the will of Adam. For God held him in such
esteem that unless he consented to it, He produced no new motion in his body, or
at least in its principal part, to which the soul is immediately joined.
Such was the institution of nature before sin; the immutable order of Justice,
and hence He whose will always conforms to this order, willed it to be so. 8 Now,
since this will always remains the same, the first man's sin upset the order of
nature, because after his sin the immutable order no longer requires that he
absolutely dominate anything. It is not right that the sinner should be able to
suspend the communication of motion, that God's will should accord itself with
his, or that exceptions to the laws concerning the union of the body and soul
should be made in his favor. As a result, man is subject to concupiscence, his
mind depends on his body, he feels unintended pleasures and involuntary. rebellious impulses as a result of the most just law which joins the two parts
composing him.
Thus, the formal aspect of concupiscence has nothing more real about it than
the formal aspect of sin-it is nothing in man but loss of the power he had to
suspend the communication of motion on certain occasions. No positive will in
God to produce it need be admitted. Man's loss here is not a natural consequence
of God's will, which always conforms to order and remains the same-it is a
consequence of the sin which has left man unworthy of a privilege due only to
his justice and innocence, but only sin, which has changed the order of dependence between body and soul.
God does produce, however, whatever is of a real or positive nature in the
sensations and impulses of concupiscence,b for God produces all that is real; but
this is in no way evil. It is through the general law of nature, through the will of
God, that sensible objects produce certain kinds of motion in man's body, and
that this motion excites certain sensations in the soul that help preserve the body
or propagate the species. Who, then, would dare say that these things in themselves are not good?
1 know it is said that sin is the cause of certain pleasures. It is said, but is it
conceivable? Is it thinkable that sin, which is nothing, should actually produce
something? Is it conceivable that nothingness should be a real cause? Yet this
very thing is claimed. But perhaps it is a matter of not bothering to think
seriously about what is being said; or else of not wanting to accept an explanation
contrary to the hearsay of people who perhaps speak with more gravity and
self-assurance than enlightenment.
Sin is the cause of concupiscence, but it is not the cause of pleasure, just as
free will is the cause ofsin without being the cause of the soul's natural impulse.
•In the objection or an ide 7 or the Elucidation [8) of chapter 7, book 2. I explain what I say here
gener.iiiY about man's loss of the power he had over his body.
"St. Augustine against the two Epistles of the Pelagians, bk. I. ch. 15, etc.

558

Nicolas Malebranche

The soul's pleasure, as well as its impulse or its love, is materially good; and
there is no good that God fails to do. The rebellion of the body and the malignity
of pleasure come from sin, just as the soul's attachment to a particular good, or
its rest, comes from the sinner; but these are only privations and nonbeings of
which the creature is capable.
All pleasure is good and to some extent even makes those who enjoy it happy,
at least while they are enjoying it. But pleasure may be said to be evil because
instead of raising the mind to Him who causes it, through· our mind's error and
our heart's corruption it lowers the mind to the sensible objects that seem to cause
it. It is evil because, given that we are sinners and consequently deserving more
to be punished than to be rewarded, it is unjust for us to require God as a result of
His decrees to reward us with pleasant sensations. In short (for I do not want to
repeat here what I have said elsewhere), it is evil because God now forbids it
since it turns the mind away from Him, the mind that He created and preserves
only for Himself. For what God had formerly ordained to preserve man in his
innocence now fixes the sinner in his sin, and the sensations of pleasure He had
wisely established as the quickest means of informing man (without distracting
his reason from its true good) whether he should unite with the bodies surrounding him now exhaust his mind's capacity and attach him to objects incapable of
acting on him and infinitely below him (because he considers these objects as the
true causes of the happiness he enjoys upon their occasion, and because it is not
up to him to arrest the motion they excite in him).

ELUCIDATION TWO

On the first chapter of the first book, where I say: That the will can l'arimuly
determine the impression it has for the good only by ordering the understanding
to represent some particular object to it.

It should not be imagined that the will orders the understanding in any other way
than by its desires and impulses-for the will has no other action. Nor should the
understanding be taken to obey the will by producing in itself the ideas of things
the soul desires-for the understanding does not act. All it does is receive
illumination or the ideas of things through the necessary union it has with Him
who contains all beings in intelligible fashion, as has been explained in the third
book.
Here then, is the whole mystery. Man participates in, and is joined to,
Sovereign Reason, a and the truth is revealed to him to the extent that he attends
to and beseeches it. Now, the soul's desire is a natural prayer that is always
fulfilled, for it is a natural law that ideas are all the more present to the mind as
the will more fervently desires them. Thus, provided that our capacity for
thought or our understanding is not taken up by the confused sensations we
receive upon occasion of some bodily event, whenever we desire to think about
some object the idea of that object is present to us; and as experience teaches us,
this idea is clearer and more immediate as our desire is stronger or our attention
more vivid and as the confused sensations we receive through the body are
weaker and less perceptible, as I have already pointed out in the preceding
remark.
Thus, when I said that the will orders the understanding to present some
particular object to it, I meant only that the soul that wills to consider carefully
the object draws near it through its attention or desire, because this desire, as a
result of the efficacious decrees of God (which are the inviolable laws of nature),
is the cause of the presence and of the clarity of the idea representing the object. I
could not have spoken in any other way, nor could I have explained myself as I
am now doing, for I had not yet proved that God alone is the author of our
•see the Elucidation I 10) of ch. 6. pl. 2, bk. 3.

559

560

Nicolas Malebranche

knowledge or that our particular volitions are the occasional causes of it. I spoke
according to common opinion, and I was often forced to do so because not
everything can be said at the same time. Some fairness on the part of the reader is
required, and he must extend his credit for a while if he wishes to be satisfied, for
only geometers can always pay in cash.
It should not be imagined that the soul's different faculties, of which the
understanding and the will are the chief ones, are entities different from the soul
itself. In the idea we have of matter, or extension in length, depth, and breadth,
we evidently see that the capacities it has for receiving motion and different
figures are not distinct from its essence; and if we had as clear an idea of the soul
as we have of the body, I am convinced that we would also see that its understanding and will are not different from the soul itself. We would see that the
soul is essentially a substance that thinks or perceives everything that affects it,
that it is an intelligence that nonetheless is actually made intelligent only through
the efficacy of divine ideas, which alone can act on it, affect it, modify it,
enlighten it, as I have explained elsewhere. It is really the soul, then, that
perceives, and not the understanding conceived as something different from the
soul. The same is true of the will; this faculty is but the soul itself insofar as it
loves its perfection and happiness, insofar as it wills to be happy, or insofar as
through the impulse God constantly impresses in it for the good in general it is
made capable of loving everything that appears to it to be good. Freedom too is
but the soul insofar as it is not invincibly led toward particular goods, or goods
that do not actually satisfy its natural desire, for the soul's power of suspending
its consent with regard to false goods is drawn from its natural and invincible
impulse for happiness, for true and well-founded happiness. We generally say
that the will is active and that it is free instead of that the soul is active and free.
But a critic would lack either intelligence or fairness to accuse an author of
contradicting himself by pointing to different passages that appear to be contradictory.

ELUCIDATION THREE

On the third chapter, where I say: That we should not be surprised if we have no
evidence for the mysteries of the faith, since we do not even have any ideas of
them.
When I say that we have no idea of the mysteries of the faith, it is clear from the
preceding and from the following that I am speaking about clear ideas that
produce enlightenment and evidence and by which we have an understanding of
the object so to speak. I agree that a peasant would be incapable of believing, for
example, that the son of God was made man or that there are three persons in
God a unless he had some idea of the Word's union with our humanity or some
notion of a person. But if these ideas were clear, one could, by attending to them.
perfectly understand these mysteries and explain them to others, and they would
no longer be ineffable mysteries. The word person, according to Saint Augustine, was applied to the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, not so much to explain
clearly what they are, as not to remain silent on a mystery about which we are
obliged to speak.
I say here that we have no ideas of our mysteries, as I have said elsewhere that
we have no idea of our soul, because the idea we have of our soul is no clearer
than the idea we have of our mysteries. Thus, the word idea is equivocal.
Sometimes I take it as anything that represents some object to the mind, whether
clearly or confusedly. More generally I take it for anything that is the immediate
object of the mind. But I also take it in the most precise and restricted sense, that
is, as anything that represents things to the mind in a way so clear that we can
discover by simple perception whether such and such modifications belong to
them. For this reason I have sometimes said that we have an idea of the soul and
have sometimes denied it. b It is difficult and sometimes bothersome and unpleasant to preserve a too rigorous exactness of expression or to defme terms when the
subsequent discourse determines the sense in which they are taken.
0 "Ne omnino taceremus interrogati. quid tres, cum tres esse fateamur. ·• De Trinitate bk. 7. ch. 4
(6]. And elsewhere. ''Cum quaeritur; quid tres. Magna prorsus inopia humanum laborat eloquium.
Dictum est tamen tres personae, non ut illud diceretur. sed ne taceretur." Ibid. Bk. 5. ch. 9.
"Chapter 7 of the second part of book 3.

561

562

Nicolas Malebranche

When an author contradicts himself only in the mind of those who seek to
criticize him and hope that he contradicts himself, he should not be greatly
concerned; and if he were willing to satisfy with annoying explanations everything malice or ignorance could set up against him, not only would he write a
nasty book, but worse, its readers would be shocked by his replies to imaginary
objections that are contrary to a certain fairness in which everybody prides
himself. For men do not wish to be suspected of malice or ignorance, and it is
ordinarily permissible to answer weak or malicious objections only when someone of repute has lodged them and when the readers are thus protected from the
reproach that such responses seem to make against those who require them.

ELUCIDATION FOUR

t

On the following passage from the fifth chapter: This being so, Adam cannot be
said to have been brought to love of God and to his duty by pre~·enient pleasures,
because the knowledge he had of his good and the joy he continually felt as a
necessary result of the perception of his happiness in being united to God could
have sufficed to attract him to his duty and make him act more meritoriously than
if he had been determined, as it were, by prevenient pleasure.
For a distinct understanding of all this, we must realize that only illumination and
pleasure determine us to act. For if we begin to love an object, we do so either
because we know through reason that it is good or because we experience
through sensation that it is pleasant. Now there is quite a difference between
illumination and pleasure. Illumination enlightens our mind and makes us aware
of the good without actually or efficaciously leading us to love it. Pleasure, on
the contrary, both moves us and efficaciously determines us to love the object
seeming to cause it. Illumination does not lead us by itself; it merely permits us to
lead ourselves, freely and by ourselves, to the good it presents to us when we
already love it; illumination leaves us entirely to ourselves. Pleasure, on the
contrary, precedes our reason; it prevents us from consulting it and makes us love
by instinct; it does not leave us entirely to ourselves and it weakens our freedom.
Thus, since before sin Adam was destined in time to merit eternal happiness,
and since for this reason his freedom was complete and hs illumination sufficient
to keep him closely joined to God (whom he already loved through the natural
impulse of his love), he did not have to be inclined to his duty through prevenient
pleasures, which would have diminished his merit by diminishing his freedom.
In a sense, Adam would have had reason to complain to God had he been
prevented from meriting his reward as he was supposed to merit it, i.e., through
perfectly free actions. 8 It would have been a kind of insult to his freedom for God
to give him the kind of grace we now need because of the prevenient pleasures of
concupiscence. Since Adam had everything necessary to his perseverence, to
dispose him through the instinct of pleasure would have been to distrust his virtue
""'Fortissimo quippe dimisi! atquc pcm1isit facere quod vellct." Aug. De com'f'l. & grat. ch. 1::!.

563

564

Nicolas Malebranche

and almost accuse him of infidelity. To remove from him all feelings of the needs
he might have and the weaknesses he might be susceptible to would have been to
give him some reason for glorying in himself, for I acknowledge he then had
neither needs nor weaknesses. Finally8 and most importantly by far, it would
have been to make us indifferent to the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, which is
certainly the first and greatest intention of Himb who let men become covered
with sin in order to have mercy on them in Jesus Christ so that he who glorifies
himself does so only in the Lord.
It seems to me certain, then, that Adam felt no prevenient pleasures in his
duty. But it seems to me that it is not entirely certain that he felt joy, though I
here assume that he did since I think it very probable. Let me explain this.
One way in which prevenient pleasure differs from the pleasure of joy is that
the former precedes reason whereas the latter follows it. For joy naturally results
from the knowledge we have of our happiness or perfections, because we cannot
consider ourselves as happy or perfect without immediately experiencing joy
over it. Since we can sense that we are happy through pleasure, or know it
through reason, there are two kinds of joy. But here I am speaking of the joy that
is purely sensible. I am speaking here of the joy that Adam was able to feel as a
necessary consequence of the perception of his happiness in being united to God.
And there are some reasons to doubt he actually had this joy.
This main reason is that this joy would have perhaps so filled his mind that it
would have deprived him of his freedom, and his union with God would have
been invincible. For it might be thought that since this joy had to be in proportion
to the happiness Adam possessed, it would have been excessive.
But to this I reply, first, that purely intellectual joy leaves the mind entirely
free and occupies very little of its capacity for thought. In this it differs from
sensible joy, which ordinarily upsets reason and diminishes freedom.
I reply, second, that Adam's happiness at the first instant of his creation did
not consist in a full and complete possession of the sovereign good. He was still
capable of losing it and becoming unhappy. His happiness consisted mainly in
that be did not suffer pain and that he was with Him who was to make him
perfectly happy, and he persevered in his innocence. Thus, his joy was not
excessive; it was, or should have been, mixed with a kind of fear, for he should
have distrusted himself.
Finally, I reply that joy does not always apply the mind to the real cause of its
production. Since we experience joy upon perceiving our perfections, we naturally believe that our perception of them causes it; for when something always
follows another, it is naturally considered as one of its effects. Thus, we regard
ourselves as the author of our present happiness, we are secretly complacent
about our perfections, we Jove ourselves and glory in ourselves, and our thought
is not always directed to him whose operation on us is imperceptible.
•see the second dialogue of the Com·er.wtions chreti<•nnu. Paris edition, where I give an account
of permi,s1on for sin.

"Rom. 2:32; Gal. 3:22.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

565

It is true that Adam knew more distinctly than the greatest philosopher ever
that only God could act on him and cause in him the sensation of joy he felt at the
perception of his goodness and perfections. He knew all this very clearly through
the light of his reason when he attended to it, but he did not sense it. On the
contrary, he sensed that this joy was a consequence of the perception of his
perfections, and he sensed this always and without any effort on his part. Thus,
this sensation was able to lead him to consider his own perfections and to be
pleased with himself if he forgot or in some way lost sight of Him whose
operations cannot be perceived. As a result, far from making him incapable of sin
(as the objection to which I am responding would have it), his joy might even
have been the occasion of his pride and downfall. This is why 1 say in this chapter
that Adam should have been careful not to let his mind's capacity be filled by a
presumptuous joy excited in his soul by the perception of his natural perfections.

ELUCIDATION FIVE

t

On the fifth chapter, where I say: That prevenient delight is the grace of Jesus
Christ.
Although I say in this chapter that prevenient delight is the grace that Jesus Christ
has particularly merited for us, and although I elsewhere absolutely call it the
grace of Jesus Christ, this is not to say that there is any other actual grace besides
this one, or that there is any grace that Jesus Christ has not merited for us. But I
call it the grace of Jesus Christ in order to distinguish it from the grace God gave
to the first man at his creation, which is ordinarily called the grace of the Creator.
For the grace by which Adam was able to persevere in his innocence was
primarily a grace of light, as I have just explained in the preceding remark; since
Adam had no concupiscence, he had no need of pre1·enient pleasures to combat
it.
But the grace that is now necessary to sustain us in our duty and to produce and
maintain charity in us is prevenient delight. For since pleasure produces and
maintains love of the things causing it or seeming to cause it, the prevenient
pleasures we receive upon occasion of the presence of bodies produce and maintain cupidity in us. Consequently, since cupidity is entirely contrary to charity,
unless God produces and maintains charity in us through prevenient delights, the
prevenient pleasures of concupiscence would clearly weaken it to the extent that
they strengthen cupidity.
What I say here supposes that God permits our concupiscence to act on us and
that He does not diminish it by inspiring horror in us for the sensible objects that
as a result of sin must now tempt us; for the horror of injustice is just as real a
grace as the delight of justice. But the supposition that God diminishes concupiscence instead of increasing the delight of grace will have the same result.
Clearly, a balance scale, one of whose plates is too heavily loaded, can be
balanced in two ways -not only by adding enough weight to the other side to
even it, but also by removing some weight from the heavier side.
Nor do I suppose that a good action cannot be performed without prevenient
delight. I have sufficiently explained myself on this point in chapter four of book
three. And it seems to me clearly beyond doubt that a man who has the love of
566

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

567

God in his heart can by the strength of his habitual love excited by the knowledge
of his duty, and without prevenient delight, give a sou, for example, to a poor
man, or patiently suffer some minor injustice. It seems to me that delight is
necessary only when temptation is strong or love weak, if delight can yet be said
to be absolutely necessary to a just man whose faith might, it seems to me, be
resolute enough and whose hope strong enough to overcome the greatest of
temptations, the joy or foretaste of eternal goods being capable of withstanding
the sensible attractions of transitory goods.
It is true that delight or actual grace is necessary for any good action if by the
word delight or grace is meant charity that is actually excited, or the delight that
accompanies it, as Saint Augustine generally understands it, for clearly anything
that is in no way done for love of God is worth nothing. But if you remove the
equivocation and take the word delight in the sense I have just specified, I do not
believe that you can doubt what I have just said.
But here is the difficulty. Pleasure and love are assumed to be the same thing
because one is almost never found without the other and because Saint Augustine
does not always distinguish them. On this assumption what one says is correct,
and one may conclude with Saint Augustine, "Quod amplius nos delectat, secundum id operemur necesse est,'' for we certainly will what we love; we can also
say that we would not be able to do anything good or meritorious without delight
or charity. But I hope to show in an Elucidation that I shall give on the treatise on
the passions8 that there is as great a difference between pleasure and love,
voluntary or involuntary, as there is between our knowledge and our love, or to
explain this difference more sensibly, as there is between the figure of a body and
its motion.

•on the third chapter of bonk five [Hi].

ELUCIDATION SIX

t

On what I said at the beginning of the tenth chapter of the first book and in the
sixth chapter of the second book on method: That it is very difficult to prove that
there are bodies. What ought to be thought of the proofs given of their existence.

It is quite common for men to be perfectly ignorant of what they think they know
best and to know certain other things well enough of which they imagine they do
not even have ideas. When their senses play a role in their perceptions they yield
to what they do not understand, or understand only in very imperfect fashion; and
when their ideas are purely intelligible, or contain nothing sensible affecting
them, they accept incontestable demonstrations only with difficulty.
What does the ordinary man think, for example, when most metaphysical
truths are proved to him, when we demonstrate for him the existence of God, the
efficacy of His will, the immutability of His decrees, that there is but one God or
one true cause that does everything in all things, that there is but one sovereign
Reason in which all intelligences participate, that there is but one necessary love
that is the principle of all created wills? He thinks we are speaking with words
devoid of sense, that we have no ideas of the things we are proposing and that we
would do better to keep quiet. Since metaphysical truths and arguments contain
nothing sensible, men are not affected by them, and as a result they do not remain
convinced by them. Nonetheless, it is certain that abstract ideas are the most
distinct and metaphysical truths the clearest and most evident.
Men sometimes say that they have no idea of God nor any knowledge of His
will, and often they even think this as they say it; but this is because they think
they do not know what they perhaps know best. For where is the man who
hesitates to answer when asked whether God is wise, just, and powerful, whether
or not He is triangular, divisible, mobile, or subject to any possible change? Yet
one cannot answer without fear of error as to whether certain qualities belong or
do not belong to some subject if one does not have any idea of the subject.
Similarly, where is the man who would dare say that God does not act in the
simplest ways, that His intentions are disordered, that He creates monsters by a
positive, direct, and particular will and not by a kind of necessity in order not to

568

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

569

upset the simplicity and generality of His ways, in short, that His will could be
contrary to the order of which all men have some knowledge? But if we had no
idea of God's will, we might at least doubt whether He acts according to certain
laws we very clearly conceive that He must follow, given that He wills to act.
Men have ideas, then, of purely intelligible things, and these ideas are much
clearer than those of sensible objects. Men are more certain of the existence of
God than of bodies, and when they withdraw into themselves they find the will of
God, according to which He produces and conserves all beings, more clearly
than the will of their best friends or of those they have spent their whole life
studying. For their mind's union with God and of their will with His, i.e., with
eternal law or the immutable order, is an immediate, direct, and necessary union,
whereas the union they have with sensible objects, which is established only for
the preservation of their health and life, gives them knowledge of these objects
only in relation to this design.
This direct and immediate union, which according to Saint Augustine is
known only by those whose mind is purified, enlightens us in the most secret
recesses of our reason, and exhorts and moves us in the most intimate part of our
heart. Through it we learn what God thinks and even what He wills, eternal
truths and laws, for it cannot be doubted that we know at least some of them
with evidence. But the union we have with our best friends teaches us with
evidence neither what they think nor what they will. We believe we know, but
we are almost always mistaken when we know only because of what they say.
Nor can the union we have through our senses with surrounding bodies enlighten us; for what the senses report is never entirely true, and often it is entirely
false, as I have explained in this book. For this reason I say here that it is more
difficult than one would have thought to prove defmitely that there are bodies,
even though our senses might assure us of it, because reason does not so readily
assure us as we might think and because reason must be consulted very attentively if we are to be enlightened.
But since men are more impressionable than reasonable, and since they listen more
readily to the testimony of their senses than to that of inner truth, they have
always relied on their eyes to assure themselves of the existence of matter
without bothering to consult their reason. This is why they are surprised when
told that it is difficult to prove the existence of matter. They think that they have
but to open their eyes in order to assure themselves that there are bodies, and if
there is some reason to suspect an illusion, they think it suffices to approach the
bodies and touch them-after which they have difficulty conceiving that one
might yet have reasons for doubting their existence.
But our eyes represent colors to us on the surface of bodies and light in the air
and in the sun; our ears make us hear sounds as if spread out through the air and
in the resounding bodies; and if we believe what the other senses report, heat will
be in fire. sweetness will be in sugar, musk will have an odor, and all the sensible
qualities will be in the bodies that seem to exude or diffuse them. Yet it is certain
(for the reasons that I have given in the first hook of Tht' Searl'/1 -~tier Truth) that
all these qualities do not exist outside the soul that perceives them-at least it is

570

Nicolas Malebranche

not evident that they are in the bodies that surround us. Why should we conclude
then, merely on the testimony of the senses that deceive us on all sides, that there
really are external bodies, and even that these bodies are like those we see, i.e.,
like those that are the soul's immediate object, when we look at them with the
eyes of the body. Whatever is to be said of this view, it certainly is not without
difficulties.
Furthermore, if on the basis of what the senses report we can assure ourselves
of the existence of a given body, that body is the one to which the soul is
immediately joined. The most lively sensation and the one that seems to have the
most necessary relation to some actually existing body is pain. Yet it often
happens that those who have lost an arm feel very severe pain in it even long after
the loss of the arm. They know very well that they no longer have the arm when
they consult their memory or look at their body; but the sensation of pain
deceives them. And if, as often happens, we assume them to have entirely
forgotten what they were and to have no other senses than that through which
they feel the pain in their imaginary arm, surely they could not be persuaded that
they do not have an arm in which they feel such tormenting pain.
There have been those who believed they had horns on their head and others
who imagined they were made of butter or glass or that their body was not shaped
like other men's, that it was like that of a cock, a wolf, or an ox. They were mad,
you will say, and I agree; but their soul was able to be mistaken in these things,
and hence all other men can fall into similar errors if they judge objects on the
testimony of their senses. For it should be noted that these madmen really see
themselves as they think they are-error is not strictly in the sensation they have
but in the judgment they form. If they said only that they sensed themselves or
perceived themselves to be like a cock, they would not in the least be mistaken.
They err solely in the fact that they believe that their body is like the one they
sense, i.e., like their mind's immediate object when they consider themselves.
Thus, those who believe themselves to be such as they really are, are no more
judicious in their judgments of themselves than the mad if they base their judgments solely on what their senses report. They fail to be deceived, not through
reason, but through good fortune.
But in the final analysis, can we be certain that those we call mad really are so?
Might it not be said that they only pass for mad because their sensations are
peculiar? For it is clear that a man passes for mad not because he perceives what
is not but precisely because he sees the opposite of what others see, whether they
are deceived or not.
A peasant, for example, whose eyes are disposed in a way to see the moon as it
is, or as we only see it or shall perhaps see it some day with glasses yet to be
invented, looks at it with wonder and exclaims to his companions: I see high
mountains and deep valleys and seas and lakes and gulfs and high rocks! 8 Do you
not sec many seas on the eastern side and that there is hardly anything but land
and mountains toward the west and the south? Do you not see in the same area a
"This is roughly what one sees when nne looks at the m<K>n with a telescope.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

571

mountain higher than any we have ever seen, and are you not amazed at an
entirely black sea or a terrifying gulf that appears in the center of this star? How
will his companions answer such exclamations and what will they think of him?
That he is mad and fallen under the evil influences of the planet he beholds and
admires. He is alone in his view and that is enough. Thus, to be mad in the
opinion of others, it is not necessary really to be so; it is enough to think or to see
things differently than others; for if all men believed themselves to be like cocks,
he who believed himself to be as he is would surely be considered insane.
You will say, but do men have a beak at the end of their nose or a comb on
their head? I do not think so. But I know nothing of the matter when I judge only
according to my senses and do not know how to make proper use of them. In vain
do I touch my face or my head. I feel my body and those surrounding me only
with hands whose length and figure I do not know. I do not even know for sure
that I really have hands; I know so only because when it seems to me that I am
moving them certain motions take place in a certain part of my brain, which
according to current belief is the seat of the common sense. But perhaps I do not
even have this part of the brain about which so much is said and so little known.
At least I am not aware of it within me, whereas I am aware of my hands.
Consequently, I ought to believe that I have hands rather than that I have this
little gland that is constantly the object of controversey. But I know neither the
figure nor the motion of this gland, yet I am assured that I can learn only by
means of them the figure and motion of my body and those surrounding me.
What, then, is to be thought of all this? That reason is not instructed by the
body, that even the part of the body to which the soul is immediately joined is
neither perceptible nor intelligible by itself, that neither our body nor those
surrounding it can be our mind's immediate object, that we cannot learn from our
brain whether it actually exists, much less whether there are bodies surrounding
us; that we must therefore recognize that there is some superior intelligence that
alone is capable of acting on us, and that can act on us in such a way as to truly
represent to us bodies outside us, without giving us the least idea of our brain,
though the motion produced in our brain is an occasion for this intelligence to
reveal these bodies to us. For in short, we see the figure of bodies surrounding us
with eyes whose figure we do not know; and although the colors that appear on
these objects are no more lively than those depicted on the optic nerve, we see
none of these latter even while we admire the splendor of the former.
But after all, under what obligation is this intelligence to reveal bodies to us
when certain kinds of motion take place in our brain? Furthermore, why need
there be external bodies for this motion to be stirred up in our brain? Do not
sleep, the passions, and madness produce this motion without the aid of external
bodies? Is it evident that bodies that cannot move one another' should be able to
communicate to bodies they meet a motor force that they themselves do not
have? Nonetheless, I would have bodies move themselves and those they strike,
and set the fibers of our brain in motion. Cannot He who gives being to all things
•see the third chapter of the second part of book silt, and the Elucidation [ 15] on this chapter.

572

Nicolas Malebranche

also by Himself excite the motion in our brain to which our mind's ideas are
attached? Finally, how is it contradictory that our soul should have new ideas
while our brain keeps the same motion, since it is certain that the brain's motion
does not produce the soul's ideas, that we do not even have any awareness of this
motion, that only God can represent our ideas to us-as I have proved
elsewhere?8 To be completely certain of the existence of external bodies, then, it
is absolutely necessary to know God, who gives us the sensation of them, and to
realize that, since He is infinitely perfect, He cannot deceive us. For if the
intelligence that gives us the ideas of all things wanted to amuse itself, so to
speak, by representing to us bodies as actually existing-even though there were
no such objects-it is clear that doing so would not be very difficult for it.
For these reasons, or reasons like them, Descartes, who wanted to establish his
philosophy on unshakable foundations, thought he could not assume that there
are bodies, and that he should not prove that there are on the basis of sensible
proofs, even though they would seem very persuasive to the ordinary man.
Clearly he knew as well as we do that he had only to open his eyes to see bodies
and that we can approach them and touch them to ascertain whether our eyes
deceive us in what they report. He knew the mind of man well enough to judge
that such proofs had not been rejected. But he sought neither sensible probabilities nor the vain applause of men. He preferred the truth, even though
scorned, to the glory of an undeserved reputation, and he preferred to seem
ridiculous to insignificant minds with his doubts that to them might seem extravagant than to accept things that he did not judge certain and undeniable.
But although Descartes has given the strongest proofs that reason alone can
muster for the existence of bodies, and although it is evident that God is no
deceiver and that He would be said really to deceive us if we deceived ourselves
by making the use we must of our mind and of our other faculties of which He is
the Author-still we can say that the existence of matter is not yet perfectly
demonstrated, i.e., with geometric rigor. For in philosophical matters, we must
not believe anything till evidence obliges us to do so. We must make as much use
of our freedom as possible; our judgments should have no greater extent than our
perceptions. Thus, when we perceive bodies, let us judge only that we perceive
them and that these perceptible or intelligible bodies actually exist; but why
should we judge positively that there is an external material world like the
intelligible world we perceive?
Perhaps you will say that we perceive bodies external to us and even at some
distance from the body we animate and that therefore we can judge that they are
external to us without our judgments extending beyond our perceptions. But
how? Do we not see light external to us and in the sun, even though it is not
there? Nevertheless, I would have these bodies we see external to us really be
external to us, for in the final analysis this is beyond question. But is it not clear
that there are outnesses and distances, that there are intelligible spaces in the
intelligible world that is our mind's immediate object? Let us be careful here: the
•See the sixth chapter of the second pan of book three and the Elucidation [10) on this chapter.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

573

material world we animate is not the one we see when we look at it, i.e., when
we tum the body's eyes toward it. The body we see is an intelligible body and
there are intelligible spaces between this intelligible body and the intelligible sun
we see, just as there are material spaces between our body and the sun we look at.
Certainly God sees that there are spaces between the bodies He has created; but
He does not see these bodies or spaces by themselves. He can see them only
through the ideas He has of them, only through intelligible bodies and spaces.
God derives His light only from Himself; He sees the material world only in the
intelligible world He contains and in the knowledge He has of His volitions,
which actually give existence and motion to all things. Therefore, there are
intelligible spaces between the intelligible bodies that we see, as there are material spaces between the bodies we look at.
Now it must be noted that since only God knows His volitions (which produce
all beings) by Himself, we can know only from Him whether there really is a
material world external to us like the one we perceive, because the material world
is neither perceptible nor intelligible by itself. Thus, in order to be fully convinced that there are bodies, we must have demonstrated for us not only that there
is a God and that He is no deceiver, but also that He has assured us that He has
really created such a world, which proof I have not found in the works of
Descartes.
God speaks to the mind and constrains its belief in only two ways: through
evidence and through faith. I agree that faith obliges us to believe that there are
bodies: but as for evidence, it seems to me that it is incomplete and that we are not
invincibly led to believe there is something other than God and our own mind. It
is true that we have a strong propensity to believe that there are bodies surrounding us; I agree here with Descartes. a But this propensity, as natural as it is, does
not constrain our belief through evidence; it merely inclines us toward belief
through impression. Now, our free judgments should follow only light and
evidence; and if we let ourselves be led by sense impressions, we shall be
mistaken almost always.
Why are we mistaken in the judgments we form concerning sense qualities, the
size, figure, and motion of bodies, if not because we follow an impression like the
one that leads us to believe there are bodies? Do we not perceive that fire is hot,
that snow is white, and that the sun is brilliant with light; do we not perceive
sense qualities as well as bodies external to us? Yet it is certain that these sense
qualities we perceive external to us are not really external to us (or if you will,
nothing is certain on this matter). What reason have we, then, that besides the
intelligible bodies we perceive there are still others we look at? What evidence do
you have that an impression that is deceptive not only with regard to sense
qualities but also with regard to the size, figure, and motion of bodies, is not so
with regard to the actual existence of these same bodies? I ask what evidence of
this you have, for I agree that you have no lack of probabilities.
I realize there is this difference between sense qualities and bodies, that reason
"Meditation 6.

574

Nicolas Malebranche

corrects the impression or natural judgments related to sense qualities much more
easily than those related to the existence of bodies, and even that all of reason's
corrections with regard to sense qualities agree with religion and Christian morality, and that the existence of matter cannot be denied according to the principles
of religion.
It is easy to understand that pleasure and pain, heat, and even colors are not
modes of bodies, that sense qualities in general are not contained in the idea we
have of matter, in short, that our senses do not represent sensible objects to us as
they are in themselves, but as they are in relation to the preservation of our life
and health. This agrees not only with reason but even more so with religion and
Christian morality, as is shown in several places in this work.
But it is not so easy to ascertain positively that there are no bodies external to
us as we positively ascertain that pain and heat are not in the bodies that seem to
cause them in us. Certainly it is at least possible that there are external bodies.
We have nothing that proves to us there are not any, and on the contrary we have
a strong inclination to believe there are bodies. We have, then, more reason to
believe there are bodies than to believe there are not any. Thus, it seems that we
should believe there are bodies; for we are naturally led to follow our natural
judgment when we cannot positively correct it through light or evidence. For
since all natural judgments come from God, we can make our voluntary judgments agree with them when we find no means of discovering them to be false;
and if we are mistaken in these instances, the Author of our mind would seem to
be to some extent the Author of our errors and faults.
This argument is perhaps sound enough. Nevertheless, it must be agreed that it
should not be taken as a necessary demonstration of the existence of bodies, for
God does not invincibly urge us to yield to it. If we consent to it, we do so
freely-we are able not to consent to it. If the argument I have just given is
sound, we must believe it entirely probable that there are bodies; but we must not
rest fully convinced by this single argument. Otherwise, it is we who act and not
God in us. It is by a free act, and consequently one liable to error, that we consent
and not by an invincible impression; for we believe because we freely will to do
so, and not because we perceive with an evidence necessitating us to believe, as
in the case of mathematical demonstrations.
Surely only faith can persuade us that there really are bodies. We cannot have
an exact demonstration of other than a necessary being's existence. And if you
attend closely, you will see that it is not even possible to know with full evidence
whether or not God is truly the creator of the material and sensible world. For
such evidence is found only in necessary relations, and there is no necessary
relation between God and such a world. He was able not to create it, and if He
did create it, it is because He willed to do so and willed freely to do so.
The saints in heaven see by an evident light that the Father begets His Son and
that the Father and the Son produce the Holy Spirit, for these emanations are
necessary. But since the world is not a necessary emanation in God, those who
most clearly see His being do not see with evidence that He produces anything
external. Nonetheless, I believe the blessed are certain that there is a world; but

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

575

this is because God assures them of it by revealing His will to them in a way
unknown to us. We here below are certain of the existence of the world because
faith teaches us that God has created it, and because faith agrees with our natural
judgments or our compound sensations when they are confirmed by all our senses
and when they are corrected by our memory and reason.
It is true that initially faith seems to assume the existence of bodies, fides ex
auditu. It seems to assume prophets, apostles, Sacred Scripture, miracles; but if
you attend closely you will see that although only the appearances of men,
prophets, apostles, Sacred Scripture, miracles, and so on, are assumed, what we
learn from these supposed appearances is absolutely undeniable because, as I
have proved in several places in this work, only God can represent these appearances to the mind, and because God is no deceiver, for faith itself assumes all
this. Now in the appearance of Sacred Scripture and from the appearance of
miracles we learn that God has created a heaven and an earth, that the Word was
made flesh, and other such truths that assume the existence of a created world.
Hence it is certain through faith that there are bodies, and that through it all these
appearances become realities. There would be no point to my pausing here to
reply at greater length to an objection that seems too abstract to the ordinary man,
and I believe that the above will satisfy anyone who is not overly demanding.
From all this, therefore, it must be concluded that we can and even must
correct the natural judgments or the compound perceptions relating to the sensible qualities we attribute to bodies surrounding us or the one we animate. But as
for the natural judgments relating to the actual existence of bodies, although in an
absolute sense we can avoid forming voluntary judgments that agree with them,
we should not do so, because these natural judgments are in perfect agreement
with faith.
Furthermore, I have made this observation mainly to provoke some serious
thought about the following truths: that bodies cannot act on, or reveal themselves to, minds, and that the bodies we look at when we open our eyes are quite
different from the ideas that represent them and that affect us; that our soul finds
its light, its life, and its sustenance only in God; that it can have an immediate
and direct relation only with Him and that the relation it has with its body and
those surrounding it necessarily depends on the relation it has with the efficacious
and luminous substance of the Divinity -a substance that discloses creatures to
us as possible or as existing or as belonging to us, depending on the different
ways in which it affects us insofar as it represents them: (I) as possible when the
perception of the idea affecting us is pure, (2) as existing when the perception is
sensible, and (3) as belonging to us and forming a part of us when the perception
is very absorbing and lively, as is pain. I realize that the ordinary man will not
agree with this observation and that, depending on whether he has too few or too
many animal spirits, he will either ridicule or be alarmed at the arguments I have
just given, for the imagination cannot endure strange or abstract truths: it views
them either as terrifying specters or as ridiculous shadows. But I prefer to be the
object of the mockery of stmng imaginations and the object of the fear of weak
and fearful imaginations than to fail in my duty to the truth and to those who, in

576

Nicolas Malebranche

struggling valiantly against the body's influence on their mind, can distinguish
the replies of the wisdom that enlightens us from what their senses tell them and
from the confused din of the imagination, which disturbs and seduces us.

ELUCIDATION SEVEN

On the fifth chapter of the second book, where I speak about memory and
spiritual habits.

I tried in this chapter to avoid speaking about memory and spiritual habits for
several reasons, the chief of which is that we have no clear idea of our soul. For
what means is there to explain clearly what the dispositions are that the soul's
operations leave in it, which dispositions are its habits, since we do not even
know clearly the nature of the soul? It is evident that we cannot distinctly know
the changes of which a being is capable when we do not distinctly know the
nature of that being. For if, for example, men had no clear idea of extension, they
would struggle in vain to discover its figures. They would try in vain to explain
the ease with which a wheel turns on its axle by the use we make of it. Yet
because I am called upon to speak on a matter that is not known to me in itself, I
shall take the route below in order to follow only clear ideas.
I assume that only God acts in the mind and represents to it the ideas of all
things, and that if the mind perceives some object by a very clear and vivid idea,
it is because God represents this idea to it in a very perfect way.
I assume also that since the will of God agrees entirely with order and justice,
it is enough to be entitled to a thing in order to obtain it. Upon these assumptions,
which are distinctly conceived, spiritual memory can be explained easily and
clearly. For since order demands that minds that have often thought about some
object should think about it again more easily and have an idea of it clearer and
more vivid than those who have thought about it but little, the will of God, which
constantly operates according to order, represents the clear and vivid idea of this
object to their mind as soon as they desire it. Consequently, according to this
explanation, memory and the other habits of pure intelligences would consist not
in a facility of operation resulting from certain modifications of their being but in
an immutable order of God, and in a right the mind acquires over the things that
have already been submitted to it; and the mind's whole power would depend
immediately and solely on God alone, with the force or facility tor acting that all
creatures find in their operations being in this sense only the efficacious will of
the Creator. And I do not think it necessary to give up this explanation on account
577

578

Nicolas Malebranche

of the evil habits of sinners and of those who are damned. For though God does
whatever is real and positive in the actions of sinners, it is evident from the things
I have said in the first Elucidation that God is not the author of sin.
Nonetheless I believe and feel I must believe that after the soul's action there
remain in its substance certain changes that really dispose it to this same action.
But as I do not know them, I cannot explain them; for I have no clear idea8 of my
mind, in which I could discover all the modifications of which it is capable.
Through arguments from theology, and not through clear and evident arguments,
I believe that the reason why pure intelligences see objects they have already
considered more clearly than others is not precisely and solely because God
represents these objects to them in a more vivid and more perfect way, as I have
just explained, but because they are really more disposed to receive the same
action of God. Just as the facility to play instruments that certain people require
does not consist precisely in the fact that the animal spirits necessary for motion
of the fingers have more action and force in them than in other men, but in the
fact that the routes by which the spirits flow are smoother and more connected
from the habit of exercise, as I have explained in the chapter I am elucidating.
Yet I agree that all the uses of memory and the other habits are not absolutely
necessary for those who, being perfectly united to God, find in His light every
kind of idea, and in His will all the facility for acting that they could wish.

"See the Elucidation nn chapter 7 of part 2 nf book 3.

ELUCIDATION EIGHT

On the seventh chapter of the second book. Summary of my proofs for, and
explanations of, Original Sin. And replies to those objections that seem to me
strongest.
In order to make an orderly reply to the difficulties that might be generated in the
mind concerning Original Sin and the way in which it is passed from father to
son, I feel that I must briefly set out what I said on this topic in several passages
of the Search after Truth. Here, then, are my main proofs. I have arranged them
in such a way as to make them more intuitive for those who wish to study them.

God wills order in His works; what we clearly conceive to conform to order,
God wills; what we clearly conceive to be contrary to order, God does not will.
This truth which is ascertained through the inner sensation of consciousness is
evident to all those who are capable of a steady and purified contemplation of the
infinitely perfect being who contains this immutable order, a the law of all intelligences, and even of God Himself. Nothing can shake them from this when they
see clearly that every difficulty that can be raised against this principle is merely
result of our ignorance of what would have to be known to resolve it, b and the
false or imperfect idea we have of divine providence.

a

II
God has no other end in His operations than Himself. Order would have it so.
III
God creates and preserves the mind of man in order that it be concerned with
Him, know Him, and love Him, for the end of God's works is God. Order
requires that it be so. God cannot will that we love what is not worthy of love or
that what is least worthy of love be most loved. Thus, it is evident that nature is
•1 explain the nature of immutable order in the tenth Elucidation below.

•cr.

Dia/oflut'S on Met<lphy.ric.f on Providence.

579

Nicolas Malebranche

580

corrupt and in a state of disorder, because the mind is naturally led to love bodies
that are not worthy of love or have no efficacy for acting on it, and because the
mind often loves them more than God Himself. Original Sin, or the disorder of
nature, therefore has no need of proof; for each of us is sufficiently aware of a
law in himself that captures and disorders him, a law not established by God
because it is contrary to the immutable order of justice, which is the inviolable
rule for all His volitions.
IV

Nonetheless, man before his fall was warned by prevenient sensation, and not
by clear knowledge, as to whether he should join himself to, or separate himself
from, the bodies surrounding him. Order would have it so. It is a disorder that the
mind should be obliged to concern itself with bodies. It can be joined to them,
but it is not created for them. It must therefore know God and sense bodies.
Furthermore, since bodies cannot be its good, the mind could join itself to them
only with difficulty, if all it did were to know them such as they are, without
sensing in them what in fact is not in them. Thus, false good must be discerned
through a prevenient sensation in order to be loved by an instinctive love, and
true good must be known through clear knowledge in order to be loved by a free
and rational love. Finally, God creates and preserves man in order to be known
and loved by him; therefore, his mind's capacity must not be filled, even partially
and in spite of himself, by knowledge of the infinite configurations and figures of
the bodies surrounding him and of the one he animates. Yet in order to know
through clear knowledge whether a given fruit at a given time is nourishing for
the body, it manifestly would be necessary to know so many things and to reason
so much that a mind of the greatest scope would be entirely occupied thereby.

v
But although the first man was warned through prevenient sensations as to
whether or not he should make use of the bodies surrounding him, he was not
excited by involuntary or rebellious impulses. He even erased from his mind the
ideas of sensible things when he so wished, whether he was making use of them
or not; for order would have it so. The mind can be united to the body, but it must
not be dependent upon it; it should command the body. Furthermore, all the love
that God places in us must end in Him, for God produces nothing in us that is not
for Him. Finally, bodies are not worthy of love; they are below what in us is
capable of loving. Therefore, in nature's first institution bodies were unable to
tum the mind toward them or lead it to consider and love them as goods.
VI

Bodies surrounding us act on our soul only when they produce certain kinds of
motion in our txldy and when this motion is communicated to the main part of the
brain. For it is according to changes that take place in this part that the soul itself
changes and finds itself excited by sensible objects. I have already sufficiently

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

581

shown this and experience demonstrates it. Given this, it is clear from the
preceding article that the first man arrested whenever he wished the motion
communicated to his body, or at least that motion communicated to the principle
part of his brain. Order would have it so, and consequently He whose will always
conforms to order can do nothing against order although He is omnipotent. Thus,
man could in certain instances suspend the natural law of the communication of
motion because he was without concupiscence and because he experienced no
involuntary or rebellious impulses within him.

VII
But having sinned, the first man lost this power. Order would also have it so.
For it is not right that in favor of a rebellious sinner there should be exceptions to
the general law of the communication of motion, exceptions other than those that
are absolutely necessary to the preservation of our life and civil society. Thus,
since man's body is constantly disturbed by the action of sensible objects, and
since his soul is agitated by the disturbances in the main part of his brain, he is
dependent upon the body to which he was merely joined and over which he had
ruled before his sin.

VIII
Now this is how the first man was able to sin. It is natural to love pleasure and
to enjoy it, and this was not forbidden to Adam. Such is also the case with joy.

We can delight in beholding our natural perfections. This is not evil in itself.
Man was made to be happy, and it is pleasure and joy that at present make him
happy. The first man enjoyed pleasure, then, in the use he made of sensible
goods. He also felt joy in beholding his perfections, for one cannot consider
oneself as happy or perfect without thereby experiencing joy. But he did not feel
such pleasure in his duty, for although he knew that God was his good, he did not
sense this, as I have proved in several places. a Thus, the joy he was able to fmd
in his duty was not sensible. Let all this be granted. Since the first man did not
have the capacity of an infinite mind, his pleasure or joy diminished the mind's
clear perception, which informed him that God was his good, the sole cause of
his pleasures and joy, and that he was to love only Him. For pleasure is in the
soul and modifies it; as a result, it exhausts our capacity for thought to the extent
that it affects and excites us. This is something that we learn through experience
or through the inner sensation we have of ourselves. We can see, then, that since
the first man let his mind's capacity be gradually shared or filled by the lively
sensation of a presumptuous joy, or perhaps by some sensible pleasure or love,
God's presence and the thought of his duty were erased from his mind because he
failed to courageously follow his light in the search for his true good. Having
thus been distracted, he was able to fall, for his main actual grace was his light,
or the clear knowledge of his duty, because he then had no need of the prevenient
delights that we now need in order to resist concupiscence.
•see the Elucidation on chapter S I 11.

582

Nicolas Malebranche

IX
It should also be noted that neither the prevenient sensations that Adam experienced in the use of corporeal goods nor the joy he found in considering his
happiness or perfection are really the cause of his fall, for he realized that only
God was capable of making him feel pleasure or joy. Thus, he should have loved
only Him, since only the true cause of our happiness should be loved. Since
nothing disturbed the first man's knowledge and light when he wished to keep it
entirely pure, he should have and could have erased from his mind all the
sensations that divided it and that placed it in some danger of being distracted and
losing sight of Him who enlightens and fortifies it. He should have remembered
that if God did not allow him to perceive Him, but only know Him as good, it
was in order that he might merit his reward more quickly through the continual
use of his freedom.
Given, then, that Adam and Eve sinned, and that subsequent to their sin they
felt involuntary and rebellious impulses within themselves, I maintain that their
children had to be born sinners and like them subject to the impulses of concupiscence. Here are my reasons.

X
I have shown at great length in the chapte~ that occasions this Elucidation
that the communication between the brain of the mother and that of her child is
such that all the traces and motion occurring in the mother's brain are excited in
the child's. Thus, since the child's soul is joined to its body at the same moment
it is created, because the formation of the body requires God, as a result of His
general will, to give it a soul to inform it, it is clear that at the same instant that
this soul is created it has corrupt inclinations, and that it is directed toward
bodies, because from this moment on, it has inclinations in response to the
motion occurring in the brain to which it is joined.

XI
But because it is a disorder for the mind to be turned toward bodies and to love
them, the child is a sinner and in a state of disorder as soon as it is created. God,
who loves order, hates the child in this state. Yet its sin is not voluntary; its
mother conceives it in iniquity due to the communication established by the
natural order between the brain of the mother and that of her child, for only
through the body, through generation, is the soul, which is not begotten, corrupted and given to Original Sin.

XII
Now this communication between the brain of the mother and that of her child
is a very good arrangement for several reasons. (I) Because it is useful and
perhaps necessary to the formation of the foetus. (2) Because the child could
thereby have communicated with its parents, for it was fitting that the child
•Seven of book 2. <Reference occurs in fifth edition only.-Trans.>

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

583

should know to whom it owed the body it animated. Finally, the child could have
known only by means of this communication what was occurring in the world
outside and the thoughts it should have had pertaining thereto. Since it had a
body, it should have had thoughts related to it and it should not have been
deprived of the view of the works of God among which it lived. There are
probably many reasons for this communication other than those I have related,
but these are enough to justify such communication and to remove from all
reproach the conduct of Him whose every volition necessarily conforms to order.
XIII
Yet order would not be conformed to if a righteous child should have received
traces of sensible objects in spite of itself. And if the soul of children were
created a single moment before being joined to the body, if it were for a single
moment in a state of innocence or order, it would be fully entitled, by the
necessity of the immutable order or eternal law, to the power of suspending this
communication, just as the first man before his sin arrested whenever he wished
the impulses that were excited in him, for the immutable order would have it that
the body obey the mind. But since the soul of children has never been pleasing to
God, it has never been fitting that God change the law of the communication of
motion in their favor. Thus, it is right for children to be born sinners and in a state
of disorder; and the cause of their sin is not the order of nature-this order is
wisely instituted and just-but the sin of those to whom they owe their origin. In
this sense it is not right that a sinful father should produce children more perfect
than himself or that they should have a power over their body that their mother
does not have over her own.
XIV
It is true that after Adam's sin, which corrupted and upset everything, God by
reordering nature could have corrected the disorder this sin had caused. But God
does not change His volitions in this way. He wills nothing that is not just. What
He once wills, He wills forever. He does not correct Himself or regret anything.
His will is constant. His eternal decrees do not depend on the inconstancy of a
man's will, and it is unjust that they should be subject to it.

XV

But if it is permitted to enter into God's purposes and to speak our thoughts on
the motives He might have had for establishing the order I have just deduced and
for permitting the first man's sin, 8 it seems to me that no sentiment more worthy
of God's grandeur or more in conformity with both religion and reason can be
had than to believe that God's main intention in His external operations is the
Incarnation of His Son, that God established the order of nature and allowed the
disorder that befell it in order to promote this great work, that He permitted all
•see the second and tilth Dialogues of the Com·••rsatimrs drrhi<'nne.<. Paris ed .• 1702.

Nicolas Malebranche

584

men to be subject to sin so that no man8 should glory in himself, and that He even
permitted concupiscence in the most perfect of men so that they should not be
vainly complacent with themselves. For when we consider the perfection of our
own being, it is difficult to despise ourselves unless we at the same time see and
love the sovereign good in the presence of which all our perfection and grandeur
dissipates and is destroyed.
I admit that concupiscence can be the occasion of our merit, and that it is right
that the mind should for a while follow order with difficulty so as to merit being
eternally subject to it with pleasure. I would have it that partly in view of this
God permitted concupiscence after having forseen sin. But since concupiscence
is not absolutely necessary to our merit, if God permitted it He did so because He
willed that we not be able to do good without the help Jesus Christ has merited
for us, and that man not be able to boast of his own resources. For it is clear that
man cannot struggle against himself and win unless he is animated by the spirit of
Jesus Christ, the second Adam, who, as leader of the faithful, inspires them with
feelings entirely contrary to the feelings of concupiscence they have derived from
the first Adam. For Jesus Christ was given to us by God, says Saint Paulb, to be
our wisdom, our justice, our sanctification, and our redemption in order that he
who glorifies himself does so only in the Lord.

XVI
Given, then, that children are born with concupiscence, it is evident that they
are truly sinners because their heart is turned toward bodies as far as possible.
There remains in their will only natural love, and this love is disordered. Thus,
there is nothing in them that God can love, because God cannot love disorder.

XVII
But when they have been reborn in Jesus Christ, that is, when their heart has
been turned toward God either by an actual impulse of love or, rather, by a habit,
or an inner disposition, such as results from a perfect act of love of God, then
concupiscence is no longer sinful 8 in them, for concupiscence is no longer alone
in their heart and no longer dominates it. Habitual love that remains in them
through the grace of baptism in Jesus Christ is freer or stronger than the love that
is in them through the concupiscence they have from Adam. They are like the
righteous who without losing their righteousness follow the impulses of conconcupiscence is no longer sinfulc in them, for concupiscence is no longer alone
not freely consent to these impulses.

XVIII
And it should not be considered very strange if I say that it could even happen
that at the time children are baptized they love God with a voluntary love. For,
"Aug. In Jul. bk. 6, ch. 3.
"I Cor. ch. I [vv. 30-31).

rAug. De nupt. & concup. ch. 25.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

585

given that the second Adam is the opposite of the first, why could he not, at the
time of rebirth, deliver children from the servitude of their bodies to which they
are subject only because of the first Adam, in order that, enlightened and moved
by a lively and efficacious grace to love God, they should all love Him with a
free and rational love, without the first Adam preventing them from doing so.
You will say that they do not notice that their body stops acting on their mind for
a single moment; but should you be surprised that they do not see what is not
visible? Only a single instant is needed to perform this act of love that changes
the heart. And since this act can be formed in the soul without traces of it
occurring in the brain, you should not be surprised if children never have any
recollection of it, for we have no memory of things whose traces are not preserved in the brain.

XIX
Saint Paul teaches us that the old man, or concupiscence, is crucified with
Jesus Christ, and that we die and are buried with him through baptism. Are we
not then delivered from the body's influence on the mind, and does not concupiscence die at the same time? True, it is regenerated, but having been destroyed
and having left children in a state of loving God, it can no longer do them evil,
although it might be regenerated in them. For when there are two different loves
in one heart, one natural and the other voluntary, order would have it that only
the love that is voluntary should be valued. And if at baptism children loved God
by an act that was in no way free (subsequently loving bodies by many acts of the
same kind), order would perhaps not permit God to value a single act more than
many acts all of which were natural and involuntary. Or rather, if these opposing
loves were of equal strength, He would value the one that was later for the same
reason that when there have been two successive, opposing loves in a single
heart, God always values the later because grace is lost through a single mortal
sin.

XX
Nevertheless, it cannot and should not be denied that God can, without suspending the domination of its body over its mind, lead the child into righteousness, or tum its will toward Him, by placing in its soul a disposition 8 like the one
found after an actual impulse of love for God. This way of acting will perhaps not
appear as natural as the other, for we do not clearly conceive what these residual
dispositions might be. But this should not be surprising, for having no clear idea
of the soul (as I have proved elsewhere b), we should not be surprised if we do not
know all the modifications of which it is capable. Yet the mind cannot be fully
satisfied by things it does not clearly conceive. An extraordinary miracle seems
to be necessary to give the soul these dispositions without some previous act.
This cannot be done through means that seem to be the simplest. Instead of the
• See Elucidation 7.
"See ch. 1 or the second pan of book three and its Elucidation (II).

Nicolas Malebranche

586

second Adam producing in the mind of the child being baptized the opposite of
what the first Adam produced there, it is enough for the child to be reborn that
God should act in it through the ordinary means according to which He sanctifies
adults. For since the child at this moment has no sensations or impulses that
divide its capacity for thinking and willing, nothing prevents it from knowing and
loving its true good. I say nothing more of the matter because it is not necessary
to know precisely how the regeneration of children occurs provided that we grant
a true regeneration in them, i.e., an inner, real justification caused, if you will,
by the acts that accompany the sacrament, and especially through the habits of
faith, hope, and charity infused into the soul without any previous acts. If I
propose an explanation so contrary to prejudice, I do so in order to content those
who reject, albeit without reason, spiritual habits, and to prove to them the
possibility of regeneration in children, for imputation seems to me to contain a
manifest contradiction. God cannot view as righteous and love creatures that are
at the same time in a state of disorder, although, because of Jesus Christ, He can
intend to restore them to order and to love them when they have been so restored.
Objections
Against the proofs for, and explanations of, Original Sin.
First Objection
Against the first article. 8
God wills order, it is true; but it is His will that does so. His will does not
presuppose order. All that God wills is in order for the sole reason that God wills
it. If God wills that minds should be subject to bodies and that they should love
and fear them, this would not be a state of disorder. If God willed that twice two
be four, He would not lie in saying that twice two are not four. This would be a
truth. God is the principle of all truth, He is the master of all order. He supposes
nothing, neither truth nor order, He does all things.
Reply
This upsets everything. There is no longer any science, b any morals, any
indubitable proofs of religion. This consequence is clear to anyone who follows
step by step the false principle that God produces order and truth by an entirely
free will. But for certain people this perhaps will not count as a reply.
I reply than that God can do nothing and can rule nothing without knowledge,
and that therefore His volitions suppose something; but what they suppose is not
something created. Order, truth, eternal wisdom is the exemplar of all God's
works, and this wisdom is not created. God who creates all things did not create
it, although He is always begetting it through the necessity of His being.
All that God wills is in order for the sole reason that God wills it, this I admit.
But this is because God cannot act against Himself, against His own wisdom and
"For each objection it is necessary to review the article against which it was made.
''See Elucidation [10) below on the nature of ideas.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

587

light. He is indeed able not to produce anything external to Himself; but if He
wills to act, He can do so only according to the immutable order of wisdom that
He necessarily loves. For religion and wisdom teach me that He does nothing
without His Son, without His Word, without His wisdom. Thus, I have no fear in
saying that God cannot positively will that the mind should be subject to the body
because the wisdom according to which God wills all that He wills clearly
shows me that this would be contrary to order. And I clearly see it in this same
wisdom, because it is the sovereign, universal Reason in which all minds participate, for which all intelligences are created, and through which all men are
rational. For no man is his own reason, light, or wisdom unless perhaps it is
when his reason is an individual reason, his light a false glow, his wisdom a
madness.
Since most men do not distinctly know that only Eternal Wisdom enlightens
them, and that intelligible ideas that are their mind's immediate object are not
created, they imagine that eternal laws and immutable truths are established as
such by a free volition of God; and this is what led Descartes to say that God
could have made twice four not equal eight, or the three angles of a triangle not
equal two right angles, "because," he says, "there is no order, no law, no
ground [raison) of goodness and truth that does not depend on God." And
because it is He ''who as sovereign legislator has ordained and established the
eternal truths. " 8 This learned man did not notice that there was an order, a law, a
sovereign reason that God necessarily loves, which is coeternal with Him and
according to which He necessarily acts, given that He wills to act. For God is
indifferent in what He does external to Himself, but He is not indifferent, although perfectly free, in the way in which He does it; He always acts in the
wisest and most perfect way possible. He always follows the immutable and
necessary order. b Thus, God is capable of not making minds or bodies; but if He
creates these two kinds of beings, He must create them by the simplest means and
arrange them in a perfect order. For example, He can join minds to bodies, but I
maintain that He cannot subject the former to the latter, unless, as a result of the
order He always follows, the sin committed by minds should oblige Him to do
so, as I have already explained in the seventh article and in the first Elucidation
near the end.
In order to anticipate certain charges that might be raised against this, I feel I
must say that men are wrong in consulting themselves when they wish to know
what God can do or will. They should not judge His volitions according to the
inner sensation they have of their own inclinations. They would often construct
an unjust, cruel, and sinful God in order to make Him omnipotent. They must
divest themselves of the principle of their prejudices, which makes them judge
everything in relation to themselves. They should attribute to God only what they
clearly conceive to be contained in the idea of the infinitely perfect being. for
"Reply to the sixth set of ohjcctions against his M•·<iitatio11.1. art. 6. art. H. L:llcr 68 of mi. .1 [Ed.
Clersellier).
"See the Elucidation uf the sixth chapter of the sccnnd part of book 3. or the ninth Dialogue ""
M<'ltiJ>ily.•·ic.•.

Nicolas Malebranche

588

things must be judged only through clear ideas. Then the God they will adore will
not be like those of antiquity, who were cruel, adulterous, and carnal, like the
people who had imagined them. He will not even be like the God of certain
Christians who, in order to make Him as powerful as the sinner would like to be,
give Him the absolute power of acting against all order, of letting sin go unpunished, and of condemning people to eternal punishment, no matter how righteous or innocent they might be.
Second Objection

Against the first article.
If God wills order, who creates monsters (I do not say among men, who have
sinned, but among animals and plants)? What is the cause of the general corruption of the air that causes so many diseases? By what order are the seasons upset
and the fruits of the earth scorched by the sun or by ice? Is to give an animal
entirely useless parts or to freeze fruit after completely forming it to act according
to wisdom and order? Is it not rather that God does what pleases Him and that His
power is above all rule and order? For (to speak of things of greater consequence
than fruit with which anything can be done) the earth from which God makes
vessels of anger is the same as that from which He makes vessels of mercy. We
often see injustice enthroned, virtue cruelly oppressed, and impiety in continuous
prosperity.
Reply

Here are difficulties that serve only to obscure the truth, because they are born
only of the mind's darkness. We know that God is just; we see that evildoers are
happy. Must we deny what we see and doubt what we know because we are
perhaps dense enough not to know and skeptical enough not to believe what
religion teaches us concerning future punishments? Likewise, we know that God
is wise, and that everything He does is good. We also see monsters or defective
works. What is one to believe? That God has erred or that these monsters are not
His work. Surely if one has any sense or strength of mind, one will believe
neither one nor the other, for it is evident that God does everything and that He
can do nothing that is not as perfect as it can be in relation to simplicity and the
small number of means He employs and must employ in the formation of His
work. One must stand by what one sees, without being disturbed by difficulties it
is impossible to resolve when the cause of this impossibility is our ignorance. If
ignorance fashions difficulties, and if similar difficulties upset the most firmly
established opinions, will there be anything certain among men who do not know
all things? What? Will the most brilliant light not be able to chase the least
darkness, and will the slightest darkness obscure the clearest and most vivid
light?
But although dispensation from replying to such difficulties can be had without
weakening the principle we have established, it is nevertheless good to know that
they can be answered. For the mind of man is so unjust in its judgments that it
might perhaps prefer opinions that seem to be the consequences of these imagi-

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

589

nary difficulties rather than constant truths that can be doubted only when one
wills to doubt them and ceases to consider them in order to do so. I say, then, that
God wills order although there are monsters, and that it is even because God
always wills and acts according to the immutable order of His perfections that
there are monsters. Here is the reason for this.
Order demands that the laws of nature by which God produces this infmite
variety found in the world be very simple and small in number, as they in fact
are, for this conduct bears the mark of an infinite wisdom. Now, the simplicity of
these general laws produces in certain particular cases, due to the disposition of
the subject, irregular kinds of motion, or rather, monstrous arrangements of
them, and consequently, it is because God wills order that there are monsters.
Thus, God does not will positively or directly that there should be monsters, but
He wills positively certain laws of the communication of motion, of which
monsters are necessary consequences. And He wills these laws because, being
very simple, they are always capable of producing that variety of forms which we
cannot admire too much.
For example, as a result of the general laws of the communication of motion,
there are bodies that are thrust toward the center of the earth. The body of a man
or an animal is one of these bodies; it finds no support in the air and comes down
on its feet. Would justice and order have it that God change His general volitions
for this particular case? This surely does not seem very likely. The animal, then,
must injure or maim its body. We must reason in the same way concerning the
generation of monsters.
Order would have it that all beings should have what is necessary to their
preservation and to the propagation of their species, provided that this can be
done by means that are simple and worthy of the wisdom of God. Thus, we see
that animals and even plants have the general means to preserve themselves and
to continue their species; and if some animals lack them in certain particular
cases, this is because the general laws according to which they have been pro·
duced have not been able to allow it, because these laws are concerned not only
with them but generally with all beings, and because the general gain is to be
favored over the individual.
It is evident that if God were to make only one animal, He would not make it a
monster; but order would have it that God not make this animal according to the
same laws according to which He now produces all the others. For God's action
must be proportionate to His intentions. By the laws of nature God wills to make
not a single animal but a whole world, and He must make it by the simplest
means as is required by order. It is enough, then, that this world should not be
monstrous or that the general effects should be worthy of the general laws in
order that nothing reprehensible be found in God's conduct.
If God had established particular laws for particular changes. or if He had
placed in each thing a llcltllre or a particular principle of all the motion it undergoes. I grant that it would be difficult to reconcile His wisdom with so many
"See the Dialog111'.>

011

M•·tat>h.nin

on Providence. Dialogue 9 ff.

Nicolas Malebranche

590

obvious disorders. It would perhaps be necessary to admit either that God does
not will order or that He is unable to correct disorder. For in the final analysis, it
does not seem to me possible to combine the almost infmite number of secondary
causes or powers, virtues, qualities and natural faculties, with nature's so-called
tricks or disorders without offending the infinite power and wisdom of the Author
of all things. Since God does all things, appeal must be had to the simplicity of
general laws in order to justify divine Providence, as will be found explained
elsewhere. a
Objection
Against the second article.
God can never act for Himself. When one is wise, one never does anything
useless, and everything God would do for Himself would be useless, for He lacks
nothing. God is fully self-sufficient. He has by the necessity of His being all the
good He could possibly will for Himself; He wishes nothing for Himself. Therefore, He does nothing for Himself because He acts only through the efficacy of
His volitions. The nature of good is to be communicated and distributed, to be
useful to others rather than to one's self, to search out and, if possible, to create
people whom one can make happy. Thus, since God is absolutely and essentially
good, it is contradictory that He should act for Himself.
Reply
God can actfor Himself in two ways, either to draw some profit from what He
does or so that His creature might find its perfection and happiness in Him. l shall
not examine hereb whether God acts for Himself in the first way, and if, in order
to receive honor worthy of Him, He has created and restored all things in His
Son, in whom, according to Scripture, all things subsist. I maintain only that God
can neither create nor conserve minds in order for them to know and love
creatures as their good or the cause of their happiness, because creatures are not
their good or the cause of their happiness. It is an immutable, eternal, and
necessary law that they should know and love God as I have explained in the
third article. Thus, this is not an objection against my principle but rather a
confirmation of it. And if it is certain that the nature of good is to be distributed
and communicated externally (for I shall not examine this axiom), it is clear that
since God is absolutely and essentially good, it is a contradiction that He should
not act for Himself in the sense that I would have it.
First Objection
Against the fourth article.
Since ignorance is a consequence of sin, Adam before his fall had perfect
knowledge of the nature of his body as well as all those surrounding it. He did not
"See the Trt'atist• on Nature ant/ Grace, and my replies to Arnauld or the Dialo!(Ues on
Mt·taphnl!'> already dted.
"See the ninth Diah>!(llf' on Mt•laf>hy.ric.r.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

591

need to be advised as to what he should do for the preservation of his life. He had
to know perfectly the nature of all the animals, for example, in order to assign to
them, as he did, the names that belong to them. For it falls to wise men alone, say
Plato and Pythagoras, to assign names to things.
Reply

This is a mistake. Ignorance is neither an evil nor a consequence of sin; error
or mental blindness is an evil and a consequence of sin. Only God knows
everything and is ignorant of nothing, and there is a certain amount of ignorance
in the most enlightened intelligences. Whatever is finite cannot comprehend the
infinite; thus, no mind can even comprehend all the properties of triangles. At the
moment of his creation Adam knew everything that it was proper for him to know
and nothing more. It was not proper for him to know exactly the disposition of all
the parts of his body or of those he made use of. I have given the reasons for this
in this article and elsewhere. a
In Scripture the assignment of names is a mark of authority rather than of
perfect knowledge. b Since the Lord of heaven had made Adam lord ofthe earth,
He wished that Adam give names to the animals as He Himself had given to the
stars. It is clear that sounds or words do not and cannot naturally have any
relation to the things they signify, whatever the divine Plato and the mysterious
Pythagoras should say. We might perhaps be able to explain the nature of a horse
or of an ox in an entire book; but a word is not a book, and it is ridiculous to
imagine that monosyllables such as sus, which in Hebrew signifies a horse, and
schor, which signifies an ox, represent the nature of these animals. Yet there is
some likelihood that these are the names that Adam gave them, for they are found
in Genesis. c And even the author of Genesis asserts that the names Adam gave to
the animals are the same names that were in use during his time, for I do not see
that he could have meant anything else by these words: ''Omne quod vocavit
Adam animae viventis, ipsum est nomen ejus" [Gen. 2:19].
I will grant that Adam gave names to the animals that are somehow related to
their nature, and I will subscribe to the learned etymologies that an author of this
century gives for them. I will grant that the first man called the larger domestic
animals Behemoth because they remained silent, the ram Ajil because it is
strong, the billy goat Sair because it is shaggy, the swine Cha:.ir because it has
small eyes, the ass Chamor because in the east there are many such animals that
are red. But I do not see that anything other than opening one's eyes would be
necessary to know whether the billy goat is shaggy, the ass red, or whether the
swine has small or large eyes. What we call a beast or a large domestic animal
Adam called Beir and Behemoth, because these beasts are gross and dumb. What
is to be concluded from this? That he knew their nature perfectly? This is not
clear. 1 would infer, rather, that the appropriate conclusion is that since Adam
"Vol. I. ch. 5.
""Omnibus cis nomina vocal.·· Ps. 47 [v.l2).
•49: 17; 32:5.

Nicolas Malebranche

592

was simple enough to question an ox as the largest of domestic animals, and
since he was surprised that it could not answer, he looked down on it and
therefore disdainfully called it by the name Beier and Behemoth.
Second Objection
Against the fourth article.
There are prevenient sensations that are uncomfortable and that cause pain.
Adam was innocent and righteous; he therefore should not have been afflicted by
such sensations. He therefore should have conducted himself in all instances
through reason and light, and not by means of prevenient sensations like those we
now have.
Reply
I grant that there are prevenient sensations that are unpleasant and painful; but
these sensations never caused any pain to the first man, because as soon as they
caused him pain he willed no longer to be afflicted by them, and exactly when he
had this volition he was no longer affected by them. These sensations served only
to give him deferential warning as to what he should or should not do. They did
not upset his felicity; they only made him understand that he could lose it and that
He who made him happy could also punish him and make him miserable if he
were unfaithful.
To be convinced that the first man never felt any lively pain that caught him by
surprise, there are two things to consider. The first is that pain is very mild when
the motion to which it is joined is very weak, because it is always proportionate
to the strength of the motion that is communicated to the main part of the brain.
The second, that it is the nature of motion to occupy a duration of time, and that it
cannot be violent at the first instant that it is communicated to particles such as
the nerves of our body, which are rather slack between the brain and the skin. On
this supposition it is clear that the first man never felt any violent pain that took
him by surprise or that was capable of making him unhappy, for he was able to
arrest the motion causing it. But if he was able to stop the motion at the same
instant that it began its action, certainly he would not have failed to do so,
because he wished to be happy and because aversion is naturally joined to the
sensation of pain. Besides this, he deserved to be protected in a special way
because of his innocence.
Adam, then, never suffered violent pain. But I do not think we should say that
he never even felt mild pain as would be the case when we taste a piece of green
fruit thinking that it is ripe. His felicity would have been very slight had it been
upset by such insignificant things, for delicacy is a mark of weakness, and
pleasure and joy are insecure when wiped out by the least thing. Pain truly
disturbs happiness only when it is involuntary and when it subsists in us in spite
of us. Jesus Christ was still happy on his cross although he suffered great pains,
because he suffered nothing that he did not wish to suffer. Thus, given that Adam
did not suffer anything despite himself, he cannot be said to have been made
unhappy before his sin because, on the present hypothesis, he was advised by

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

593

prevenient (though deferential and subdued) sensations of what he was to avoid
for the preservation of his life.
Objection

Against the fifth article.
Adam felt prevenient pleasures; prevenient pleasures are involuntary impulses.
Therefore, Adam was moved by involuntary impulses.
Reply

I reply that in Adam's case his sensations preceded his reason. I have given the
proofs of this in the fourth article. But I deny that they preceded his will or that
they excited any rebellious impulses in it. For Adam willed to be warned by these
sensations of what he was to do for the preservation of his life. But he never
willed to be moved despite himself, for that is a contradiction. Furthermore,
when he wanted to concentrate on contemplating truth without the least mental
distraction, his passions and senses were in a state of perfect tranquillity. Order
would have it so, and it is a necessary consequence of the absolute power he had
over his body.
I reply, second, that it is not true that the soul's pleasure is the same thing as its
impulse or its love. a Pleasure and love are two modes of the soul, but pleasure
has no necessary relation to the object seeming to cause it, while love is necessarily related to the good. Pleasure is to the soul what figure is to body, and motion
is to body what love is to the soul. Now, the motion of a body is very different
from its figure. I grant that the soul, which is constantly urged toward the good,
moves toward it, as it were, more easily when it has a sensation of pleasure than
when it suffers pain, just as a body when struck rolls more easily when it has a
spherical figure than when it has the figure of a cube. But the figure of a body is
different from its motion, and it can be spherical and remain at rest. True, minds
are not like bodies; they cannot feel pleasure without having an impulse, because
God who makes and preserves them only for Himself constantly urges them
toward the good. But this does not prove that pleasure. is the same thing in the
soul as its impulse, for two things, though different, can yet always be found
together.
I reply, finally, that even if pleasure were not different from the soul's impulse
or love, the pleasure felt by the first man while making use of corporeal goods
would not have led him to love these bodies. The soul is led toward the object
that causes pleasure in it by the pleasure itself, granted; but the fruit that we eat
with pleasure does not cause this pleasure in us. Bodies cannot act on the soul or
in any way make it happy; only God can do so. We err in thinking that bodies
have in them what we sense upon the occasion of their presence. Adam before his
sin was not stupid enough to imagine that bodies were the cause of his pleasures.
Thus, the motion accompanying his pleasures led only his lx)dy and not his heart
toward sensible objects. If pleasure contributed to the fall of the lirst man, it was
"See the Eludiralion nf rh. 3 of honk

~

[ 14).

Nicolas Malebranche

594

not by doing in him what it now does in us; it was only because occupying or
dividing his capacity for thought, it erased or diminished in his mind the presence
of his duty and true good.

Objection
Against the sixth article.
What likelihood is there that the immutable will of God should have been
dependent on the will of a man, and that in favor of Adam there should have been
exceptions to the general law of the communication of motion.

Reply
At least it is not clear that there could not have been such exceptions. But it is
clear (I) that the immutable order demands that the body be subject to the mind,
and (2) that it is a contradiction that God should not love and will order. a For God
necessarily loves His Son, that Wisdom to whom He communicates His entire
substance. Before the first man's sin, then, there had to be exceptions in his favor
to the general law of the communication of motion. This might seem rather
abstract. The following is more intuititve.
Man, although sinful, has the power of moving and stopping his arm as he
pleases; therefore, according to the different volitions of man, animal spirits are
determined to produce or arrest certain kinds of motion in his body, which
certainly could not happen according to the general law of the communication of
motion. Thus, given that God's will is today still subordinated, if I may so put it,
to our own, why would it not have been subordinated to Adam's? If for the good
of the body and for civil society God prevents the communication of motion in
sinners, why should He not have prevented it on behalf of a righteous man for the
good of his soul and to preserve the union and society He had with him, for God
made man only for Himself. Since God does not wish to have society with
sinners, after sin He stripped from them the power they had of leaving the body,
as it were, to join themselves with Him. But He left them the power of arresting
or changing the communication of motion in relation to civil society and the
preservation of life, because He did not wish to destroy His work, and because
even before He had formed it, He had, according to Saint Paul, the intention of
restoring it and reforming it in Jesus Christ.

Objection
Against the seventh article.
Men still move their bodies in all directions. At will do they move all its parts
whose motion is necessary for the search after goods or for the pursuit of sensible
evils. And consequently, they constantly stop or change the natural communication of motion, not only for things of little consequence, but also for things which
arc useless to life and to civil society, and even for crimes which disrupt society,
"In rhe Elucidation regarding rhe ""'""'of idea.< [ 10). I shall explain in more derail whal Order is
and why God necessarily loves il.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

595

shorten life and dishonor God in every way. God wills order, I agree, but does
order require that the laws of motion be violated for evil and that they should be
inviolate for good? Why should man not have the power of arresting the motion
produced by sensible objects in his body, since this motion prevents him from
doing good, drawing closer to God, and restoring him in his duty, and since he
still has the power of doing so much evil in the world by his tongue, his arms,
and the other parts of his body whose motions depend on his will?

Replies
To reply to this objection, it must be noted that man, after he sinned, ought to
have returned to nothingness. a For since he was no longer in a state of order and
could not return to that state, he ought to have ceased to be. God loves only
order; the sinner is not in a state of order; therefore, God does not love the sinner.
The sinner cannot subsist, then, since creatures subsist only because God wills
that they be and because God does not will that they be unless He loves them.
Also, the sinner cannot by himself return to a state of order because he cannot
justify himself, and because everything he can possibly suffer cannot equal his
offense. He should have returned, then, to nothingness. But since it is not
reasonable to think that God should create a work only to annihilate it or to let it
fall into a state worse than nothingness, it is clear that God would not have made
man nor have permitted his sin (which He had foreseen) unless He had the
Incarnation of His Son in view, in whom all things subsist, and by whom the
universe receives a beauty, a perfection and a grandeur worthy ofthe wisdom and
power of its Author.
After his sin, man can be considered as without a Redeemer, but in expectation
of a Redeemer. If he be considered without a Redeemer, we clearly see him to be
incapable of society with God, and to be incapable by himself of the least power
to reconcile himself with God. We also clearly see that God must rebuff him, as
it were, when he would leave the body to join himself to Him, that is, that man
after his sin must lose the power of delivering himself from sensible impressions
and from the impulses of concupiscence. He would even have to be annihilated
for the reasons I have just given. But he awaits a Redeemer. And if we consider
him in expectation of the Redeemer, we see that he must subsist, both him and
his posterity of which this Redeemer must be born, and out of which He must
form His Church, and that thus man after his sin necessarily still maintains the
power of moving in different ways certain parts of the body whose motion might
be useful for his preservation.
True, men constantly abuse their power for producing different kinds of motion, and the power they have, for example, of moving their tongue in different
ways is the cause of an infinite number of evils. But if you take care you will see
that this power is absolutely necessary to maintain society, to console ourselves
in the cares of this present life, and for instruction in religion, which engenders
•sec the second and tilth dialogues of the Coll\"t'r.wtimu· chrt;tic/111<'.'. to which I have already
referred.

Nicolas Malebranche

596

hope for the Liberator for whom the world subsists. If you carefully examine
what kinds of motion we can produce, you will clearly see that God left us power
over our body only to the extent that it is needed to preserve our life and to
maintain civil society. The beating of the heart, for example, the expansion of the
diaphragm, the peristaltic motion of the viscera, the circulation of spirits and
blood, and different kinds of motion of the nerves during the passions, are
produced in us without waiting for orders from the soul. Since these things must
occur in roughly the same way under the same circumstances, nothing obliges
God to place them now under the direction of the will of men. But since the
muscular motion that serves to move the tongue, the arms, and the legs must
almost constantly change according to the almost infinite diversity of good or evil
objects that surround us, this kind of motion had to be dependent upon the will of
men.
Now, it should be noted that God always acts by the simplest means, that the
laws of nature must be general, 8 and that thus having given us the power of
moving our arm and our tongue He cannot strip us of the power of striking a man
unjustly or of libeling him. For if our natural faculties depended on our intentions, there would be no uniformity or rigid rule in the laws of nature, which
nonetheless must be very simple and general in order to be worthy ofthe wisdom
of God and to conform with order. Consequently, God, as a result of these
decrees, prefers to create the material of sin, as the theologians put it, or to be a
part of men's injustice, as one of the prophets puts it,b than to change His
volitions in order to bring the disorders of sinners to a halt. But He retains the
power of being revenged for the unworthy way in which He is treated when He
can do so without going against the immutability of His decrees, that is, when
death having corrupted the body of the carnal, God is no longer under the
self-imposed necessity of providing them with sensations and thoughts related to
it.
First Objection

Against the eleventh and twelfth articles.
Original Sin not only makes man the slave of his body and subject to the
impluses of concupiscence, it also fills him with entirely spiritual vices. Before
baptism, not only is the child's body corrupt but its soul and all its faculties are
also infected by sin. Although the rebellion of the body is the principal vice
among several coarse vices such as intemperance and lewdness, it is not the
cause of the purely spiritual vices such as pride and envy might be. Thus,
Original Sin is something quite different from the concupiscence with which we
are born. It seems to be the privation of original righteousness or grace.
Reply

I grant that children are deprived of original justice, and I even give a proof of
this when I show that they are not born in a state of righteousness and that God
"I have explained providence at greater length in the Dialol(ll<'.< "" Mt•taplty.~"··•·. to which I have
already referred.
""Servire me fecistis in peccatis vestris" lsa. 43:24.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

597

hates them. For it seems to me you cannot give a clearer idea of righteousness
and rectitude than by saying that a will is virtuous when it loves God and that it is
disordered when it is turned toward bodies. But if by original grace or righteousness you mean certain unknown qualities like those with which God is said to
have adorned the soul of the first man in order to make it pleasing in His eyes, it
is also clear that the privation ofthis righteousness is not Original Sin, for strictly
speaking, this privation is not transmitted. If children do not have these qualities,
it is because God does not give them to them; and if God does not give them to
them, it is because they are not worthy of them. It is this unworthiness that,
strictly speaking, is Original Sin.
Now, this unworthiness, which, as I have already shown, consists in the fact
that the inclinations of children are actually corrupt and that their heart is turned
toward bodies that they love, is really in them. It is not the imputation of their
father's sin; they are actually in a state of disorder. Just as those who are justified
through Jesus Christ, of whom Adam was the figure, are not justified through
imputation. They are actually restored to order by inner righteousness different
from the righteousness of Jesus Christ, although only Jesus Christ has merited it
for them.
The soul has only two essential or natural relations, one to God and the other to
its body. Now, it is clear that the relation or union it has with God cannot corrupt
it or make it vicious; therefore, it is corrupt or vicious at the moment it is created
only through the relation it has with its body. Thus, it must be said either that
pride and the other vices we call spiritual can be communicated by the body or
that children are not subject to them at the moment of their birth. I say at the
moment of their birth, for I do not deny that these evil habits are easily acquired.
Although the pure intelligences are related only to God, and at the moment of
their creation were not subject to any vice, they nevertheless fell into a state of
disorder. But this is only because they made ill use of their freedom, while
children have made no use of their freedom, for Original Sin is not voluntary.
But basically I believe that those who think that the rebellion of the body is the
cause only of the coarse vices, such as intemperance, lewdness, and not of those
we call spiritual such as pride and envy, are mistaken in this. I am convinced that
there is a correspondence between the dispositions of our brain and of our soul
such that there cannot be an evil habit in the soul that does not have its source in
the body.
In several places Saint Paul calls law, wisdom, desires, and works of the flesh,
whatever is contrary to the law of the spirit. He does not speak of spiritual vices.
Among the works of the flesh he places8 idolatry, heresies, dissensions, and
several other vices that we call spiritual. According to his teaching, to follow the
impulses of the flesh is to yield to vainglory, anger, and envy. From the way the
apostle expresses himself, it seems that all sin comes from the flesh. Not that the
flesh commits it or that man's spiritual part without the grace or spirit of Jesus
Christ does anything good, but because the flesh acts on man's spiritual part in
such a way that all the evil he does is at its urging. This is how Saint Paul speaks
"Gal. ch. 5 [v.20).

598

Nicolas Malebranche

in the epistle to the Romans [7:22-23]: "I rejoice in the law of God according to
the inner man; but I see in the members of my body another law that struggles
against the law of my spirit, and that makes me a captive under the law of sin that
is in the members of my body.'' And further on [7:25] ''Thus I am myself subject
to the law of God according to the spirit, and to the law of sin according to the
flesh." He speaks in the same way in several other places in his epistles. Thus,
concupiscence or the rebellion of the body leads not only to the vices we call
carnal or disgraceful but also to those we believe to be spiritual. I shall now
attempt to prove this in an intuitive way.
It seems to me certain that when a person is in a group, traces are mechanically
produced in his brain, and motion that generates evil inclinations and thoughts in
his soul is excited in his animal spirits. In these cases our thoughts do not
naturally conform with the truth, and our inclinations do not conform with order;
they are generated in us for the good of the body and ofthe present life because it
is the body that excites them. Thus, they lose for us the presence of God and the
thought of our duty, and they tend only to make other men consider us worthy of
their affection and esteem. This secret pride that is awakened in us on these
occasions is therefore a spiritual vice whose source is the rebellion of the body.
If, for example, the people in our presence are socially important, the brilliance of their grandeur dazzles and deflates us. Since the traces their presence
excites in our brain are sometimes very large and their motion very lively, they
radiate, as it were, throughout our entire body. They are reflected on ourface and
perceptibly indicate respect and fear, and all our most hidden feelings. Then,
through these perceptible expressions of our inner impulses, these traces act on
the person looking at us. They dispose him toward feelings of gentleness and
decency through traces that our fearful or respectful attitude mechanically produce in his brain, which, appearing on his face, remove his former augustness
and give to the rest of his body a stance that then calms our uneasiness and
reassures us. Thus, after several exchanges of perceptible expressions, our attitude finally stabilizes in a state agreeable to the person dominating us.
Now, since every instance of motion in the animal spirits is accompanied by an
impulse of the soul, and since traces in the brain are followed by thoughts in the
mind, it is clear that as we are now deprived of the power of removing these
traces and arresting this motion, we find ourselves moved by the presence of
someone who dominates us, to take part in his desires and feelings, and to devote
all our attention to him, just as he is led to devote his attention to us, although in a
different way. For this reason, worldly conversation awakens and strengthens the
concupiscence of pride, as underhanded dealings, good living, and the enjoyment of sensual pleasures increase carnal concupiscence, which is something that
must be taken note of in morals.
It is a very useful thing for there to be in the brain traces that constantly
represent man to himself so that he will take call! of himself, and for there to be
others that serve to !(>rm and maintain society, because men are not made to live
alone. But since man has lost the power of eliminating these traces at will when
they ought to he removed, they constantly urge him toward evil. Since he cannot

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

599

avoid being represented to himself, he is unceasingly urged to impulses of pride
and vanity, to scorn others, and to make himself the center of all things. And
since he is not the master of the traces that urge him to maintain society with
others, he is urged almost in spite of himself by impulses of complaisance,
flattery, jealousy, and similar inclinations. Thus, all the vices we call spiritual
come as much from the flesh as do lewdness and intemperance.
Not only are there dispositions in our brain that excite sensations and impulses
in us in relation to the propagation of the species and the preservation of life, but
there are perhaps also a great number of dispositions that awaken thoughts and
passions in us in relation to society, our particular concerns as well as the
concerns of our friends. We are joined by nature to all the bodies surrounding us
and through these bodies to everything that is in some way related to us. Now we
can be joined to them only through certain dispositions that are in our brain.
Thus, since we do not have the power of preventing the operation of these natural
dispositions, our union reverses its order of dependence, and we become subject
through our body to all kinds of vices.
We are not pure intelligences. All the dispositions of our soul produce certain
dispositions in our body, as the dispositions of our body excite similar dispositions in our soul. It is not that the soul can receive absolutely nothing except
through the body, but that it is so united to the body that it cannot receive any
change in its modifications without the body also receiving some change. True, it
can be enlightened or receive new ideas without the body necessarily playing
some role; but this is because pure ideas are not modifications of the soul, as I
have proved elsewhere. Here I am only speaking about sensible ideas, for these
ideas involve a sensation, and every sensation is a mode that moves and concerns
the soul.

Second Objection
Against the eleventh and twelfth articles.
If Original Sin is transmitted because of the communication found between the
brain of the mother and that of her child, it is the mother who is the cause of this
sin and the father has nothing to do with it. Yet Saint Paul teaches us that it is
through man that sin has entered into the world. a He does not speak only about
woman. Therefore, etc.

Reply
David asserts that his mother conceived him in iniquity, and Ecclesiasticus
says that sin comes from woman and that it is through her that we are all subject
to death. b Neither one says anything at all about man. Saint Paul, on the contrary, says that it is through man that sin has entered into the world, and says
nothing at all about women. How are these testimonies to be reconciled, and is
""Sicut per unum hnminem peccatum in hunt· mundum intravit," & c. Rnm. 5 (v.l2).
""In iniquitatibus conceptus sum & in peccatis concepit me mater mea ... <Ps. 51:5-corrected. >
"A muliere initium factus est peccati, & per illam omnes mnrimur." F..cclus. 25:23.

600

Nicolas Malebranche

man or woman to be justified if either one or the other is to be justified? In speech
we never attribute to woman something in which she plays no role and which
belongs to man only. But we often attribute to man something that belongs to
woman, because the husband is her lord and master. We see that the evangelists
and even the Blessed Virgin called Saint Joseph the father of Jesus when she said
to her son, Behold your father and myself who have been looking for you: "Ecce
pater tuus & ego dolentes quaerebamus te. " 8 Thus, since Sacred Scripture
assures us that it is through woman that we are all subject to death and to sin, it is
absolutely necessary to believe it; this cannot be blamed on man alone. But
although it assures us in other places that it is through man that sin has entered
into the world, the necessity to believe this is not entirely similar, because what
belongs to woman can be attributed to man. And if we were obliged through faith
to excuse either man or woman, it would be more reasonable to excuse man.
Yet I feel that a strict interpretation must be given of the passages I have just
cited and that both man and woman must be said to be real causes of sin, each in
their own way; woman in that through her sin is communicated (since through her
man begets children), and man because his sin is the cause of concupiscence
(since his action is the cause of the woman's fecundity, or of the communication
between the woman and her child).
It is certain that man makes woman fecund, and, consequently, he is the cause
of the communication found between the mother's body and that of her child,
because this communication is the source of life for children. Now, this communication not only gives the dispositions of the mother's body to the bodies of
her children, it also gives the dispositions of her mind to their mind. We can say
then, as does Saint Paul, that through man sin has entered into the world; but
nonetheless because of this communication it must also be said that sin comes
from woman, that through her we are subject to death, and that our mother has
concei~·ed us in iniquity, as it is put in other places in Scripture.
You will perhaps say that even if man had not sinned, woman would have had
sinful children. For having sinned herself, she would have lost the power God
had given her over her body; and thus, although man should have remained
righteous, she would have corrupted the brain and consequently the mind of her
child because of the communication she had with it.
Certainly, this does not seem likely, for the righteous man could not knowingly give to a woman the wretched fecundity of begetting sinful children. Had
he remained righteous, he would have willed to have children only for God, and
sinful children can never be pleasing to God (nothing is supposed here about a
mediator). I grant, nonetheless, that in this case the marriage was not broken off
and that the man approached the woman. But it is certain that the body of the
woman belonged to her husband. Her body had been drawn from his. There was
but one flesh: "Duo in came una" [Gen. 2:24). It is also certain that the children
belonged as much to the father as to the mother. This being so, I cannot be
persuaded that the woman after her sin should have lost the power she had over
"Luke 2:48.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

601

her body unless her husband had also sinned. For if the woman had been deprived of this power while the husband remained in a state of innocence, there
would have been this disorder in the universe, that a righteous man would have
had a corrupt body and sinful children. Now, it is against order, or, rather, it is a
contradiction, that a righteous God should punish man when he is in a state of
perfect innocence. For this reason, Eve felt no involuntary or rebellious impulses
immediately after her sin. She did not yet feel shame in being seen naked, she did
not conceal herself. Rather, she drew near her husband, although he was naked
like her. Her eyes were not yet opened; she was, as before, the absolute mistress
of her body. Order had it that immediately after her sin her soul was troubled by
the rebellion of her body and by the shame of her and her husband's nakedness;
for it was not just that God should any longer suspend the laws of the communication of motion in her favor, as I have said in the seventh article. But because
her body belonged to her husband, and because her husband was still in a state of
innocence, she received no punishment through this body. This punishment was
deferred until he himself had eaten of the fruit she gave him. It was then that they
both felt the rebellion of their bodies and saw that they were naked, and it was
then that shame forced them to cover themselves with fig leaves. 8 Thus, Adam
must be said to be the real cause of Original Sin and of concupiscence, because
his sin deprived his wife as well as himself of the power they had over their body;
and for lack of this power, woman must be said to produce traces in the brain of
her child that corrupt the soul as soon as it is created. Nevertheless, according to
Saint Augustine, it amounts to the same thing as to whether man or woman
introduced sin into the world: "Sive autem a muliere, sive ab Adam dicatur,
initium factum esse peccati & per illam omnes mori, utrumque ad primum
hominem pertinet: quoniam, sicut novimus; mulier ex viro est, & utriusque caro
una est. "b
First Objection
Against the twelfth article.
It is guessing to say that the communication between the mother's brain and
that of her child is necessary or useful for the formation of the foetus, for there is
no communication between the brain of a hen and that of its chicks, and yet the
chicks are formed perfectly well.
Reply
My reply is that in the seventh chapter of the second book I have given a
sufficient demonstration of this communication through the use I make of it to
explain the generation of monsters and certain natural fears and marks. For it is
clear that a man who falls into a swoon at the sight of a snake because his mother
had been frightened by a snake while she was carrying him in her womb can have
this weakness only bc<.·ause traces like those that are opened up when he sees a
"Gen. ,·h. 3 (vv.ll· II].
11 Aug.

/)e pec·r. mc•r.

c.~ rt.'tn.

602

Nicolas Malebranche

snake were formed in his brain at an earlier time, and because these traces were
accompanied by a similar accident. Thus, I am not making any guesses about this
because I do not venture to give any precise indication of the nature of this
communication. I even believe that the means by which this occurs will always
elude the skills of the cleverest anatomists. I might say that it happens through
the roots that the foetus grows into the womb of the mother and through the
nerves with which this part of the mother seems to be replete. And in doing so, I
would be guessing no more than a man who, never having seen the machines of
the Samaritan pump, would assert that there are wheels and pumps for raising the
water. Yet I believe that guessing is sometimes permitted provided that one
would not pass oneself off as a prophet or speak with too much assurance. I
believe that one is permitted to say what one thinks provided that one does not
claim infallibility or impose upon minds with authoritarian methods or with
scientific terms that impress inattentive readers. It is not always guessing to say
things that are not visible and that are contrary to prejudice, provided that what is
said is well conceived and enters readily into the mind of those who wish to listen
to reason.
I say, then, that by assuming the general laws of the communication of motion
such as they are, it is likely that the particular communication between the
mother's brain and that of her child is necessary so that the child's body might be
formed as it should, or at least that it is necessary so that the child's brain might
receive certain dispositions that should change according to the time and place,
as I explained in the same chapter.
I grant that there is no communication between the brain of a hen and that of a
chick, which is formed in an egg, and that yet the body of chicks is formed
perfectly well. But it should be noted that the chick is further advanced in the egg
when the hen lays it, than is the foetus when it descends in the uterus. This must
be concluded because less time is required to hatch eggs than is required to give
birth to puppies, although given that the womb of a bitch is very warm and her
blood always in motion, the puppies would have to be formed sooner than the
eggs are hatched if the chicks were not more advanced in their eggs than the
puppies in their seeds. Now, it is very likely that this very advanced formation of
the chicken in its egg before being laid has been produced or governed by the
communication I am talking about.
I reply, secondly, that growth in the body of birds perhaps conforms more to
the general law of motion than that of quadruped animals, and that thus the
communication between the mother's brain and that of her little ones is not so
necessary in birds as in other animals. For this communication is necessary, it
would seem, to correct a lack in the general laws, which in certain particular
cases are not sufficient for the formation or growth of animals.
Finally, I reply that the preservation of the life of birds does not require as
many particular dispositions in their brain as in other animals'. They have wings
to flee evil and to catch their prey. They do not need all those particular mechanisms that are the source of the adeptness and docility of certain domestic
animals. Thus, their mother need not train them in many things while forming

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

603

them, or make them capable of being trained by a disposition of the brain toward
docility. Those who train young dogs for hunting sometimes find dogs that stop
naturally solely because of the training they have received from their mother,
who has often hunted while pregnant. We almost always note some difference
among the traces of these animals, and that there are some who are more obedient
and capable of better training than others of the same species. But I do not think
there has ever been a bird that has taught anything so extraordinary to its young,
and that a hen, for example, has ever produced a chick that could do anything
other than what they all do naturally. Birds, then, are not as docile or as capable
of training as other animals. The disposition of their brain is not ordinarily
susceptible to many changes. They do not act through imitation as much as
certain domestic animals. Ducklings led by a hen do not wait for her example to
plunge into water, whereas chicks, on the contrary, do not become accustomed to
swimming although the mother duck that hatched them and leads them around
might swim constantly. But there are animals that readily imitate the unusual
movements they see others performing. Yet I do not claim that you must pause a
great deal over these last reflections; they are not necessary to establish what I
claim.
Second Objection
Against the twelfth article.
It is also guessing to assert that before her sin the mother could have had
communication with her fruit, for there is no necessary relation between our
thoughts and the motion taking place in our brain. Thus, this communication
from the brain of the mother to the brain of the child is useless.
Reply
It is clear that without this communication no exchange at all would be possible between mother and child without a particular miracle. Now, before sin,
order had it that the mother was advised of all the corporeal needs of her child,
and the child was not ignorant of its obligations to its parents. Therefore, since
everything had been in order before sin, and since God always acts in conformity
with order, the mother and child communicated by the means described above.
In order to understand what might have been the nature of this exchange, it
must be remembered that the connection between traces in the brain and the
soul's ideas can occur in several ways, either according to nature or according to
the will of men, or in some other way, as I have already explained in the second
book. 8
When we look at a square or someone suffering pain, we have in our mind the
idea of a square or of a person in distress. This is general to all nations, and the
connection between the ideas and traces is natural. When a Frenchman reads the
word quarre or hears it pronounced, he too has the idea of a square; but the
connection between the sound or the letters of this word and his idea is not
"Ch. 5 of pt. I.

604

Nicolas Malebranche

natural, is not as general to all men. I say, then, that the mother and the child
would have naturally had communication between them concerning everything
that can be represented to the mind by natural connections; that if the mother, for
example, had seen a square, the child, too, would have seen it; and that if the
child had imagined some figure, it would also have awakened the trace of the
same figure in its mother's imagination. But the mother and child would not
naturally have had communication between them about purely spiritual things, or
even about corporeal things if they had conceived them without making use of
their imagination or senses. The mother would have thought about God, or have
heard or read the word quarre, or some other similar word, without the child
being able to discover what thought she had, unless with time she had been able
to establish with it a new exchange of intellectual ideas roughly as nurses do
when they teach children to speak. I shall now explain and prove all this.
It seems to me that through the explanation I have given of the cause of
hereditary aversions and of birthmarks, I have sufficiently proved that mothers'
traces are communicated to their children. Now, the traces of corporeal things are
inseparable from their ideas; therefore, these ideas are also communicated, and
children see, feel, and imagine the same things as their mothers. In spite of
themselves, they now sense what their mothers sense; but if they had not been
sinners, they would have had the power of avoiding at will the effect of the
communication they have with their mothers. For the same reason that we imagine whatever we want when our sensations are not too lively, they would even
have been able to arouse traces in their brain that they had not received from
them. On this supposition it is clear that when the mother was conscious of her
child she was able to discover, by a kind of after-effect, whether or not it
received the impression she excited in it, and even the other things it was
thinking about. For just as the mother could not set the fibers of her brain in
motion without the fibers of the child's thereby receiving an impression, so the
child could not stop this motion or excite some other kind of motion without the
mother realizing, through some mild impression, that it was doing so, provided
that she paid strict attention to it through the power she had of stopping every
disturbance other than the one that her child was exciting in her. Thus, it must be
agreed that the mother and child had a certain communication before sin, or else
the connection from the brain of the one to the brain of the other, or the soul's
power over the body, as I have previously established it, must be denied. This
seems clear enough, although the imagination might boggle at it and prejudice
might be opposed to it. It is true that this communication would have at first been
only for things falling under the senses and the imagination, and that since
children are connected to their mother only through the body, it is not absolutely
necessary that through her they receive ideas other than those of sensible objects.
For, since their soul is closely tied to God, if we consider them without sin, they
immediately receive from Him all ideas not related to the body. But as we are
able with time to attach the most abstract ideas to sensible objects in no way
related to them, the communication of mothers with their children apparently was

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

605

soon extended to the most spiritual things, if they tried to communicate with
them about such matters.
I realize that what I say here will not seem very reasonable to most men and
that even those who struggle against prejudice and the constant effort of sensible
impressions will be surprised by the novelty of these thoughts. But if you carefully consider the way in which a teacher instructs his pupil, if you consider how
many different means he is obliged to make use of in order to show him the ideas
he has of things, the comparisons he makes between them, the ways in which he
judges them, and the other dispositions of his mind with regard to them, you will
see that, but for sin, mothers would have had much less difficulty in revealing
their thoughts and inner dispositions to their children than teachers do to their
pupils, on the single assumption that the traces in the brain of mothers be
stamped in the brain of their children, which seems to me to be evident enough
from what I have just said. For in the final analysis, it can be seen that words and
all external signs we make use of to express our thoughts to other men have the
effect we wish only because they impress in the brain of those listening to us the
same traces and excite the same agitation of spirits as accompany our ideas and
our inner disposition with regard to them.

Objection
Against the seventeenth article and those following it.
It is rash to say that children are justified in baptism by the actual impulses of
their will toward God. There is no room here for novel views; they only amount
to a lot of noise.

Reply
I agree that it should not be stated positively that children are justified through
formal acts of their will. I believe that we do not know anything about this and
that positive assertions should be made only about what we know. I even believe
that the habit of their charity was not preceded by any act of love of God. But as
there are only too many people who are inclined to believe that the justification of
children is only exterior and through imputation because, as they say, they are
incapable of forming any act of Jove of God, I feel that it is appropriate to show
them that this opinion of theirs is mere prejudice. For men's prejudices with
regard to children are such that they ordinarily imagine that they do not think
while in their mother's womb or during their first years, and even that they are
absolutely incapable of doing so. They believe that they do not yet have even the
ideas of things in them, that it is their teachers, rather, who inspire ideas in them
during conversation, and that if they have certain inclinations, they are not of the
same nature as our own and that they cannot lead them to the sovereign good.
Most men do not distinctly understand that the soul of children is like the soul of
older people, that it does not become stronger or more perfect as does the body. 1
And that if it were delivered for a moment from the impression the body makes
on it and were moved by the delight of grace, it would at that moment be purer

606

Nicolas Malebranche

and more enlightened than the souls of the greatest saints, who always experience
in their mind and heart some effects of concupiscence.
Concupiscence is commonly regarded as if it were natural, and it is not always
thought to be a consequence of sin. Thus, we judge unreflectingly that the
stupidity of children is a necessary consequence of the weakness of their bodies,
of their tender years, and even of the incapacity of their mind. Now, this judgment or prejudice is constantly represented to the mind, and it preoccupies it in
such a way as to prevent it from examining the thing in itself. Thus, those who in
past centuries spoke about the effect of baptism did not explain the regeneration
of children through the actual impulses of their heart, not because they based
their judgments on solid reasons that this was not possible (for it seems from their
works that they did not even examine it), but because (as seems rather clear) they
supposed it so and hardly thought about doubting it, or perhaps because they had
no desire to give an explanation that would upset prejudice at a time when not as
much effort was being made to eliminate it as now.
But if you see that it is necessary to give a more precise explanation than is
given, for example, by Saint Augustine in some places (which supports8 imputation, although he elsewhere speaks in a way that does not supportb it); if you
consider that imputation is convenient and that for this reason it seems to have
been accepted by certain ancient and very orthodox theologians,< and that it is
absolutely necessary to those who deny, although unjustifiably, habits in the soul
(and who at the same time deny that children are capable of actuallove)-whom
it is perhaps good to satisfy if we can; finally, if you wish to respect the natural
fairness that prohibits condemning secret intentions, you will perhaps be able to
judge that what I say is not likely. But I do not think that you can complain of
what I say in my attempt to satisfy even the most querulous minds concerning
their difficulties about the transmission and remission of Original Sin, because
the necessity of a Mediator and all religion presuppose the corruption of our
nature by this sin.

"Bk. I De nupt. ch. 25··26, 27; /11 Jul. 1.6 c.l9 ami elsewhere.
21. I. De peccaJorum meritis, c. 19 & alibi.
•Jnnocenl Ill in 3. Decret. de baptismo & ejus effectu. Capite majores. Et in cone. Vienncnsi:
Generali 15. under Clement V.
0 Ep.

ELUCIDATION NINE

On the third chapter of the third part of the second book, in which I speak about
the force of imagination of authors, especially Tertullian.
As I am convinced that the most general and most fruitful source of the errors to
be found in the sciences, and especially in morals, is the impression lively
imaginations make on the mind of men, who are machine- rather than reasondirected, I thought I should illustrate this truth in all the ways that might awaken
minds from their somnolence with respect to it. And because examples strongly
impress us, especially when they involve something great and extraordinary, I
thought that the illustrious names of Tertullian, Seneca, and Montaigne might
excite the attention of readers and sensibly convince them of this contagious
domination of the imagination over reason. For after all, if completely dead
words not animated by the bearing and sensible manner of these famous authors
are still stronger than the reason of certain people, if the tum of expression that
gives only a faint idea of the sensible action that the imagination spreads vividly
across the face and the rest of the body of those penetrated by what they say, can
agitate, penetrate, and convince an infinity of people, then certainly we must
agree that nothing is more dangerous than to listen respectfully to those of a
strong and lively imagination. For their bearing and manner is so strong and
convincing a natural language, and they know how to imbue everything with
such passion, that they almost always rouse the senses and the passions against
reason, and pour, so to speak, conviction and certitude into those looking at
them.
I had foreseen while adducing these great examples that I would not cure those
struck with wonder and admiration on reading these three famous authors. Man
need not be known very well in order to know that wounds received by the brain
heal with greater difficulty than those in other parts of the body, and that it is
easier to heal a wound not exposed to the action of a body that might reopen it
than to perfectly cure certain prejudices that are constantly justifying themselves
through reasons that seem the more probable as they are more sensible.
It is very difficult to close brain traces tightly because they are exposed to the
flow of spirits and can be constantly reopened by an infinity of traces that might
607

608

Nicolas Malebranche

be called ancillary. These sorts of wounds can ordinarily be healed or closed only
when the brain having received other, deeper and contrary traces, a strong and
continual revulsion occurs in the spirits. For it must not be imagined that a
prejudice is entirely cured as soon as we imagine it is because we are not actually
struck by it. A prejudice is entirely cured only when the trace has been tightly
sealed, and not when the spirits begin to cease their flow for some particular
reason.
1 therefore realized that those who had been conquered and laid low by the
force and impulse of Tertullian, carried away and dazzled by the grandeur and
the beauties of Seneca, won over and corrupted by the free and natural ways of
Montaigne would not change their oijinion after reading a few pages of my book.
I judged to the contrary that they would be distressed at my trying to dispel their
enchantment.
But as I hoped these examples would be useful to my purpose for the reasons I
have just given, I thought I should be concerned more with the advantage of
certain people who are without prejudice than with the distress of certain individuals I thought would criticize the liberty I had taken. I considered that there
are few people with such a biased esteem for these authors that there is no longer
any hope for their return to reason. I judged, finally, that as there is perhaps no
one biased with respect to all three together because of the diversity of the
character of their imaginations, even the most opinionated would fmd that I am
right about many things.
I know the respect I should have for the works ofTertullian-as much because
of the subjects he treats as because of the approbation they have had from several
people who should know how to judge them. And I have made this disposition of
my mind sufficiently known by the things I have said about them, and by the
quality of the book De Pallio, of which alone I have spoken freely, although
there were perhaps others better suited to my purpose.
But after all, I do not think time should change or magnify ideas of things, that
all antiquities are venerable, and that false reasons and extravagent ways are
worthy of respect because they were in the world long before us. I do not think
that we should receive preposterous obscurities as sacred mysteries, bursts of
imagination as brilliant lights, the heat of Africa acting in a naturally ardent mind
as the impulses of a prophetic spirit able to pronounce only sublime truths.
1 realize that even those who most respect the works of Tertullian agree with
all this and that they are too fairminded to support the disorders of the imagination against Reason. But perhaps they are like those judicious people who greatly
love truth but who nonetheless are not insensible to manners. For I have often
seen some of them so enthralled with certain powerful, vivid, grand, and magnificent expressions of Tertullian, that aftt:r it was proved to them that this author
was not very judicious or reasonable, all they did was to repeat them to me as if
to surprise me and win me over.
I admit that Tertullian has some extremely strong and bold expressions, and
that they produce very vivid and lively images in the mind, and it is just because
of this that I give him as an example that strong imaginations have a great deal of

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

609

power to agitate and convince by impression. Thus, those who make these sorts
of objection against me confrrm my view as they combat it. The bias and the
esteem they have for Tertullian justify my procedure. The frequent citations and
big words they quote from him prove what I say. For complete arguments from
this author are almost never cited; but strong and lively expressions from him are
often cited in order to dazzle, move, and convince through sensible impression.
It seems to me you should not imagine that I wish to set myself up as a censor
of so many great men who constantly cite Tertullian in the pulpit and elsewhere.
They have their reasons, the examination of which I do not and must not enter. It
seems to me that what I say about this author is clear. Let everyone draw his
conclusions according to his lights, without attributing to me thoughts I do not
have. Those who wish to penetrate the aims of others often fonn ghosts resembling only themselves, for we are wont to spread, as it were, the maliciousness of
our passions over others. We judge everything in relation to ourselves, and those
who condemn me, although they do not realize it, perhaps judge themselves. But
if you wish me to declare myself on quotations from Tertullian, I agree that, for
several reasons, it is right to use them and even that they are sometimes very
useful in illustrating certain practical truths that are sterile and unfruitful as long
as they are in the secret recesses of reason and do not give us impulses contrary to
those the goods of the body excite in us.
Nonetheless, I do not find very unreasonable the opinion of those who believe
authors should be cited by name only when they are infallible and that except in
things where reason has no part, or in which authority must take precedence, no
one should be cited. This used to be the practice of the Fathers. Saint Cyprian
never cited Tertullian, although he took many things from him. And if what Saint
Jerome relates by hearsay of this holy bishop is true, that speaking of Tertullian
he called him his master, the name of Tertullian must not have had much
authority, nor his expressions the force they now have over minds, or else Saint
Cyprian must have followed the practice of his age with surprising rigor. For it is
a strange thing that such a disciple did not speak of his master in any of his
works.
This story of Saint Jerome is commonly used in defense ofTertullian, and I am
sometimes told that I was wrong to speak as I did of a man Saint Cyprian called
his master. But I do not know whether Saint Jerome was not too quick to attest to
what honored Tertullian. It seems he was a bit too favorable toward him, because
he to some extent excused his fall by blaming his heresy on the envy the clergy of
Rome bore him and on the ill treatment he received from them. a But if this story,
which is based only on what Saint Jerome heard from a single person, is true, I
admit that I do not understand the silence Saint Cyprian observes in his writings
with respect to Tertullian. This silence of the disciple manifestly hides some
mystery that is not in the interest of the master. And if the story as well as
Tertullian 's own works did not sufficiently show that he is not entirely worthy of
""Invidia postea. & contumeliis Clericorum Romanae Ecclesiae, ad Montani dogma delapsus. in
multis libris novae pruphetiae meminil." Hieron. in Cata/ogo de script. Eccl. [ch. 53.)

610

Nicolas Malebranche

the high esteem many people have for him, I do not know whether the conduct of
Saint Cyprian, his silence, his style, his procedures would not suffice to diminish
it and to make us think that perhaps the reputation of this author was not too well
established, even in Africa, which ought to have been more favorable to him than
a country as temperate as ours.
France and Africa produce very different minds. The genius of the French
being natural, reasonable, inimical to exaggeration, it is strange that among them
there are those impassioned for an author who does not study or follow nature,
and who, instead of consulting reason, lets himself be carried away by passion
into altogether obscure, monstrous, and ridiculous expressions.
But this is perhaps because the imagination is so strong that it weakens reason
and even changes nature. Indeed, an impassioned man disturbs us and almost
always changes the natural state of our imagination in order to conform it to his
own. And there is then no impulse that does not seem natural, no expression that
is not pleasant, no gibberish that is not convincing; for we do not examine them
carefully. Now, since the passions justify themselves, and since disordered imaginings are pleasing only in their disorder, we cannot judge soundly of things as
long as the brain preserves the violent impression it has received. There is not an
impassioned man who is not concerned to justify the passion animating him;
there is not a disturbed man who does not take pleasure in his disturbance. For if
those who imagine they have become cocks, wolves, and oxen take extreme
pleasure in the actions these animals customarily perform, although they are
completely contrary to the nature of man, it can easily be judged that we are far
from condemning the behavior of those who through the contagion of their
imagination have made us to some extent like them; for in condemning them we
realize that we would condemn ourselves.
There is a special reason why certain of the learned pride themselves in being
followers of Tertullian and express an extraordinary respect for this author. It is
the obscurity he affects as one of the principal rules of his rhetoric.
We nowadays call gibberish all expressions devoid of sense and all confused
and obscure ways of speaking; but there were people whoa regarded obscurity as
one of the greatest secrets of eloquence, and among whom the art of persuasion
in part consisted of making oneself unintelligible.
If those who speak in public always had clear and distinct ideas of the truths
they would persuade us of, and if they spoke only to people capable of enough
attention to understand them, the precept of affecting obscurity in discourse
would be ridiculous in every respect. But though this precept is absolutely
contrary to reason, it might be said to be sufficiently tailored to the mentality of
most men, not only because it hides the ignorance of those speaking, but also
because mysterious obscurity excites in many people sensations that dispose
them to yield and to let themselves be convinced.
Experience sufficiently shows that most men esteem what they do not understand, that they revere as mysteries everything that surpasses them, and that
•sec Quintilian lnst. oral. I. H. C. 2.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

611

they feel an orator has performed wonders when he has dazzled them with a
brilliant display and a language of the imagination in which reason has no part.
The inclination men have for grandeur is greater than that which they have for
truth. Thus, the pompous gibberish that persuades through impression is better
received than pure reasoning, which can persuade only through its evidence.
Evidence is acquired only by reflection costing some labor to those making it, but
sensible conviction spreads out in the soul and penetrates it in a very pleasant
way.
The good that alone can satisfy us is at once both infinite and inaccessible, and
grand and obscure expressions bear its mark. As a result, since obscurity excites
our desires as grandeur excites our wonder and esteem, these expressions win us
over by the impulses they produce in us.
When we know, or think we know, a difficult and obscure author, we esteem
ourselves more than those who do not know him; and we sometimes regard them
as ignorant. The labor spent in understanding him biases us in his defense. We
justify our studies when we revere him and make others revere him. And as we
find pleasure in justifying ourselves, we must not fail to praise him and to defend
him eagerly in a lively and sensible way.
These reasons, and others less strong, suffice, it would seem, to illustrate that
the obscurity of Tertullian is not detrimental to him in the mind of some people,
and that they clearly would not have had as much admiration for him if the truths
scattered through his works were reduced to their simplest and clearest terms.
We always reduce mathematical truths and ratios to their exponents, i.e., the
simplest terms expressing them, and we free them from everything that might
confuse and obscure them, for geometers love the pure truth; they do not wish to
convince by impression, but by evidence and light. What would become of many
of Tertullian's thoughts if we reduced them to their exponents according to the
rules of the geometer logicians, and if we had thus stripped them of the sensible
ostentation that dazzles reason? We should perform this experiment if we wish to
judge solidly the reasoning of this author.
Nonetheless, I do not claim that Tertullian should have written as a geometer.
Figures expressing our sensations and impulses with regard to the truths we
expose to others are absolutely necessary. And I believe that especially in
discourse about religion and morality we must use adornments that might procure
for the truth all the respect due it and impulses that might move the soul and lead
it to virtuous action. But we must not adorn a phantom without body or reality;
we must not excite useless impulses. And if we wish to effectually impress
conviction and certitude in those listening to us, this conviction must relate to
something true and solid. We must not convince someone nor let ourselves be
convinced without knowing clearly, distinctly, and precisely what we are convincing or being convinced of. We must know what we say, we must know what
we believe. We must love only truth and light, and must not strike others with
blindness after having let ourselves be struck with it.

ELUCIDATION TEN

On the nature of ideas, in which I explain how all things, eternal laws, and
truths, are seen in God.
I hoped that what I said about the nature of ideas would have been enough to
show that it is God who enlightens us, but experience has taught me that there are
many people who are incapable of sufficiently close attention to understand the
arguments that I have given for this principle. What is abstract is incomprehensible to most men. Only what is sensible awakens them, and fixes and sustains
their mind's perception. They cannot consider and hence cannot understand what
does not come under the senses or the imagination. This is something that I have
said often, but that bears repetition.
It is evident that bodies are not visible by themselves and that they cannot act
on our mind or represent themselves to it. This needs no proof-it can be seen
through simple perception with no need of reasoning, for the slightest attention of
the mind to the clear idea of matter suffices to show it. This is infinitely more
certain than that bodies communicate their motion when they collide; but it is
certain only to those who silence their senses in order to listen to their reason.
Thus, everyone believes, though utterly without foundation, that bodies can
move one another, because the senses say so; but no one believes that bodies are
by themselves entirely invisible and incapable of acting on the mind, because the
senses do not say so and seem to say the contrary.
Nonetheless, there are some people whose firm and steadfast reason rises to
the most abstract of truths; they meditate attentively and they courageously resist
the impression of their senses and imagination. But the body gradually weighs
down the mind, and they fall back. These ideas vanish, and as the imagination
stirs up livelier and more sensible ideas, the ideas of abstract truths then seem to
be only wraiths exciting fear and mistrust.
We are easily led to mistrust people or things with which we are unfamiliar, or
which do not afford us some sensible pleasure, for it is pleasure that wins the
heart and familiarity that calms the uncertain mind. Thus, those who are unaccustomed to abstract or metaphysical truths are easily persuaded that we are trying
only to lead them ac;tray when we would enlighten them. With mistrust and with
612

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

613

a kind of loathing do they look at non-pleasant, non-sensible ideas, and the Jove
they have for repose and felicity soon delivers them from this troubling perception that seems incapable of satisfying them.
If the question before us were not of the greatest importance, the reasons 1
have just given (as well as certain others I need not relate) would preclude further
discussion-for I can see that whatever I might say on this topic will never
penetrate the minds of certain people. But it seems to me that the principle that
only God enlightens us, and that He enlightens us only through the manifestation
of an immutable and necessary wisdom or reason so conforms to religion, and
furthermore, that this principle is so absolutely necessary if a sound and unshakable foundation is to be given to any truth whatsoever, that I feel myself under an
indispensible obligation to explain and defend it as much as I possibly can. I
prefer to be called a visionary, or one of the Illuminati, or any ofthe lovely things
with which the imagination (always sarcastic in insignificant minds) usually
answers arguments it does not understand and against which it is defenseless,
than to agree that bodies can enlighten me, that I am my own master, reason, and
light, and that in order to be well-versed in anything I need only consult myself or
other men who can perhaps fill my ears with noise, but who certainly cannot fill
my mind with light. Here, then, are several more arguments for the view I
proposed in the chapters on which I am now writing.
No one disagrees that all men can know the truth, and even the least enlightened of philosophers agree that man participates in a certain Reason that
they do not determine. This is why they define man as animal RATIONIS
particeps; for everyone knows, at least in confused fashion, that man's essential
difference consists in the necessary union he has with universal Reason (although
it is not generally known who it is who contains this Reason, and little effort is
made to find out). 8 I see, for example, that twice two is four, and that my friend
is to be valued more than my dog; and I am certain that no one in the world does
not see this as well as I. Now, I do not see these truths in the mind of other
people, just as other people do not see them in mine. There must, therefore, be a
universal Reason that enlightens me and all other intelligences. For if the reason I
consult were not the same that answers the Chinese, it is clear that I could not be
as certain as I am that the Chinese see the same truths as I do. Thus, the Reason
we consult when we withdraw into ourselves is a universal Reason. I say, when
we withdraw into ourselves, because I am not here talking about the reason
followed by a man in passion. When a man values the life of his horse more than
the life of his coachman, he has his reasons for doing so; but they are particular
reasons that every reasonable man abhors. They are reasons that at bottom are
unreasonable, because they do not conform with Sovereign Reason, or the
Universal Reason that all men consult.
I am certain that the ideas of things are immutable, b and that eternal laws and
""Si ambo videmus verum esse quod dieis, & ambo videmus verum esse quod dieo, ubi quaeso id
videmus? Nee ego utique in te, nee tu in me, sed ambo in ipsa quae supra mentes nostms est
ineommutabili veritate." Con( of St. Aug. bk. 12. eh. 25.
bSee Aug. Dr /ihrro arbitrio. bk. 2. eh. 8 ff.

614

Nicolas Malebranche

truths are necessary -it is impossible that they should not be as they are. Now, I
see nothing in me of a necessary or immutable nature-1 am able not to be, or not
to be such as I am; there might be minds unlike me, yet I am certain that there can
be no mind that sees truths and laws different from those I see-for every mind
necessarily sees that twice two is four, and that one's friend is to be valued more
than one's dog. It must be concluded, then, that the reason consulted by all minds
is an immutable and necessary Reason.
Furthermore, it is evident that this Reason is infinite. The mind of man clearly
conceives that there are, or can be, infinite numbers of intelligible triangles,
tetragons, pentagons, and other such figures. Not only does it conceive that it
will never lack for ideas of figures, and that it will always discover new ones,
even if it were to attend only to these kinds of ideas for all eternity; it even
perceives infinity in extension, for the mind cannot doubt that its idea of space is
inexhaustible. The mind clearly sees that the number which when multiplied by
itself produces 5, or any of the numbers between 4 and 9, 9 and 16, 16 and 25,
and so on, is a magnitude, a proportion, a fraction whose terms have more
numbers than could stretch from one of the earth's poles to the other. The mind
sees clearly that this proportion is such that only God could comprehend it, and
that it cannot be expressed exactly, because to do so, a fraction both of whose
terms were infinite would be required. I could relate many such examples demonstrating not only that the mind of man is limited but also that the Reason he
consults is infinite. For, in short, the mind clearly sees the infinite in this
Sovereign Reason, although he does not comprehend it. In a word, the Reason
man consults must be infmite because it cannot be exhausted, and because it
always has an answer for whatever is asked of it.
But if it is true that the Reason in which all men participate is universal, that it
is infinite, that it is necessary and immutable, then it is certainly not different
from God's own reason, for only the infinite and universal being contains in itself
an infinite and universal reason. All creatures are particular beings; universal
reason, therefore, is not created. No creature is infinite; infinite reason, therefore, is not a creature. But the reason we consult is not only infinite and
universal, it is also independent and necessary, and in one sense, we conceive it
as more independent than God Himself. For God can act only according to this
reason; He depends on it in a sense-He has to consult and follow it. Now, God
consults only Himself and depends on nothing. This reason, therefore, is not
different from Himself.; it is, therefore, coeternal and consubstantial with Him. We
see clearly that God cannot punish innocence, that He cannot subject minds to
bodies, that He is constrained to observe order. We see, then, the rule, the order, the
reason of God-for what wisdom other than God's could we see when we dare to
say that God is constrained to follow it?
But, after all, is any wisdom other than God's conceiveable? Does Solomon,
who describes it so well, distinguish two kinds of wisdom? Does he not teach us
that the wisdom that is coetemal with God Himself and by which He established
the order we see in His works is the same wisdom that presides over all minds
and is consulted in the legislation of just and reasonable laws. One need only read

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

615

the eighth chapter of Proverbs to be convinced of this truth. I know that Sacred
Scripture speaks of a certain wisdom it calls the wisdom of the age, the wisdom
of men. But this is because it speaks of things according to appearance, or in a
popular vein, for elsewhere it teaches us that this wisdom is but folly and
abomination, not only before God, but before all men who consult Reason.
Surely, if eternal laws and truths depended on God, if they had been established by a free volition of the Creator, in short, if the Reason we consult were
not necessary and independent, it seems evident to me that there would no longer
be any true science and that we might be mistaken in claiming that the arithmetic
or geometry of the Chinese is like our own. For in the final analysis, if it were not
absolutely necessary that twice four be eight, or that the three angles of a triangle
be equal to two right angles, what assurance would we have that these kinds of
truths are not like those that are found only in certain universities, or that last
only for a certain time? Do we clearly conceive that God cannot stop willing what
He has willed with an entirely free and indifferent will? Or rather, do we clearly
see that God could not have willed certain things, for a certain time, for a certain
place, for certain people, or for certain kinds of beings-given, as some would
have it, that He was entirely free and indifferent in His willing? As for me, I can
conceive no necessity in indifference, nor can I reconcile two things that are so
opposite.
Yet I will suppose that we clearly see that God through an entirely indifferent
will has established eternal laws and truths for all times and for all places, and
that they are now immutable because of His decree. But where do men see this
decree? Has God created some being representative of this decree? Will they say
that this decree is a modification of their soul? They clearly see this decree, for
they have learned from it that immutability attaches to eternal laws and truths; but
where do they see it? Certainly, unless they see it in God, they do not see it; for
this decree can be only in God, and it can be seen only where it is. Philosophers
can be certain of nothing, then, unless they consult God and He answers them.
Their protests here are in vain-they must either submit or remain silent.
But at bottom, this decree is an unfounded product of the imagination. When
we think about order and eternal truths and laws, we do not naturally seek their
cause, for they have none. We do not clearly see the necessity of this decree, nor
do we immediately think about it-rather, we see with evidence through simple
perception that the nature of numbers and of intelligible ideas is immutable,
necessary, and independent. We clearly see that it is absolutely necessary that
twice four be eight and that the square of the diagonal of a square be double that
square. If anyone doubts the absolute necessity of these truths, it is because he
looks away from their light, reasons on some false premiss, and seeks their
nature, immutability, and independence elsewhere than in the truths themselves.
Thus, the decree of immutability for these truths is a fiction of the mind, which,
supposing that it does not see what it perceives in God's wisdom, and knowing
that God is the cause of all things, feels itself constrained to imagine a decree in
order to ascribe immutability to certain truths it cannot fail to recognize as
immutable. But the supposition is false and must be guarded against. Only in the

616

Nicolas Malebranche

wisdom of God do we see eternal, immutable, and necessary truths. Nowhere
else but in this wisdom do we see the order that God Himself is constrained to
follow, as I have just indicated. The mind is created only for this wisdom, and in
a certain sense the mind can see only it; for if the mind can see creatures, it does
so only because He whom it sees (though in a very imperfect way during this life)
comprehends all creatures in the immensity of His being in an intelligible fashion
suited to the mind, as I have indicated elsewhere.
It seems clear to me that if we did not have within us the idea of the infmite,
and if we did not see everything through the natural union of our soul with
infinite and universal Reason, we would not be free to think about all things. For
the mind can will to apply itself only to the things of which it has some idea, and
it now has the power to think about only those things to which it can will to apply
itself. Thus, man is stripped of his freedom to think about all things if his mind is
severed from Him who contains all things. Furthermore, given that we can love
only what we see, it is clear that if God gave us only particular ideas He would
determine all the impulses of our will in such a way that we could love only
particular beings. For in the final analysis, if we did not have an idea of the
infinite, we could not love it; and if those who assert that they have no idea of
God spoke the truth, I would not hesitate in saying that they never have loved
God, for it appears to me quite certain that one can love only what one sees.
Finally, if order and eternal laws were not immutable by the necessity of their
nature, the foundation of the clearest and strongest arguments of religion would
seemingly be destroyed, as well as freedom and the most certain of the sciences.
For it is certain that the Christian religion, which offers us the mediation and
reparation of Jesus Christ, assumes the corruption of nature by Original Sin.
Now, what proof can we have of this corruption? The flesh struggles against the
mind, you will say, the flesh subjugates and dominates the mind. I agree. But
this, a libertine will answer, is no disorder. It pleases God, He has ordained it
thus, He is the master of His decrees, He establishes whatever order pleases Him
amongst His creatures. How will you prove to him that it is a disorder for minds
to be subordinated to bodies unless you have a clear idea of order and its
necessity, unless you know that God Himself is constrained to follow this order
by the necessary love He bears for Himself? Besides, if this order depends on
God's free decree, it will always be necessary to call upon God to learn of His
decree; God will always have to be consulted (in spite of the disliking certain
learned people have for appealing to Him); we shall have to yield to this truth,
that our instruction depends upon God. But this free decree that caused order is,
for the reasons I have already given, a fiction of the mind.
If it is not a necessary order according to which man be made for his Author
and that our will conform to the order that is the essential and necessary rule of
God's will, if it is not true that actions are good or evil as they conform or not
with an immutable and necessary order and that this same order requires that the
former be rewarded and the latter punished, finally, if all men do not naturally
have a clear idea of order, but an order that is such that God Himself cannot will
otherwise than as this order prescribes (because God cannot will disorder), then

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

617

surely I can see nothing but universal confusion. For how could we criticize the
most infamous and most immoral actions of pagans to whom God has not given
any laws? What reason will dare to judge them if there is no sovereign reason that
condemns them, if there is no immutable order or indispensable law according to
which they should be judged?
There was a poet3 who said that it is impossible to distinguish what is moral
from what is immoral. There was a philosopher" who said that it is a weakness to
be ashamed of infamous actions. Similar paradoxes are often proposed as a result
of a heated imagination or in a fit of passion. But why will you condemn these
opinions unless there is an order, a rule, a universal and necessary reason, that is
always present to those who know how to retreat within themselves. In many
instances we have no hesitation in judging ourselves and others, but by what
authority do we act unless the Reason that judges in us when it seems to us that
we pronounce judgments against ourselves and others is sovereign over us and all
other men?
But if this Reason were not present to those who retreat within themselves, and
if pagans too were not naturally united to some extent with the immutable order I
am speaking of, what sin or what disobedience would they have been guilty of,
and according to what justice would God punish them? I say this because there is
a prophet" who tells me that God Himself wills men to be His arbiter between
Him and His people provided that they judge them according to the immutable
and necessary order of justice. Nero killed his mother, granted. But in what did
his evil consist? He followed the natural impulse of his hatred. In no way did God
forbid him in this. The law of the Jews was not given to him. Perhaps you will
say that the natural law prohibits such actions and that this law was known to
him. But what proof have you of this? For my part, I agree, because this indeed is
an irresistible proof that there is a necessary and immutable order and that every
mind knows this order more clearly as it is more closely joined to the universal
reason and as it is less sensible to the impressions of its senses and passions-in
short, as it is more reasonable. But I must now explain as clearly as I can the
view I have of order and the divine or natural law, for the difficulty in agreeing
with what I say perhaps springs from failing to perceive distinctly my thought.
It is certain that God contains within Himself in an intelligible fashion the
perfection of all the beings He has created or can create, and that through these
intelligible perfections He knows the essence of all things, as through His volitions He knows their existence. Now, these perfections are also the human
mind's immediate object (for the reasons I have already given). Therefore, the
intelligible ideas or perfections that are in God and that represent to us what is
external to God are absolutely immutable and necessary. Now, truths are but
relations of equality or inequality between these intelligible beings (since it is
true that twice two is four or that twice two is not five only because there is a
•'"Nee natura potest justo secemere iniquum.'' lucretius. [Horace; Satirrs l, 3, v.II3.J
0 Diogenes.
<''Nunc ergo habitatores Jerusalem & viri Judajudicate inter me & vineam meam.'' lsa. 53 [5:3).

618

Nicolas Malebranche

relation of equality between twice two and four, and one of inequality between
twice two and five). Truths, therefore, as well as ideas, are necessary and
immutable. It has always been true that twice two is four and this cannot become
false. This is clear, without it being necessary that God as sovereign legislator
has established these truths, a as Descartes has asserted in his reply to the sixth
objections against his metaphysical meditations.
We understand easily enough what truth is, but we have some difficulty in
conceiving what the necessary and immutable order is, or what the natural and
divine law is that God necessarily wills and that the righteous likewise will. For
what makes a man moral is that he loves order and conforms his will to it in all
things-just as the sinner is such only because he does not find order pleasing in
all things and because he would have order conform to his own wishes. Yet it
seems to me that these things are not as mysterious as might be imagined, and 1
think the reason why they are found so troublesome comes from the mind's
difficulty in raising itself up to abstract and metaphysical thoughts. Here, then,
are some of my thoughts on order.
It is evident that the perfections in God that represent created or possible
beings are not all equal insofar as they represent these beings, and that those, for
example, that represent bodies are not as noble as those that represent minds, and
furthermore, that even among those that represent only bodies or only minds,
there are infinite degrees of perfection. All this is easily and clearly conceived,
although there is a great deal of difficulty in reconciling the Divine Being's
simplicity with this variety of intelligible ideas that He contains in His wisdom.
For it is clear that if all God's ideas were in every sense equal, He could not
distinguish among His works, since He sees His creatures only in what in Him
represents them, and if the idea of a watch that shows, besides the hour, all the
different motions of the planets were not more perfect than the idea of a watch
that shows only the hour, or than the idea of a circle or of a square, then a watch
would not be more perfect than a circle. For one can judge the perfection of
works only through the perfection of the ideas one has of them; and if there were
no more intelligence or mark of wisdom in a watch than in a circle, there would
be no greater difficulty in conceiving the most complex machines than in conceiving a square or a circle.
If it is true, then, that God, who is the universal Being, contains all beings
within Himself in an intelligible fashion, and that all these intelligible beings that
have a necessary existence in God are not in every sense equally perfect, it is
clear that there will be a necessary and immutable order among them, and that
just as there are necessary and eternal truths because there are relations of
magnitude among intelligible beings, there must also be a necessary and immutable order because of the relations of perfection among these same beings. An
immutable order has it, then, that minds are more noble than bodies, as it is a
necessary truth that twice two is four, or that twice two is not five.
So far, order seems to be more of a speculative truth than a necessary law. For
"Art. 6 and !!.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

619

if we consider order as we have just done, we clearly see, for example, that it is a
truth that minds are more noble than bodies, but we do not see that this truth is at
the same time an order that has the force of law and that we are obliged to prefer
minds to bodies. It must be considered, then, that God loves Himself with a
necessary love, and that thus He loves what in Him represents or contains greater
perfection more than what contains less-so much so that if we wish to suppose
an intelligible mind to be a thousand times more perfect than an intelligible body,
the love by which God loves Himself would necessarily be a thousand times
greater for the intelligible mind than for the intelligible body; for God's love is
necessarily proportionate to the order among the intelligible beings He contains,
since He necessarily loves His own perfections. As a result of this, the order that
is purely speculative has the force of law with regard to God Himself, given, as is
certainly the case, that God necessarily loves Himself and that He cannot contradict Himself. Furthermore, God cannot love intelligible bodies more than
intelligible minds, although He can love created bodies more than minds, as I
shall soon show.
Now, this immutable order that has the force of law with regard to God
Himself clearly has the same force with regard to us. For, since God has created
us in His image and likeness, He cannot will that we love more what deserves to
be loved less-He wills that our will conform with His and that here below we
freely and hence meritoriously render things the justice that He necessarily renders them. His law, the immutable order of His perfections, is therefore also
ours; and this order is not unknown to us, and even our natural love excites us to
follow it when we retreat within ourselves and our senses and passions leave us
free-in short, when our self-love does not corrupt our natural love. Given that
we are made for God and cannot be entirely separated from Him, we see this
order in Him and we are naturally led to love it, for it is His light that illumines us
and His love that animates us (although our senses and passions obscure this light
and tum the impression we have for loving Him according to this order against
order itself). However, in spite of concupiscence, which conceals order from us
and prevents us from following it, order is always a law that is essential and
without exception with regard to us, and not only with regard to us but to all
created intelligences and even the damned-for I do not think that they are so
removed from God that they do not yet have some faint idea of order in which
they find some beauty and that they are not perhaps even ready to conform
themselves to it in certain particular cases where their self-love is not at stake.
Corruption of the heart consists in opposition to order. Therefore, given that
the evil or the corruption of will is not equal even among the damned, it is clear
that they are not equally opposed to order, and that they do not detest it in
everything, unless they do so as a result of their hatred of God. For just as one
cannot detest the good considered simply as such, one can detest order only when
it seems to be contrary to our inclinations. But even if it should appear contrary to
our inclinations, it still remains for us a law that condemns and even punishes us
by a worm that never dies [Mark 9:44).
Perhaps, then, we can now sec the nature of the immutable order of justice and

620

Nicolas Malebranche

how this order has the force of law through the necessary love that God has for
Himself. We can conceive how this law is universal for all minds as well as for
God Himself, why it is necessary and absolutely without exception. We can see
clearly (provided that what I have just said is seriously considered) that to
maintain that ideas that are eternal, immutable, and common to all intelligences,
are only perceptions or momentary particular modifications of the mind, is to
establish Pyrrhonism and to make room for the belief that what is moral or
immoral is not necessarily so, which is the most dangerous error of all. Finally,
we can easily conceive in general that this law, the immutable order, is the
principle of all human and divine laws, and that it is according to this law that all
intelligences are judged and all creatures given the rank they deserve.
I admit that it is not easy to explain all this in detail, and I shall not risk the
undertaking. For if my intention were to show the connection between certain
particular laws and the general law, or between certain ways of behaving and
order, I would necessarily become involved in difficulties that I could not
perhaps resolve, and that would lead me far from my topic.
Nonetheless, if you consider that God has not and cannot have any law other
than His wisdom and the necessary love He has for it, you will easily judge that
all the divine laws must depend on it. And if you take note that He created the
world only in relation to this wisdom and love (since He acts only for Himself),
you will have no doubt that all natural laws must tend to the preservation and
perfection of this world according to indispensable order and depending upon
necessary love-for the wisdom and will of God rule all things.
I need not explain this principle at greater length. What I have said is enough
for the following conclusion, that as nature was first instituted, minds could not
have been subordinated to bodies. For since God cannot act in ignorance and in
spite of Himself, He created the world according to wisdom and through the
impulse of His love-He made all things through His Son and in the Holy Spirit
as Scripture teaches us. Now, in the wisdom of God, minds are more perfect than
bodies; and as a result ofthe necessary love that God has for Himself, He prefers
the more perfect to the less perfect. Thus, minds could not have been subordinated to bodies as nature was first instituted. Otherwise we would have to say
that in creating the world God did not follow the direction of His eternal wisdom,
nor the impulses of His natural and necessary love, which is inconceiveable and
which even contains a manifest contradiction.
It is true that the created mind is now subordinated to the body, but this is
because order considered as a necessary law would have it so. This is because
God, whose self-love is a necessary love and is always His inviolable law, cannot
love minds that arc opposed to Him; consequently, He cannot prefer them to
bodies in which there is nothing that is evil or that He hates. For God does not
love sinners in themselves; they subsist in the universe only through Jesus Christ.
God preserves and loves them only so that they might cease being sinners
through the grace of Jesus Christ, or, if they remain sinners eternally, so that they
might he eternally condemned by the immutahle and necessary order and by the

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

621

judgment of Jesus Christ (through whose power they subsist for the glory of
divine justice, for without Jesus Christ they would be annihilated). I mention this
in passing to remove certain difficulties that might remain from what I said
elsewhere about Original Sin or the general corruption of nature.
It seems to me worthwhile to point out that the mind knows objects in only two
ways: through illumination [par lumiere] and through sensation. It sees things
through illumination when it has a clear idea of them, and when by consulting
this idea it can discover all the properties of which these things are capable. It
sees things through sensation when it finds no clear idea of these things in itself
to be consulted, when it is thus unable to discover their properties clearly, and
when it knows them only through a confused sensation, without illumination and
without evidence. Through illumination and through a clear idea, the mind sees
numbers, extension, and the essences of things. Through a confused idea or
through sensation, it judges about the existence of creatures and knows its own
existence.
The things the mind preceives through illumination or through a clear idea it
perceives in very perfect fashion, and it even sees clearly that whatever obscurity
or imperfection there is in its knowledge is due to its own weakness and limitation or some lack of attentiveness on its part, and not to the imperfection of the
idea it perceives. But what the mind perceives through sensation is never clearly
known to it, not because of some lack of attentiveness on its part (for we always
attend closely to what we sense), but because of the inadequacy of the idea,
which is extremely obscure and confused.
From this we can judge that it is in God or in an immutable nature that we see
all that we know by means of illumination or clear idea-not only because
through illumination we see only numbers, extension, and the essences ofthings,
which do not depend on a free act of God, as I have already pointed out, but also
because we know these things in very perfect fashion, and because we would
even know them in an infinitely perfect fashion if our capacity for thought were
infinite, since nothing is lacking to the idea representing them. We must also
conclude that everything we know through sensation is seen in itself. However,
this is not to say that we can produce in ourselves any new modification, or that
our soul's sensations or modifications can represent objects upon whose occasion
God excites them in us, but only that our sensations (which are in no way
different from us, and which as a result can never represent anything different
from ourselves) can, nonetheless, represent the existence of beings or, rather,
make us judge that they exist. For as God, upon the presence of objects, excites
our sensations in us through an insensible action that we do not perceive, we
imagine that we receive from the object not only the idea that represents its
essence but also the sensation that makes us judge that it exists -for there is
always a pure idea and a confused sensation in the knowledge we have of the
existence of beings, the knowledge of God and of our soul excepted. I exclude
the existence of God. which we know through a pure idea and without sensation.
because His existence depends on no cause and is contained in the idea of an

622

Nicolas Malebranche

infinite and necessary being, for as I have proved elsewhere, a if He is thought of,
He must exist. I also exclude the existence of our soul, because we know through
inner sensation that we think, will, and perceive, and because we have no clear
idea of our soul, as I have sufficiently explained in the seventh chapter of the
second part of the third book and elsewhere.
Here are some of the arguments that can be added to those I have already given
to prove that only God enlightens us and that the immediate and direct object of
our clear and evident knowledge is an immutable and necessary nature. Several
objections are commonly raised against this view; I shall now try to answer them.
Objections
Against what has been said: that only God enlightens us and that we see all
things in Him.
First Objection

Our soul thinks because of its nature. In creating it, God gave it the faculty of
thinking and it needs nothing more; but if it does need something, let us stick to
what experience teaches us about our senses, i.e., that they are the cause of our
ideas. To argue against experience is a bad way of philosophizing.
Reply

I am amazed that the Cartesian gentlemen who so rightly reject the general
tenns nature and faculty should so willingly employ them on this occasion. They
criticize those who say that fire bums by its nature or that it changes certain
bodies into glass by a natural faculty, and yet some of them do not hesitate to say
that the human mind produces in itself the ideas of all things by its nature,
because it has the faculty of thinking. But, with all due respect, these terms are
no more meaningful in their mouth than in the mouth of the Peripatetics. True,
our soul is what it is by its nature and necessarily perceives what affects it, but
God alone can act on it; He alone can illuminate it, affect it, or modify it through
the efficacy of His ideas.
I realize that the soul can think, but I also know that extension can have
figures; the soul is capable of volition as matter is of motion. But just as it is false
that matter, although capable of figure and motion, has in itself a power, a
faculty, a nature by which it can move itself or give itself a figure that is now
round, now square, so it is false that the soul, although naturally and essentially
capable of knowledge and volition, has any faculties by which it can produce in
itself its own ideas or its own impulse toward the good,b for it necessarily wishes
to be happy. There is a big difference between being mobile and moving oneself.
Matter is by its nature mobile and capable of figure; it cannot even subsist
without figure. But it cannot move itself, it cannot shape itself. and lacks a
faculty to do so. The mind is hy its nature capable of impulses and ideas, I agree.
"Rk. 4, <"h. II
opposed to particular goods; sec the first Elucidation.

1 'A~

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

623

But it cannot move itself, it cannot enlighten itself-it is God who works everything of a material nature in minds as well as in bodies. Can it be said that God
works the changes that take place in matter but not those that take place in the
mind? Is it to render to God His due to leave these latter beings to their own
devices? Is He not equally the master of all things? Is He not the creator,
preserver, and true mover of minds as well as of bodies?
But if you would have it that creatures have the faculties they are ordinarily
conceived to have, a or that natural bodies be said to have a nature that is the
principle of their motion and rest (as Aristotle and his followers would have it),
all my ideas would be overthrown. But I would rather agree to this than to say
that the mind enlightens itself, or that the soul has the power to move the
members of its body in various ways and to communicate to them feeling and
life, or that it is the soul that gives heat to the blood, motion to the spirits, and its
size, disposition, and figure to the rest of the body -1 would rather all this than
to say that the mind gives itself its own impulse and light. If God does not do all
things, let Him do at least what is greatest and most perfect in the universe. And
if creatures do something, let them move bodies and order them as they will, but
let them not act on minds.
Let us say that bodies move each other after being moved themselves, or,
rather, let us ignore the cause of these different dispositions of matter, which
does not concern us. But let our J;llinds not be ignorant of Him from whom their
enlightenment comes, the Reason to which they are essentially related, the
Reason that is spoken about so much and understood so little. Let our minds
know Him from whom they receive everything capable of making them happier
and more perfect, and let them realize the full extent of their dependence on God,
who continually gives them all that they now have, for as a great saint says in
another context, b it is culpable pride to use the things that God gives us as if they
were natura/to us. Above all, let us not imagine that the senses instruct reason,
or that the body enlightens the mind, or that the soul receives from the body what
it itself lacks. It is better to believe that one is self-dependent than truly dependent on bodies; it is better to believe oneself one's own master than to seek one's
master among creatures that have no value to us. But it is best to accede to the
eternal truth, which assures us in the gospel that only it is our teacher,< than to
rely on the reports of our senses or of men who dare to speak to us as our
teachers. Experience, whatever is to be said of it, does not encourage prejudice,
for our senses are but the occasional causes of God's action on us. Our teachers
are only prompters -they too are but the occasional causes of the instruction that
eternal wisdom gives us in the most secret recesses of our reason. But because
this wisdom enlightens us in a completely non-sensible way, we fancy that our
eyes, or the words of those who reverberate the air against our ears, produce this
•See the last Elucidation concerning the efficacy of secondary causes [ 15].
"''Est quippe superbia & peccatum muimum uti datis tanquam innatis." St. Bern. De diligenJo
D••o.
•Matt. 23 [vv. 8-10]. See St. Augustine's De magistro.

624

Nicolas Malebranche

illumination, or express the intelligible voice that instructs us inwardly. It is for
this reason, as I have pointed out elsewhere, that Jesus Christ was not satisfied
with instructing us through His divinity in an intelligible way; He wished further
to instruct us in sensible fashion by His humanity; He wished to teach us that He
is our master in every way. And because we are unable without difficulty to
retreat within ourselves in order to consult Him as the eternal truth, the immutable order, the intelligible light, He made the truth sensible through His words,
order worthy of love through His example, and light visible through a body that
adapts it to our weakness. And yet we remain ungrateful, immoral, stupid, and
insensible enough to consider (against His express prohibition) as our teachers or
the cause of our knowledge, not merely other men, but perhaps even the vilest
and most despicable of bodies.

Second Objection
Given that the soul is more perfect than bodies, why can it not contain what
represents them? Why could the idea of extension not be one of its modifications? Only God acts on it and modifies it-granted, but why should it see bodies
in God if it can see them in its own substance? The soul is not material, admitted.
But God, though He is a pure spirit, sees bodies in Himself; why could not the
soul, then, see them by considering itself, even though it itself is spiritual?

Replies
Do you not see that there is this difference between God and the human soul,
that God is a being without restriction, a universal and infinite being, whereas the
soul is a kind of particular being? It is a property of an infinite being to be
simultaneously one and all things, compounded, as it were, of an infinity of
perfections, and to be so simple that each perfection it possesses contains all
other perfections without any real distinction; for since each divine perfection is
infinite, it constitutes the entire divine being. But as the soul is a particular being,
a limited being, it cannot have extension in it without becoming material, without
being composed of two substances. God, then, contains bodies within Him in an
intelligible way. He sees their essences or ideas in His wisdom, and their existence in His love or volitions. We must speak this way because God made
bodies, and because He knew what He made even before anything was made.
But the soul cannot see in itself what it does not contain; it cannot even see
clearly what it does contain, which it can only sense in a confused way. Let me
explain this point.
The soul does not contain intelligible extension as one of its modes because
this extension is not perceived as a mode of the soul's being, but simply as a
being. This extension is conceived by itself and without thinking of anything
else; but modes cannot be conceived without perceiving the subject or being of
which they are modes. We perceive this extension without thinking about our
mind; we cannot even conceive that this extension could be a modification of our
mind. A figure is disclosed in it when this extension is conceived as limited; but
the mind's limits do not serve to give it figure. Since this extension has parts, it

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

625

can be divided in the same sense that it is extended, i.e., into intelligible parts;
but we see nothing in the soul that is divisible. The extension we see, then, is not
a mode of the soul, and therefore it cannot be seen in it.
But, you will say, for these same reasons God would not be able to see His
creatures in Himself. This would be true if ideas of creatures were modifications
of His substance, but the Infinite Being is incapable of modifications. 8 God's
ideas of creatures are, as Saint Thomas says, only His essence, insofar as it is
participable or imperfectly imitable, for God contains every creaturely perfection, though in a divine and infinite way; He is one and He is all. Thus, He can
see them in Himself and only in Himself, for His knowledge is drawn only from
Himself. But the soul, however it might sense itself, does not know either itself
or its modifications, the soul which is a particular being, a very limited and
imperfect being. Certainly it cannot see in itself what is not there in any way at
all. How could we see in one species of being all species of being, or in a finite
and particular being a triangle in general and infinite triangles? For the soul
indeed perceives a triangle or circle in general, while it is a contradiction that the
soul should be able to have a modification in general. The sensations of color that
the soul ascribes to figures makes them particular, because no modification of a
particular being can be general.
To be sure, we can assert what we clearly conceive. Now, we clearly conceive
that the extension we see is something distinct from ourselves. We can say, then,
that this extension is not a modification of our being, and that it is indeed
something distinct from ourselves. For it should be noted that the sun that we see,
for example, is not the one we look at. The sun, and everything else in the
material world, is not visible by itself. This I have proved elsewhere. The soul
can see only the sun to which it is immediately joined, only that sun that like it
occupies no place. Now, we see clearly and perceive distinctly that this sun is
something distinct from us. Thus, we speak contrary to our light and consciousness when we say that the soul sees in its own modifications all the objects it
perceives.
Pleasure, pain, taste, heat, color, all our sensations and all our passions, are
modifications of our soul. But be that as it may, do we clearly know them? Can
we compare heat with taste or smell with color? Do we know the relation
between red and green, or even between two shades of green? Such is not the
case with different figures, which we can compare with each other; we know
their relations exactly, we know precisely that the square of the diagonal of a
square is double that square. What relation is there between these intelligible
figures, which are very clear ideas, and our soul's modifications, which are but
confused sensations? Why suppose, then, that these intelligible figures cannot be
perceived by the soul unless they are its modifications, since the soul knows
nothing of what happens to it through a clear idea, but only through consciousness or inner sensation. as I have proved elsewhere and as I shall again prove in
the following Elucidation. If we could see the figures of bodies only in ourselves,
"See my Riporase to the third posthumous letter of Arnauld.

626

Nicolas Malebranche

they would be, on the contrary, unintelligible, for we do not know ourselves. We
are but shadows to ourselves; to see ourselves, we must look beyond ourselves,
and we shall never know what we are until we view ourselves in Him who is our
light and in whom all things become light. For only in God are the most material
beings perfectly intelligible; but outside of Him the most spiritual of substances
become utterly invisible. For only what is intelligible can affect intelligences.
Surely, only God, only His always efficacious substance, can affect, enlighten
and nourish our minds, as Saint Augustine says. It is not possible that we should,
I do not say, sense, for we can sense ourselves only in ourselves, but clearly
know ourselves, i.e., discover the nature and properties of our soul, elsewhere
than in our divine and eternal model, that is, elsewhere than in the always
luminous substance of the divinity, insofar as it can be participated in by a
spiritual creature, or insofar as it is representative of such a creature. We know
clearly the nature and properties of matter, for the idea of extension that we have
in God is very clear. But as we do not see in God the idea of our soul, we sense
both what we are and whatever actually takes place in us. But it is impossible for
us to discover clearly what we are, or any of the modifications of which we are
capable.
Third Objection

Nothing in God can be moved, nothing in Him can have figure. If there is a
sun in the intelligible world, this sun is always equal to itself. The visible sun
appears greater when it is near the horizon than when it is at a great distance from
the horizon. Therefore, it is not this intelligible sun that we see. The same holds
true for other creatures. Therefore, we do not see God's works in Him.

Reply
A sufficient reply to this would be that nothing in God is really figured and
thereby capable of motion, but that there are in God figures that are intelligible
and, consequently, intelligibly mobile. For it cannot be doubted that God has the
idea of the bodies He has created and constantly moves, that He can find this idea
only in His substance, and that He is at least able to inform us of it. But to clarify
this matter, it must be realized that God contains in Himself an ideal or intelligible infinite extension; for since He has created it, God knows extension, and He
can know it only in Himself. Thus, since the mind can perceive a part of this
intelligible extension that God contains, it surely can perceive in God all figures;
for all finite intelligible extension is necessarily an intelligible figure, since figure
is nothing but the boundary of extension. Furthermore, we see or sense a given
body when its idea, i.e., when some figure composed of intelligible and general
extension, becomes sensible and particular through color or some other sensible
perception by which its idea affects the soul and that the soul ascribes to it, for the
soul almost always projects its sensation on an idea that strikes it in lively
fashion. Therefore, there need be in God no sensible bodies or real figures in
intelligible extension in order for us to sec them in God or in order for God to see
them in Himself. It is enough that His substance, insofar as it can be participated
in by the corporeal creature, should be able to be perceived in different ways.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

627

Likewise, if, as it were, a figure of intelligible extension made sensible by
color should be taken successively from different parts of this infinite extension,
or if a figure of intelligible extension could be perceived as turning on its center
or as gradually approaching another, we would perceive motion in an intelligible
or sensible figure without there being any actual motion in intelligible extension.
For God does not see the actual motion of body in His substance, or in the idea
He has of them in Himself, but only in the knowledge He has of His volitions
with regard to them. Even their existence He sees only in this way, because only
His will gives being to all things. God's volitions change nothing in His substance, they do not move it. In this sense, intelligible extension cannot be moved
even intelligibly. But although we might suppose that the intelligible parts ofthe
idea of extension always maintain the same relation of intelligible distance between them and that this idea therefore cannot be moved even intelligibly,
nonetheless, if we conceive of a given created extension to which there corresponds a given part of intelligible extension as its idea, we shall be able through
this same idea of space (though intelligibly immobile) to see thatthe parts of the
created extension are mobile, because the idea of space, although assumed intelligibly immobile, necessarily represents all sorts of relations of distance and
shows that the parts of a body can fail to maintain the same situation relative to
each other. Furthermore, although we do not see bodies in themselves, but only
through intelligible extension (let this extension be assumed intelligibly immobile or not), we can through it actually see or imagine bodies in motion
because it appears mobile to us due to the sensation of color, or the confused
image remaining after the sensation that we successively attach to different parts
of the intelligible extension that furnishes us with an idea when we see or imagine
the motion of some body. It is easier to understand all this than to give an
unambiguous explanation of it.
From what I have just said, you can understand why you see the intelligible
sun now greater, now smaller, although it is always the same with regard to God.
All that is needed for this is that we sometimes see a greater part of intelligible
extension and sometimes a smaller. Since the parts of intelligible extension are
all of the same nature, they may all represent any body whatsoever.
It should not be imagined that the intelligible world is related to the sensible,
material world in such a way that there is an intelligible sun, for example, or an
intelligible horse or tree intended to represent to us the sun or a horse or a tree, or
that everyone who sees the sun necessarily sees this hypothetical intelligible sun.
Given that all intelligible extension can be conceived of as circular, or as having
the intelligible figure of a horse or a tree, all of intelligible extension can serve to
represent the sun, or a horse or a tree, and consequently can be the sun or a horse
or a tree of the intelligible world and can even become a visible and sensible sun,
horse, or tree if the soul has some sensation upon the occasion of bodies to attach
to these ideas, i.e., if these ideas affect the soul with sensible perceptions.
Thus, when 1 said that we see different bodies through the knowledge we have
of God's perfections that represent them, I did not exactly mean that there arc in
God certain particular ideas that represent each body individually, and that we
see such an idea when we sec the body: tor we certainly could not see this body

Nicolas Malebranche

628

as sometimes great, sometimes small, sometimes round, sometimes square, if we
saw it through a particular idea that would always be the same. But I do say that
we see all things in God through the efficacy of His substance, and particularly
sensible things, through God's applying intelligible extension to our mind in a
thousand different ways, and that thus intelligible extension contains all the
perfections, or rather, all the differences of bodies due to the different sensations
that the soul projects on the ideas affecting it upon the occasion of these same
bodies. I have spoken in a different way, but you should realize that I did so only
to make certain of my arguments stronger and more intuitive, and you must not
think on the basis of what I have just said that these arguments no longer obtain.
If it were necessary, I could give the reasons for the different ways in which I
have explained myself.
I shall not venture to treat this subject in depth 8 for fear of saying things either
too abstract or out of the ordinary, or, if you will, in order not to risk saying
things I do not know and cannot discover. Here instead are several passages from
Scripture that seem contrary to what I have just asserted. I shall try to explain
them.

Fourth Objection
In his gospel and the first of his epistles, Saint John says That no one has ever
seen God, "DEUM nemo vidit unquam,b unigenitus qui est in sinu patris ipse

enarravit. c

Reply
I answer that seeing His creatures in Him is not really seeing God. Seeing the
essences of creatures in His substance is not seeing His essence, just as merely
seeing the objects it represents is not seeing a mirror. Seeing the essence of God,
not in its absolute being, but in relation to creatures or insofar as it is representative of them, is not seeing the essence of God.
Nothing precludes us from agreeing with Saint Paul, d Saint Augustine, Saint
Gregory, and several other Church Fathers, that we see God even in this life,
though in very imperfect fashion. Here are the words of Saint Gregory in his
Homilies on Job :e "A luce incorruptibili caligo nos nostrae corruptionis
obscurat; cumque & videri aliquatenus potest, & tamen videri lux ipsa sicuti est
non potest, quam Ionge sit indicat. Quam si mens non cemeret, nee quia Ionge
esset videret. Si autem perfecte jam cemeret, profecto hanc quasi per caliginem
non videret. Igitur quia nee omnino cemitur, nee rursum omnino non cemitur,
recte dictum est quia a Ionge Deus videtur." Although Saint Gregory, to explain
the passage of Job ·'Oculi ejus a Ionge prospiciunt,'' says that in this life we see
"See myReponse aru vrayes &fau.sses idees, my tirstLettre touchantla defense & especially my
Repon.<e u.ne 3 /eure posthu.fllt' de M. Arnauld. as well as certain other passages that can perhaps
eliminate all the dofficulties the most attentive and most careful reader might form.

a

"Ch. I. IX(Ep.(IJ,4,12).
'Ch. 4. 12 [Ev. I. 18).

"To the Corinthians, ch. 13 (I Cor. 13:12).
•Bk. 31, ch. 20 [in c.39 Job. cap. 51).

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

629

God only from a distance, this is not because God is not very present to us, but
because the clouds of our concupiscence conceal Him from us, "caligo nos
nostrae corruptionis obscurat.'' For in other passages he compares, following
Saint Augustine, the light of God, which is God Himself, to the light of the sun
that surrounds us, but that we do not see if we are blind or if we close our eyes
because overwhelmed with its brilliance, "In sole oculos clausos tenemus."
Saint Augustine• goes even farther than his faithful follower Saint Gregory.
For although he agrees that we now know God only in very imperfect fashion, he
nonetheless claims in several passages that God is better known to us than the
things we imagine we know best. "He who made all things," he says, "is closer
to us than the very things He made, for it is in Him that we live and move and
have our being. The greater part of the things He made are not suited to our mind
because they are corporeal and of a kind different from it." And further on:
"Those who have known the secrets of nature are justly condemned in the Book
of Wisdom, for if they can have penetrated what is most hidden from men, how
much more easily should they be able to discover the Author and Sovereign of
the universe? The foundations of the earth are hidden from our eyes, but He who
has cast down these foundations is close to our minds." This is why the holy
doctor believes that he who has charity can know God better than he knows his
brother. Says he, "Ecce jam potest notiorem Deum habere quam fratrem. Plane
notiorem, quia praesentiorem: notiorem, quia interiorem: notiorem, quia certiorem. '•b I shall relate no further proofs of Saint Augustine's view. If you wish
them, you will find all sorts of them in the learned anthology Ambrosius Victor
made of them, in volume two of his Philosophia Christiana.
But to return to the passage from Saint John, "Deum nemo vidit unquam." I
believe that the evangelist's aim, when he says that we have never seen God, is to
point out the difference between the Old and New Testaments, between Jesus
Christ and the prophets and patriarchs, of whom it is written that they saw God.
For Jacob, Moses, Isaiah, and the others saw God only with the eyes of the body
and under a different form. They did not see God Himself, "Deum nemo vidit
unquam.'' But the only Son of the Father who is in His bosom has told us of what
He saw: "Unigenitus qui est in sinu Patris: ipse enarravit."
Fifth Objection

Writing to Timothy [ 1, 6: 16], Saint Paul says that God dwells in an inaccessible light that no one has ever seen, nor ever can see. If the light of God is
inaccessible, we cannot see all things in it.
•''Propinquior nobis qui fecit, quam multa quae facta sunt. In illo enim vivimus, movemur &
sumus" [Paul, Act. 17. 28). "lstorum autem pleraque remota sunt a mente nostra propter dissimililudinem sui generis. Recte culpantur in libro sapientiae inquisitores hujus saeculi. Si enim
tantum. inquit potuerunt valere ut possent aestimare saeculum, quomodo ejus Dominum non facilius
invencrunt?" [Sap. 13. 9). "lgnota enim sunt fundamenta oculis nostris & qui fundavit terram.
pmpinquat mentibus nustris." Ub. imp. d•• Gen. ad /itt. bk. 5. ch. 16.
"D•· Trinitalt'. bk. 8, ch. 8. See the preface of the Dialogues on Mt'tapbysics. or the Repcmse au.r
•·rai<'J & ./tiii.H<'-' ide<'-'. chapters 7 & 21. where I prove my view through the teaching of St.

Augustine.

Nicolas Malebranche

630
Reply

Saint Paul cannot be in disagreement with Saint John, 8 who tells us that Jesus
Christ is the true light that enlightens all men coming into this world. For the
mind of man that severalb Fathers call an illuminated or enlightened light, "lumen illuminatum,'' is enlightened only by the light of eternal wisdom, which
these same Fathers therefore call illuminating light, "lumen illuminans." David
exhorts us to draw near God in order to be enlightened by Him: '' Accedite ad
eum, & illuminamini" [Ps. 33, v.6]. But how can we be enlightened by Him if
we cannot see the light by which we are to be enlightened? Thus, when Saint
Paul says that this light is inaccessible, he means to the carnal man• who does not
retreat within himself to contemplate it. Or, if he is speaking of all men, the
explanation is that there is no one who fails to be distracted from perfect contemplation of the truth because our body constantly upsets the mind's attention.

Sixth Objection
In answering Moses, who had wished to see Him, God said, "You cannot see
my face; for no man shall see me and live. NON videbit me homo & vivet"
[Exod. 33:20].
Reply
It is clear that the literal sense of the passage is in no way contrary to what I
have said up till now. For I do not maintain that we can see God in this life in the
way in which Moses wished to do so. Yet I make this reply, that in order to see
God it is necessary to die, for the soul is joined to the truth to the extent that it is
released from the body. This is a truth that we do not think about enough. Those
who follow the impulses of their passions, those whose imagination is tainted by
the enjoyment of pleasures,d those who have increased the union and correspondence of their mind and body, in a word, those who Live, cannot see God, for
they cannot retreat into themselves in order to consult the truth. Happy, therefore, are those of a pure heart, of a disinterested mind and clear imagination, and
who are in no way dependent on the world and hardly at all on their body; in a
word, happy are those who are dead, for they will see God. Wisdom has saide
this publicly on the mountain and it says it secretly to those who consult it by
retreating within themselves.
Those who constantly awaken their concupiscence of pride, whose ambitious
intentions know no bounds, who join and even subjugate their soul not only to
"Ch. I [v.9).
"St. Cyril of Ale~andria on the words of St. John. "Eratlu~ vera" [John I :9). St. Augustine Tral'l.
14 on St. John [c. 3). St. Gregory, c. 27. on ch. 2H of Job.
,. ''lnaccessihilem dixit sed omni homini humana sapienti. Scriptura quippe sacra omnes carnalium
sectatorcs humanitatis nomine notarc snlet.'' St. Gregory. ch. 2H. on ch. 2H of Joh.
""Sapientia non invenitur in terra suaviter viventium." Joh 18 (2H:I2--13).
''Matt. 5:H.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

631

their own body but also to those surrounding them, in short, those who lil·e not
only the life of the body but also the life of the world, cannot see God, for
wisdom dwells in the most secret recesses of reason, while they are forever
spreading themselves externally.
But those who constantly mortify the activity of their senses, who carefully
preserve the purity of their imagination, and who courageously resist the impulses of their passions, in short, those who sever the bonds that make others
slaves of the body and of perceptible grandeur, can discover countless truths as
well as see that wisdom which is8 "hidden from the eyes of all the living." To a
certain extent they give up living when they retreat into themselves; they leave
the body when they draw near the truth. For the human mind is so situated
between God and bodies that to recede from the one is to draw near the other; it
cannot leave bodies without approaching God, just as it cannot pursue bodies
without withdrawing from Him. But because we cannot entirely leave the body
before death, I admit that before death we cannot perfectly unite ourselves with
God. According to Saint PauJb we can now see God in confused fashion as
through a reflecting glass, but we cannot see Him face to face: ''Non videbit me
homo, & vi vet." But we can see Him ex parte, that is, in a confused and
imperfect way.
It should not be imagined that life is the same in alllh·ing men, nor that it
consists in an indivisible point. The body's domination over the mind, which
prevents us from uniting ourselves with God through knowledge of the truth, can
vary. The soul is not equally joined in all men to the body it animates through its
sensations, nor to those toward which it is led by its passions, and there are
people who so mortify their concupiscence of pleasure and pride that they are
hardly bound any longer either to their body or to the world. They are, as it were
dead. Saint Paul gives us a good example of this. He chastized his body and
reduced it to servitude [I Cor., 9:27), and he so humiliated and annihilated
himself that he no longer thought about the world, nor did the world think about
him; for the world was crucified and dead for him as he was crucified and dead
for the world! It was because of this, says Saint Gregory, that he was so aware of
the truth and so disposed to receive the divine lights contained in his Epistles,d
which, however dazzling they may be, strike only those who, like him, mortify
their senses and passions. For as he himself says, the carnal and sensual man
cannot understand spiritual things because worldly knowledge, contemporary
tastes, polite conversation, refinement, liveliness and beauty of imagination, and
the things by which we live for the world and the world lives for us, induce in our
•" Abscondiat est ab oculis omnium viventium." Job 28:2 [28:21).
"" Videmus nunc per speculum in aenigmate, tunc autem facie ad faciem. None cognosco ex
parte." I Cor. ch. 13 [v.l2).
•·Gal. 16:14 [6: 14).
•"Animalis homo non percipit ea quae sunt spiritus Dei, stultitia enim est illi." I Cor. 2:14. "Ad
moyscn dicitur, non vide bit me homo & vi vet: ac si aperte diceretur: Nul Ius unquam Deum spiritaliter
videt qui mundo camaliter vivit." St. Gregory, c. 28. on ch. 28 of Job.

632

Nicolas Malebranche

mind a dull and frightening stupor with regard to every truth that we understand
perfectly only in the silence of our senses and passions.
We must, therefore, wish for the death that unites us with God, or at least for
the image of this death, the mysterious sleep during which all our external senses
are deadened and we can listen to the voice of inner truth, which is heard only in
the silence of night, when darkness hides sensible objects from us, and, as far as
we are concerned, the world is, as it were, dead. "It is thus," says Saint
Gregory, ''that the bride had heard the voice of her bridegroom as if in her sleep,
when she said, 'I sleep but my heart keeps watch' [Song of Sol. 5:2). Externally I
sleep, but inwardly my heart keeps watch, because with neither life nor feeling
with regard to visible objects, I become extremely sensitive to the voice of inner
truth which speaks to me in the most secret recesses of my reason. HINC est
quod sponsa in canticis canticorum sponsi vocem quasi per somnium audierat,
quae dicebat: 'Ego dormio, & cor meum vigilat.' Ac si diceret, dum exteriores
sensus ab hujus vitae sollicitudinis sopio, vacante mente, vivacius intema cognosco. Faris dormio, sed intus cor vigilat, quia dum exteriora quasi non sentio,
interiora solerter apprehendo. Bene ergo Eliu ait quod per somnium loquitur
Deus.'' Morals of Saint Gregory on chapter 33 of Job.

ELUCIDATION ELEVEN

t

On the seventh chapter of the second part of the third book, where I prove that
we have no clear idea either of our soul's nature or of its modifications.

I have said in a number of places, and I even think that I have sufficiently proved
in the third book of the Search after Truth, that we have no clear idea of our
soul, but only consciousness or inner sensation of it, and that thus we know it
much less perfectly than we do extension. This seemed to me so evident that I did
not think it necessary to argue so at further length. But the authority of Descartes, a who clearly says that the nature of the mind is better known than the
nature of any other thing, has so prejudiced some of his disciples that what I
wrote on the topic has served only to make me seem a person of weak character
who cannot grasp and hold fast to abstract truths incapable of arousing and
maintaining the attention of those who consider them.
I grant that I am extremely weak, sensuous, and coarse, and that my mind
depends on my body in more ways than I can express. I know this and I feel it;
and I work incessantly to increase this knowledge I have of myself. For if we
cannot avoid being miserable, at least we must know and feel it. We must at least
be humbled at the sight of our inner miseries and recognize the need we have of
being delivered from this body of death that injects trouble and confusion into all
the soul's faculties.
Yet the present question is so suited to the mind's capacity that I do not see the
need for any great effort to resolve it (which is the reason I did not pause over it).
For I think I can say that the ignorance of most men with regard to their own soul,
of its distinction from the body. of its spirituality. immortality. and other properties, is enough to show clearly that they have no clear and distinct idea of it.
We are able to say that we have a clear idea of the body because in order to
know the modifications it can have, it suffices to consult the idea representing it.
We clearly see that it can be round or square, in motion or at rest. We have no
difficulty conceiving that a square can be divided into two triangles, two parallelograms. two trapezia. When we are asked whether something does or does not
"Reply to the lifth objection against the second Meditation. toward the end.

633

634

Nicolas Malebranche

belong to extension, we never hesitate in our response, because as the idea of
extension is clear, we see without any difficulty through simple perception what
it contains and what it excludes.
But surely we have no idea of our mind which is such that, by consulting it, we
can discover the modifications of which the mind is capable. If we had never felt
pleasure or pain we could not know whether or not the soul could feel them. If a
man had never eaten a melon, or seen red or blue, he would consult this alleged
idea of his soul in vain and would never discover distinctly whether or not it was
capable of these sensations or modifications. I maintain, furthermore, that even if
one is actually feeling pain or seeing color, one cannot discover through simple
perception whether these qualities belong to the soul. One imagines that pain is in
the body that occasions it, and that color is spread out on the surface of objects,
although these objects are distinct from our soul.
In order to determine whether sensible qualities are modes of the mind, we do
not consult the alleged idea of the soul-the Cartesians themselves consult,
rather, the idea of extension, and they reason as follows. Heat, pain, and color
cannot be modifications of extension, for extension can have only various figures
and motion. Now there are only two kinds of beings, minds and bodies. Therefore, pain, heat, color, and all other sensible qualities belong to the mind.
Since we have to consult our idea of extension in order to discover whether
sensible qualities are modes of our mind, is it not evident that we have no clear
idea of the soul? Would we otherwise ever bother with such a roundabout way?
When a philosopher wishes to learn whether roundness belongs to extension,
does he consult the idea of the soul, or some idea other than that of extension?
Does he not see clearly in the idea itself of extension that roundness is a modification of it? And would it not be strange if, in order to learn of it, he reasoned as
follows. There are only two kinds of beings, minds and bodies. Roundness is not
the mode of a mind. It is therefore the mode of a body.
We discover by simple perception, then, without any reasoning and merely by
applying the mind to the idea of extension, that roundness and every other figure
is a modification belonging to body, and that pleasure, pain, heat, and all other
sensible qualities are not modifications of body. Every question about what does
or does not belong to extension can be answered easily, immediately, and boldly,
merely by considering the idea representing it. Everyone agrees on this subject,
for those who say that matter can think do not believe that it has this faculty
because it is extended; they agree that extension, taken precisely as such, cannot
think.
But there is no agreement on what should be believed about the soul and its
modifications. There are people who think that pain and heat, or at least color, do
not belong to the soul. You even make a fool of yourself before certain Cartesians if you say that the soul actually becomes blue, red, or yellow, and that the
soul is painted with the colors of the rainbow when looking at it. There are many
people who have doubts, and even more who do not believe, that when we smell
carrion the soul becomes formally mtten. and that the taste of sugar, or of pepper
or salt, is something belonging to the soul. Where, then, is the clear idea of the

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

635

soul so that the Cartesians might consult it, and so that they might all agree on the
question as to where colors, tastes, and odors are to be found?
But even if the Cartesians should agree on these difficulties, we could not
conclude from their agreement that they have a clear idea of the soul. For if they
agree finally that it is the soul that is actually green or red when we see greenness
or redness, they will do so only as a result of lengthy arguments. They will never
see it through simple perception; they will never arrive at this by consulting the
supposed idea of the soul, but rather, by consulting the idea of body. They will
maintain that sensible qualities belong to the soul only because these qualities do
not belong to extension, of which they have a clear idea. They will never
convince anyone of this whose insufficiency of mind precludes complex perceptions or reasoning, or rather, anyone who does not stop to consider the clear idea
of body and who confuses everything. There will always be peasants, women,
children, and perhaps savants and doctors, who will have doubts about it. But
women and children, the learned and the ignorant, the most enlightened and the
most dense, have no difficulty in conceiving through the idea they have of
extension that it can have all sorts of figures. They clearly understand that
extension is incapable of pain, taste, odor, or of any sensation, when they
faithfully and attentively consider the single idea that represents it. For there is no
sensible quality contained in the idea that represents extension.
It is true that they might have doubts as to whether or not body is capable of
sensation, or of receiving some sensible quality; but this is because they understand body as something other than extension, and because they have no idea
of body taken in this sense. But when Descartes, or the Cartesians to whom I am
speaking, assert that we know the soul better than body, they mean by body only
extension. How, then, can they maintain that we know the nature of the soul
more clearly than that of body, since the idea of body or extension is so clear that
everyone agrees on what it contains and what it excludes, whereas the idea of the
soul is so confused that the Cartesians themselves constantly dispute as to
whether modifications of color belong to it.
''We know the nature of a substance more distinctly,'' say these philosophers
following Descartes, a ''as we know more of its attributes. Now there is nothing
whose attributes we know more of than our mind, because as many attributes as
we know in other things can be counted in the mind from the fact that it knows
them. And thus its nature is better known than the nature of any other thing."
But who does not see that there is quite a difference between knowing through
a clear idea and knowing through consciousness? When I know that twice two is
four, I know this very clearly, but I do not know clearly what it is in me that
knows it. I sense it, granted; I know it throl!gh consciousness or inner sensation.
But I have no clear idea of it as I have of numbers, between which I can clearly
discover relations. I can count that there are in my mind three properties: that of
knowing that two times two is four, that of knowing that three times three is nine,
and that of knowing that four times four is sixteen. If you wish, an infinity of
•tn the passage just cited.

636

Nicolas Malebranche

properties in me can thus be counted, since these three properties are different
from each other. But I deny that the nature of the things thus capable of being
counted can be known clearly. To be counted, they need only be sensed.
We can be said to have a clear idea of a being and to know its nature when we
can compare it with others of which we also have a clear idea, or at least when we
can compare the modifications of which the being is capable. We have clear
ideas of numbers and of parts of extension because we can compare these things.
We can compare two with four, four with sixteen and each number with every
other. We can compare a square with a triangle, a circle with an ellipse, a square
or a triangle with every other square or triangle, and we can thus clearly discover
the relations between these figures and between these numbers. But we cannot
compare our mind with other minds in order to discover clearly some relation
between them. We cannot even compare the modes of our mind, its own perceptions. We cannot discover clearly the relation between pleasure and pain, heat
and color, or to speak only of modes of the same kind, we cannot exactly
determine the relation between green and red, yellow and violet, or even between
violet and violet. We sense that the one is dad:er or more brilliant than the other,
but we do not know clearly either by how much, or in what being dad:er or more
brilliant consists. We therefore have no clear idea either of the soul or of its
modifications, and although I see or sense colors, tastes, odors, I can say, as I
have, that I do not know them through a clear idea, because I am unable to
discover clearly their relations.
It is true that I can discover exact relations between sounds, that the octave, for
example, is two to one, the fifth three to two, the fourth four to three. But I
cannot know these relations through the sensation I have of them. If I know that
the octave is two to one, it is because I have learned through experience that a
given string sounds the octave when, having been plucked at full length, it is then
plucked after having been divided into two equal parts. It is because I know that
there are twice as many vibrations in an equal amount of time, or something like
this. It is because the disturbances in the air, the vibrations of the string, and the
string itself are things that can be compared through clear ideas, and because we
know distinctly the relations that can obtain between the string and its parts as
well as between the rates of different vibrations. But the sounds cannot be
compared in themselves, or insofar as they are sensible qualities and modifications of the soul. We cannot know their relations in this way. And although
musicians distinguish different consonances very well, this is not because they
distinguish their relations through clear ideas. For them, the ear alone judges the
difference in sounds; their reason knows nothing. But the ear cannot be said to
judge through a clear idea or otherwise than through sensation. Even musicians,
then, have no clear idea of sounds taken as sensations or modifications of the
soul. Consequently, neither the soul nor its modifications is known through a
clear idea, but only through consciousness or inner sensation.
Furthermore, we do not know what the soul's dispositions consist in which
make it readier to act and represent objects to itself. We cannot even conceive
what such dispositions could consist in. I say further that through reason we

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

637

cannot ascertain whether the soul when separated from the body or taken in
isolation from the body is capable of having any habits or memory. But how can
we be ignorant of these things if the nature of the soul is better known than that of
the body? We have no difficulty in seeing what constitutes the animal spirits'
readiness to be distributed in the nerves in which they have already flowed many
times. Or at least we have no difficulty in discovering that as the passages in the
nerves become larger and their fibers relax in a certain way, the spirits can easily
pass through them. But what could conceiveably increase the soul's readiness for
action or thought? For my part, I admit that I understand nothing of this. In vain
do I examine myself in order to discover these dispositions; I have no answer for
myself. I cannot enlighten myself on the matter, even though I have a very lively
sensation of the readiness with which certain thoughts are excited in me. And if I
did not have good reasons that lead me to believe that I do in fact have such
dispositions (although I am not aware of them in me), I would judge by consulting only inner sensation that my soul has neither habits nor a spiritual memory.
But our hesitation in this is a sure sign that we are not as enlightened as we might
say, for doubt does not agree with evidence and clear ideas.
It is certain that the most enlightened man does not know with evidence
whether he is worthy of Jove or hatred, as the wise man says. 8 The inner
sensation we have of ourselves cannot decide. Saint Paul says that his conscience
gives him no reproach,b but he does not claim that because of this he is justified.
He claims, on the contrary, that this does not justify him and that he dares not
judge himself because it is the Lord who judges him. But given that we have a
clear idea of order, if we also had a clear idea of the soul through our inner
sensation of ourselves, we would know clearly whether the soul conformed to
order; we would know whether we are righteous or not. We would even be able
to know with precision all its inner dispositions toward good and evil when
having a sensation of them. But if we could know ourselves as we are, we would
not be so liable to presumption. And it is likely that Saint Peter would not have
said to his Master, whom he was soon to deny,c "Why cannot I follow you now,
I will give my life for you, Animam meam pro te ponam." For with an inner
sensation of his own strength and good will, he would have been able to see
clearly whether he had the strength or courage to conquer death, or rather the
insults of a maid and a few servants.
If the nature of the soul is better known than the nature of any other things, if
the idea we have of it is as clear as the idea we have of the body, then I ask only
this: how is it that there are so many people who confuse the two? Is it possible to
confuse two entirely different clear ideas? Let us do justice to everyone. Those
who are not of our opinion are as reasonable as we, they have the same ideas of
things, they participate in the same reason. Why, then, do they confuse what we
"Eccles. 9: I.
0 ·'Sed neque meipsum judico. Nihil enim mihi conscius sum: sed non in hoc justificatus sum: qui
autem judicat me Dominus est.·· I Cor. 4:4.
<John 12:37.

638

Nicolas Malebranche

disinguish? Have they on any other occasion ever confused things of which they
have clear ideas? Have they ever confused two different numbers? Have they
ever taken a square for a circle? Yet the soul is more different from the body than
a square is from a circle, for they are substances that agree in nothing, and yet
these people confuse them. There is, then, some difficulty in recognizing their
difference. Their difference is not found by simple perception, and reasoning is
required to conclude that the one is not the other. The idea of extension must be
carefully consulted, and it must be seen that extension is not a mode of bodies but
body itself (since it is represented to us as a subsisting thing and as the principle
of everything we clearly conceive in bodies); and thus, since the modes of which
a body is capable are in no way related to sense qualities, the subject of these
qualities, or rather, the being of which these qualities are modes, must be very
different from body. Such arguments must be produced in order to avoid confusing the soul with the body. But if we had a clear idea of the soul, as we do of the
body, we certainly would not have to take such a roundabout way to distinguish it
from the body. We could do so at a single glance, as easily as we see that a
square is not a circle.
I shall pause for no further proof that we do not know the soul or its modifications through clear ideas. 8 We come to realize this no matter how we look at
ourselves, and I add this to what I have already said in the Search after Truth
only because of the criticism it received from certain Cartesians. If this does not
satisfy them, then let them show me this clear idea of the soul that, no matter how
I try, I cannot find in myself.

"You might see the ninth of the Mrditation.• c/rretit•nne.f.

ELUCIDATION TWELVE

On the eighth chapter of the second part of the third book. Vague and general
terms that signify nothing in particular. How to distinguish them from others.

In order to understand what I have said in several places, viz., that we do not
explain things when we express them in terms from logic or by general ideas, it
suffices to reflect that since everything that exists reduces to being or to modes of
being, every term not signifying either of these things signifies nothing, and
every term not signifying either of these things distinctly and in particular signifies nothing distinct. This appears to me very evident, but what is evident in
itself is not so for everyone. We are accustomed to being dazzled with words and
to dazzle others with them. All terms that do not offend the ear gain currency
among men, and the truth enters so little into the affairs of the world that those
who speak and listen ordinarily have no regard for it. The gift of speech is the
greatest of talents, the language of the imagination is the surest of means, and a
memory filled with incomprehensible terms will always appear with great display, whatever the Cartesians may say on the matter.
When men love only the truth, they will then be careful about what they say,
they will carefully examine what they hear, they will scornfully reject terms
devoid of sense, and they will apply themselves only to clear ideas. But when
will men love only the truth? When they no longer depend on their bodies, when
they no longer have any necessary relation to sensible objects, when they no
longer corrupt each other. and when they faithfully consult the master who
enlightens them in the secret recesses of their reason. But this will never happen
in this life.
Yet not all men are equally indifferent to the truth. If some of them pronounce
words without reflection, receive them without discrimination, attend only to
what affects them, there arc also others who work seriously to instruct themselves in the truth and to convince others of it. And it is mainly to the latter that I
speak, for it is at their request that I decided to produce these Elucidations.
I say. then. that everything which is, whether it actually ex isis or not, and
consequently everything intelligible, reduces to being and mode. By hl'ing I
mean what is absolute. or what can he conceived alone and without relation to
639

640

Nicolas Malebranche

anything else. By modes I mean what is relative, or what cannot be conceived
alone. Now there are two kinds of modes; some consist in the relation of the parts
of some whole to some part of the same whole, the others consist in the relation
of one thing to another that is not part of the same whole. The roundness of wax
is a mode of the first sort, because its roundness consists in the equality of
distance all the parts of the surface have from that part which is its center. The
motion or the situation of the wax is a mode of the second sort, for it consists in
the relation the wax has to bodies surrounding it. I am not speaking about motion
taken as the motor force, for it is clear that this force is not and cannot be a mode
of bodies, because however they are conceived to be modified, they cannot be
conceived as having a motor force in them.
If it is certain that everything intelligible reduces to beings or modes, it is
evident that every term signifying neither of these things signifies nothing, and
that every term not signifying this or that being or mode is an obscure and
confused term. And consequently we cannot clearly conceive what others say to
us, nor what we say to them, unless we have distinct ideas of a being or mode
answering to each of the terms they or we ourselves use.
Nonetheless, I agree that we can, and sometimes must, make use of terms that
do not directly call up any distinct ideas. We can, because it is not always
necessary to replace the defined by the definition, and because we usefully
employ abbreviated expressions, although they are confused in themselves. And
we are constrained to do so when we are obliged to speak of things of which we
have no clear idea, and which we know only through the inner sensation we have
of ourselves, as when we speak of the soul and its modifications. We need only
take care not to use obscure and equivocal terms when we have clear terms or
when those to whom we speak might derive a false idea from them. These things
will be better understood with an example.
It is clearer to say that God created the world by His will than it is to say He did
so by His power. The latter word is a term from logic; it evokes no distinct and
particular idea in the mind, and it leaves room to imagine that the power of God
might be something other than the efficacy of His will. We speak more clearly
when we say that God forgives sinners in Jesus Christ than if we were to say that
God pardons them through His clemency and mercy. These terms are equivocal;
they give us some reason to think that God's clemency is perhaps contrary to this
justice, that sin can go unpunished, that the satisfaction of Jesus Christ is not
necessary, and other such things.
We often use these vague terms of imprecise meaning when we speak of the
divine perfections; and this should not be condemned, because philosophical
precision is not always necessary. But through criminal negligence and stupidity
we so abuse these general expressions and draw from them so many false conclusions that although all men have the same idea of God and consider Him an
infinitely perfect being, yet there is hardly an imperfection that was not attributed
to Him during the age of idolatry, and He is often spoken of in a very unworthy
manner-all this for failure to closely compare the things we say about Him with
the idea representing Him, or rather with Him Himself.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

641

Here is another example that comes to mind and is of some importance.
Those who claim that the prevenient delight or the grace of Jesus Christ is
efficacious by itself and by its nature with regard to the consent of the will. I say
with regard to the consent of the will, for undoubtedly it is efficacious• by itself
with regard to the will; it always has the effect of moving it and leading it toward
the good, because it makes it enjoy the good, and we always invincibly wish to
be happy. Those, I say, who maintain that the grace of the Saviour is efficacious
by itself with regard to the consent of the will, reply to the objection that this
view destroys freedom and is contrary to the decision of the Council of Trent,
which determinedb that free will, moved by grace, can resist it or not consent to it
if it wishes to do so. They reply, I say, that their view is not contrary to freedom,
and that we have the power to resist the grace of Jesus Christ, but that we never
resist it or that this power we have not to consent to it never has any effect. If you
wish, they say, can you not jump out the window, cut off your nose, or scratch out
your eyes? You have these and several other powers, but it is certain that neither
you nor anyone else will use them. There are, then, many powers that will never
have any effect. Such is the power, they say, that the grace of Jesus Christ leaves
to free will. It is able not to consent to it if it so wills, but it will never so will.
To disclose the weakness of this reply, we have only to elucidate the word
power, and remove the equivocation from it.
It is clear that we have the power to jump out the window only on the
supposition that we have the power of willing to do so. Now, we cannot will
anything without some motive appealing to the natural and invincible desire we
have to be happy; for to will something is only to consent to the motive leading us
to will it, and we must know or sense before consenting. If, then, we do not have
the power of willing anything without a motive agreeing with the desire to be
happy, we are far from having the power to jump out the window, considering
the danger there is of maiming or killing ourselves, which we naturally regard as
a great evil. Thus, when a man says that he has the power of throwing himself
down if he wishes to do so, the word power signifies only that he has the power
to move his body according to his desires, and he truly has this power. And when
without hesitation he asserts that he will never jump out his window, it must
mean that he will never do so out of sheer wantonness and without very pressing
motives that he does not then foresee, such as the fear of being burned alive in his
room, or being stabbed by his enemeies, because we can will nothing without a
motive. Might one say that Saint Peter can now still deny his master if he wished
to do so in order to conclude that there are some powers that do not and will never
have any effect? He can do so if he wills to do so, but he cannot will to do so, nor
even hesitate to will not to do so, because he has no motive for this and because
he has invincible motives for being attached to his beloved master and his God.
But now that the soul is on trial in its body, and the life of man is and must be a
•see the lirst of the four l.•·trre.< regarding those of Arnauld in the second volume of the

R•·c~~<•il

of

my replies. There. by allaching distinct and precise ideas to the tenns of the question. I try to explain
in what sense the grace nf Jesus Christ is efficacious by itself.
"Sess. 6. can. 4.

642

Nicolas Malebranche

continual struggle, because this is the time to gain merit through its cooperation
with grace, can we say that when it leads us to perform some good work,
concupiscence does not provide sufficient motive to leave the soul at least the
power to suspend its consent, the freedom to think, the time to examine, especially if it is a good work we are not in the habit of practicing? Now, assuming
we suspend it for a quarter-hour or longer than the delight of grace lasts, is it not
evident that the grace will not have been efficacious by itself with regard to
consent, although this same grace would have made the will consent had it
immediately followed the impulse it inspired in it. When we suggest to a man
that he throw himself down or scratch out his eyes, what motive would he have to
suspend his consent in order to examine whether he will do so. But when grace
leads someone to leave the world to become a religious, certainly he does not
lack motive to examine and suspend consent. Although moved by grace, he has a
true power, then, that only too often has its effect, whereas the other has only an
imaginary power; and to respond to the clear and evident decision of the Council
in the way I have just described is to take advantage of the equivocal term power
and to be deceived or to wish to deceive others.
I say that this decision is clear and evident, for the power decided upon by the
Council, that of resisting or of not consenting to the actual impulse of grace, to
the prevenient delight that actually moves the will, is the power to realise an act
indicated in this power-very clearly indicated, I say. For resisting or not consenting are terms relative to the actual impulse that grace produces in the will.
Certainly we cannot resist grace or temptation in sensu diviso, i.e., when grace or
temptation are not actually moving the will, for this would be to resist nothing, to
consent to nothing. In order for the will to be able actually to resist the impulse of
grace, grace must actually be moving it. Thus, the decision of the Council is
clear, unequivocal, and without need of explanation. For a power that cannot be
exercised or that cannot realize any act is a power that can do nothing, and that
consequently is nothing. And to say that free will moved by grace has the power
not to consent to it, but that it is a contradiction that it should exercise its power,
is to contradict the Council and oneself.
If the Council had said, he who consents to the impulse of grace has the power
not to consent to it, then one would have grounds to make a distinction and say
that he has this power, but that it is a contradiction that this power should realize
its act of resistance to grace, because the will cannot consent and not consent at
the same time. It is a contradiction that God should give and not give me a certain
grace at the same time. It is also a contradiction that at the same time I should
consent and not consent. But there is no contradiction if on the one hand God
gives me His grace and at the same time I do not consent to it, unless it is because
we assume that I cannot have any motive to refuse my consent, or that the act of
my consent is not free and does not depend on me.
But it is especially in matters of physics that we take advantage of vague and
general terms that do not call up distinct ideas of being or modes. For example,
when we say that bodies tend toward their center. that they fall by their gravity,
that they rise by their lnity. that they move by their nature, that they are hard or

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

643

fluid by themselves, that they successively change their forms, that they act by
their virtues, qualities, faculties, and so on, we use terms signifying nothing, and
all these propositions are absolutely false in the sense philosophers give them.
There is no center in the sense ordinarily understood. The terms gravity, form,
nature and the like call up the idea of neither a being nor a mode. They are terms
devoid of sense, which wise people ought to avoid. "Scientia insensati inenarrabilia verba, " 8 says Scripture. These terms are suited only for hiding the
ignorance of counterfeit scholars, and for making the stupid and the skeptical
believe that God is not the true cause of all things.
It seems to me that this is certain and easy to understand. Yet most men speak
freely of all things without troubling themselves to examine whether the terms
they use have a clear and exact meaning. There are even some authors who have
composed several volumes in which it is harder than may be thought to locate
some passage where they have understood what they have written. Thus, those
who read a great deal and listen respectfully to the vague and general discourse of
counterfeit scholars are in a very gross ignorance. And I do not see that they can
be delivered from it unless they make and constantly renew the resolution never
to believe anyone on his word or before having attached distinct ideas to the
commonest words others use. For these terms are not clear, as is ordinarily
imagined. They appear clear only on account of the continual use made of them,
because we imagine we understand perfectly what we say or what we hear when
we hear or say things we have said a hundred times, though we have never
examined them.

"Eccl. 21:21 (Eccl. 21:18).

ELUCIDATION THIRTEEN

On the conclusion of the first three books. That physicians and spiritual directors
are absolutely necessary to us, but that on many occasions it is dangerous to
consult them and to follow them.
To be sure, man before his sin had everything necessary for him to preserve his
mind and body in a perfect state, and so had no need of either spiritual directors
or physicians. He consulted the inner truth as the infallible rule of his duty, and
his senses were so trustworthy that they never deceived him concerning the use
he was supposed to make of the bodies surrounding him in order to preserve his
own body.
But things are quite different after sin. We consult our passions much more
than truth or the eternal law, and our senses are so disordered that by following
them we sometimes lose life and health. Spiritual directors and physicians are
absolutely necessary to us, and those who pretend to be clever enough to take
care of themselves in all cases generally fall into gross errors that teach them a
little too late that they follow a master who is none too wise.
Yet I believe I can say that sin has not so disordered all the soul's faculties that
we cannot, in certain cases, consult ourselves, and that it often happens that we
lose the life of the soul or the body because we appeal to physicians who lack
expertise in their art and who do not know our temperament sufficiently, or to
spiritual directors who are ignorant in religion and morals, and who do not
thoroughly examine consciences to discover the obligations and dispositions of
those consulting them.
What I said by way of conclusion to the first three books of the Search after
Truth has led certain people to imagine I held that in order to preserve our health
and life we should follow our senses and passions in everything, and that in order
to learn our duty it is of no use to consult other men because we have as our
master eternal Wisdom, who speaks to us clearly in the most secret recesses of
our reason. And though I have never said or even thought that physicians and
spiritual directors are of no use, certain people who are quick to judge and draw
conclusions persuaded themselves that this was my opinion (perhaps because it

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

645

was their own and because they did not so much consider man as he is now, as he
was before sin). Here, then, is roughly what I think about this question.
Man can be considered in two states, in health and in sickness. If he is
considered in a perfect state of health, it seems to me indubitable that his senses
are much more useful for the preservation of health than his reason or the
experience of the cleverest of physicians. No physician need be sought in order to
know how much weight a man can carry, whether he ought to eat wood or stones,
or whether he can cast himself into a precipice. His senses teach him in a simple
and indisputable way what he must do in such cases, which are the most common, and this seems to me sufficient justification of what I said by way of
conclusion to the first three books.
But this is not sufficient justification for what I thought, or for what I even said
elsewhere: 8 that our senses admirably acquit themselves of their duty, and conduct us in so proper and faithful a way to their end, that it seems to me they are
wrongly accused of being corrupt or disordered. For I have always believed that
the soundness, precision, and admirable order found in our sensations in relation
to the preservation of life are not consequences of sin but nature's first institution.
The objection is raised that this order is now upset, and that if we followed our
senses, not only would we often eat poison, but we would almost always eat
more food than we could digest.
But, as to poisons, I do not think that our senses ever lead us to eat them; and I
believe that if, by chance, our eyes excite us to taste something poisonous, we
would not find it to have the kind of taste that would make us swallow it,
provided, however, that the poison was in its natural state. For there is a big
difference between poisons as they are found naturally and poisoned meat, between raw pepper and peppered meat. Our senses lead us to eat poisoned meats, I
agree. But they do not lead us to eat poisons. I do not even know whether they
lead us to taste poisons, given that the poisons are in the state that God created
them. For the scope of our senses is limited to the natural order of things as God
has established it.
I also agree that our senses now lead us to eat too much of certain foods, but
this is because they are not in their natural state. We would perhaps not eat an
excess of wheat if we ground it with the teeth that were made for that purpose.
But it is ground and sifted, kneaded and cooked, sometimes even with milk,
butter, or sugar. It is also eaten with jams and different kinds of sauces that whet
the appetite. Thus, it should not be surprising that our senses lead us to excess,
when reason and experience combine to ambush and corrupt them.
The same is also true of flesh, which horrifies the senses when it is raw and
bloody, as when seen after the animal has died a natural death. But men have
taken it upon themselves to slaughter animals, to withdraw the blood, cook the
flesh, season it, and after all this, they accuse their senses of corruption and
"Bk. I. ch. 5.

646

Nicolas Malebranche

disorder. Since they make use of their reason to prepare foods other than those
with which nature provides them, I maintain that they must also use their reason
to eat with moderation. And if cooks have found the art of making us eat old
shoes in their stews, we must also make use of our reason and distrust these
bogus meats that are not in the state that God created them. For God provided us
with the senses only in relation to the natural order of things.
It must be noted further that our imagination and senses are to be suspected
when we take food that is out of the ordinary. For if a man should come across a
fruit that he himself had never eaten or had never seen anyone else eat, he would
at first havt: a certain aversion and feeling of fear while tasting it. His imagination
and senses would be naturally very alert to the taste he was experiencing. However hungry he was, he would eat very little of it the first time; and if the fruit
should have some dangerous quality, it would be sure to create in him a certain
repulsion. His machine would thus be disposed in such a way that he would not
eat it again, and with his repulsion expressed by the look on his face, he would
even prevent others from eating it. All this would or could take place in him
without reason playing any role, for I am not speaking here about any help that
reason or learning might provide. But since our friends take bad food, at least in
relation to our temperament, we do likewise. For opinion guides our life, and
example reassures us. We do not examine the effect that such food produces in us
and we have no fears about eating to excess. But our senses do not play so great a
role in this excess as we might believe.
It is true that there might be fruits whose taste deceives people who are most
alert to the reports of their senses, but this certainly is very rare. It should not be
definitely concluded from these particular cases that our senses are altogether
corrupt, or that they ordinarily deceive us in the things concerning the body's
welfare. Perhaps these fruits deceive our taste because our organ of taste has been
altered by some unnatural food that we eat often. For it is certain that the very
tasty meats we eat injure our tongue's fibers with their particles, which penetrate
too deeply and destroy its delicacy and discrimination. The example of those who
no longer fmd any taste in sauces is a proof of this. For if we find no flavor in
wheat or in raw flesh, it is because our tongue has become insensible to those
particles whose motion is more moderate.
But even assuming that there are fruits whose taste can deceive the most
delicate senses still in their state of natural perfection, we must not believe that
this is a result of sin, but only that in virtue of the very simple laws of nature one
sense cannot discriminate among all kinds of meat. Furthermore, the defect in the
senses would not be beyond remedy, because when mothers have a distaste for
dangerous fruit, they communicate it to their children, not only when the children
are in their womb, but also when they have been delivered into the world. For
children eat only what is given them by their mothers, who impress upon them,
mechanically and by the look on their face, the repulsion they have for fruits that
are not good to eat. Consequently, through our senses, God has sufficiently
provided for the preservation of our life, and nothing could be any better. Since
order would have it that the laws concerning the union of body and soul should be

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

647

very simple, they must be very general; and God ought not to have established
particular laws for cases that hardly ever occur. In these instances reason must
come to the aid of the senses, for reason can be of use in all things. But the senses
are determined toward certain natural judgments that are the most useful that can
be conceived of, as I have shown in the first book. Nonetheless, these judgments
sometimes deceive us, because it is impossible that it should be otherwise without multiplying the very simple laws concerning the union of body and soul.
If man is considered in his present state of malady, it must be admitted that his
senses often deceive him even in those things that are related to the preservation
of his life. For when his body's equilibrium is disturbed, a great deal of irregular
motion must be stirred up to his brain to the extent of the disturbance. Yet his
senses are not so corrupt as is ordinarily thought; and God has so wisely provided
for the preservation of his life through the laws concerning the union of body and
soul that, although these laws are very simple, they are often sufficient to restore
us to health. It is much safer to follow them than to make use of our reason or of
certain physicians who do not carefully note the state in which they find their
patients. For just as a wound closes and heals by itself when it is carefully kept
clean, bound, and bandaged, and perhaps is licked as the animals do when
injured, so our ordinary sicknesses soon disappear when we rest and do exactly
as the sicknesses inspire us as if by instinct or sensation.
A man in fever, for example, finds that wine is bitter, and wine is also then
harmful to him. The same man finds it pleasant-tasting when he is in health, and
wine is then good for him. It even happens that wine is very helpful for sick
people who find it agreeable, provided that the taste they have for it is not an
effect of their habit of drinking wine, and that the desire excited in them is caused
by the actual disposition of their body. Thus, it cannot be doubted that the senses
should be consulted in order to know, even in sickness, the way to regain health.
The following is what I think must be done.
Sick people must be very alert to certain secret desires that the actual disposition of their body sometimes excites in them, and they must be especially careful
that these desires are not the result of some previous habit. To this end, they
must, as it were, give free rein to their imagination, or without thinking about
anything that might restrain it, observe their inclinations and detennine whether
their inclinations are a result of the actual state of their body. If this is the case,
then they must follow them, but with great restraint. For it is very difficult to be
certain whether these secret inclinations are the result of their present bodily
state, and in this regard it is sometimes worthwhile to consult someone of
experience. If he yields to his imagination, as I have just described, and nothing
comes to mind, the patient must fast and remain quiet. For fasting apparently will
arouse a certain desire, or will dissipate the humors making him sick. But if the
sickness increases in spite of rest and fasting, it is then necessary to rely on
experience and physicians. Everything must be told exactly to a physician of
some expertise who if possible knows our temperament. The beginning and the
ensuing progress of the sickness. and our state before the sickness. must be
clearly explained to him so that he might relate his experience and reason to him

648

Nicolas Malebranche

whom he would cure. And although the physician might prescribe bitter
medicines that are actually kinds of poison, the patient must take them, because
experience shows that these poisons usually do not remain in the body, and that
they sometimes flush out the bad humors causing our disease. At this time
reason, or rather experience, must overrule the senses, provided that our distaste
for the prescribed medicine is not something new. For if our aversion toward it
were excited simultaneously with the sickness, this would be a sign that the
prescribed medicine was of the same nature as the corrupt humors causing the
sickness, and thus it would perhaps only increase them.
Nevertheless, I think that before venturing to take medicines that are strong or
very distasteful, it would be appropriate to begin with remedies that are milder or
more natural, as, for example, drinking a great deal of water, or taking a mild
emetic if we have lost our appetite and if vomiting is not found too difficult.
Water taken in great quantities can liquify humors that have been condensed by
heat, aid the circulation of blood into all parts of the body, drown out the
ferments causing sickness, and desalinate both the blood and humors or eliminate
the bitterness in them. And when emetics cleanse the stomach, they prevent the
food we have eaten from further corrupting it and from supporting intermittent
fevers. I need not pause to show the worth of these remedies. I am of the opinion,
then, that the advice of wise physicians should be followed-physicians who do
not progress too quickly, who do not expect too much from their remedies, and
who are not too quick to make prescriptions, because for every remedy that does
some good, there are always several others that have just the opposite effect.
Because those suffering from some illness are impatient, and because it is advantageous neither to the prestige of physicians nor to the profit of apothecaries to
see sick people without prescribing anything for them, physicians visit too little
and prescribe too much. Thus, when you are sick, you ought to ask your physician not to take any chances, to follow nature and, if he can, to support it. You
should make it clear that you are reasonable and patient enough not to fault him if
he sees us often without healing us; for in these cases, to avoid aggravating the
illness is sometimes a great deal.
I think, then, that we must appeal to physicians and not refuse to obey them if
we wish to preserve our life. For though they cannot guarantee our health, they
can sometimes help a great deal because of the constant experience they have
with different illnesses. They know very little with precision, but they always
know more than we do; and provided that they carefully take note of our temperament, of the symptoms of the illness, and of the inner sensation we have of
ourselves, we should expect from them all the help that we can reasonably expect
from men.
What has just been said about physicians can roughly be said of spiritual
directors. In certain cases it is absolutely necessary to consult them, and generally it is useful to do so. But often it is of no use at all, and sometimes even very
dangerous to consult them. I shall now explain and demonstrate these things.
It is ordinarily said that human reason is liable to error, but this contains an
equivocation of which we are not wary enough. For it should not be imagined

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

649

that the Reason man consults is corrupt, or that it ever deceives him when he
consults it faithfully. I have said this before and I repeat it: only sovereign
Reason makes us rational, only sovereign Truth enlightens us, only God speaks
to us clearly and can teach us. We have but one true Master, Jesus Christ, our
Lord, the eternal Wisdom, the Word of the Father in whom are all the treasures
of the knowledge and wisdom of God; and it is impious to say that this universal
Reason in which all men participate and by which alone they are rational, is
liable to error or capable of deceiving us. It is not man's reason that seduces him
but his heart, and it is not his light that prevents him from seeing but his
darkness. It is not his union with God that deceives him, or even, in a sense, his
union with the body, but his dependence upon the body, or rather, his desire to
deceive himself. It is his desire to enjoy the pleasure of making judgments before
bothering to conduct an examination. It is his desire to rest before reaching the
place in which the truth rests. I have examined the cause of our errors with
greater precision in several places of the Search after Truth, and I here assume
what I have said about it.
I therefore say that it is of no use to consult spiritual directors when it is certain
that the Truth is speaking to us, and it is certain that the Truth is speaking to us
when evidence is found in the responses made to our inquiries or to our mind's
attentions. I mean the evidence found in them, the evidence light produces, and
not that false evidence produced in us by the imagination or passion. Thus, when
we retreat within ourselves, we hear in the tranquillity of our senses and passions
a word so clear and intelligible that we cannot doubt it. We must submit to it
without regard for the opinion of men. We must not take account of custom or
listen to our secret inclinations, or defer too much to the so-called learned. We
must not be seduced by false appearances of piety, or be disheartened by the
opposition of those who are ignorant of the mind animating them. Rather we
must suffer their insults with patience, without condemning their intentions or
despising the people themselves. In all simplicity, we must rejoice in the light of
truth that illuminates us, and although its replies might condemn us, we must
prefer them to all the subtle distinctions the imagination invents in order to justify
the passions.
Any man, for example, who knows how to retreat within himself and who
quiets the din of his senses and passions discovers clearly that the entire impulse
of love that God places in us must center upon Him, and that God Himself cannot
dispense us from the obligation we have of loving Him in all things. It is clear
that God cannot cease acting for Himself, nor create or preserve our will for it to
will anything other than Himself, or to will anything other than what He Himself
wills. For I do not see how it can be imagined that God can will that we love most
what is least worthy of love, or that we should love supremely, or as our end,
what is not supremely worthy of love.
I realize that men who consult their passions instead of order can easily
imagine that God has no other rule for His volitions than His volitions themselves, and that if God follows some order, He does so precisely because He has
willed and produced this order by a volition that is entirely free and indifferent in

650

Nicolas Malebranche

every way. There are people who think that no order is necessary and immutable
by its nature and that the order or wisdom of God according to which He made all
things, although the first of created things, is itself a created thing, created by a
free volition of God and not begotten of His substance through the necessity of
His being. But this opinion, which upsets all the foundations of morals by
stripping the order and eternal laws dependent upon them of their immutability,
and which overturns the entire edifice of the Christian religion by despoiling
Jesus Christ or the Word of God of His divinity, still does not cast the mind into
such darkness as to hide from it this truth: that God wills order. Thus, whether
God's volitions create order or assume it, we clearly see when we retreat within
ourselves that the God we worship cannot do what appears to us clearly contrary
to order. As a result ofthis, given that order would have it that such time as we
have, or the duration of our being, should be for Him who preserves us and that
the impulse of our heart should unceasingly tend toward Him who unceasingly
impresses it in us, and that our soul should labor with all its powers only for Him
in virtue of whom it acts, God cannot dispense us from the commandment He
gave us through Moses in the law [Deut. 6:5] and that He has reiterated for us
through His Son in the gospel:• "You shall love the Lord your God with your
whole heart, your whole soul, your whole mind and your whole strength."
But because order would have it that every righteous person should be happy
and every sinner miserable, that every action conforming to order or every
impulse of love toward God should be rewarded, and that every action contrary
to order or every impulse of love not tending toward God should be punished, it
is clear that every man wishing to be happy must unceasingly strive after God and
must recoil from every obstacle in his path or anything that diminishes his
impulse toward his true good. For this he has no need of a spiritual director, for
when God speaks, men must be silent. And when we are absolutely certain that
our senses and passions play no role in the responses we hear in the most secret
recesses of our reason, we must always listen to these responses respectfully and
submit to them.
Should we want to know whether to go to a ball or a play, whether in
conscience we can pass a large part of the day at games and in useless conversations, whether certain transactions, studies, or occupations agree with our obligations, let us then retreat within ourselves, silence our senses and passions, and
then see in the light of God whether we can perform such an action for God. Let
us beseech Him who is the way, the truth, and the life, in order to know whether
the path we are following does not lead us to death, and whether we have reason
to believe (since God is essentially just and necessarily obliged to punish anything inconsistent with order and to reward anything agreeing with it) that we are
going to increase or ensure our happiness through the action we would perform.
If the love of God inclines us to go to a ball, let us go then. If in order to gain
heaven we must gamble,let us gamble then, night and day. If, in our occupation,
"''Diliges Domin urn Deum tuum ex toto corde tun. & ex Iota anima tua, & ex Iota mente tua, & ex
tota virtute tua." Mark 12:30.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

651

we have the glory of God in view, let us continue in it. Let us do all these things
joyously, for our reward in heaven will be great. But if, after having carefully
examined our essential obligations, we clearly see that neither our being nor its
duration belong to us and that we are performing an unjust act that God cannot
fail to punish when our only concern is to pass the time pleasantly. If our Lord
and Master Jesus Christ, who purchased us with His blood, reproaches us in very
clear and intelligible fashion for our unfaithfulness and ingratitude because we
are living according to the flesh and the world, because we are leading a soft and
voluptuous life, or because we follow custom and opinion, let us then give
ourselves up to his voice and let us not harden our hearts; let us not look for
spiritual directors who comfort and reassure us against these reproaches and who
conceal with pleasing clouds the light that wounds and penetrates us.
When one blind man leads another, says the Gospel [Math. 15:14], both fall
into the precipice. But if the blind man who lets himself be led falls with him who
leads, if he is not excused by God, will He excuse someone who sees clearly but
lets himself be led by a blind man because the blind man leads him pleasantly
along the road of his inclinations? These voluntarily blind men should know that
God, who never deceives, allows these seducers to be in order to punish the
corrupt hearts of those who seek to be seduced, that blindness is a punishment for
sin although it is often a cause of it, and that he who has refused to listen to
eternal Wisdom (which speaks to him only for his own good) justly ends by being
corrupted by men whose deceit is as dangerous as their flattery is pleasant.
I grant that it is difficult to retreat within oneself, to silence one's senses and
passions, and to decide whether it is God or our body speaking to us. For we
often take the effects of sensation for the certainity of reason, and because of this,
it is often necessary to consult spiritual directors. But our Master is to be valued
more than prompters. We must begin by consulting God, and it is not always
necessary to consult spiritual directors, for in many cases what we must do is
seen with ultimate evidence and complete certainty. It is then even dangerous to
consult them, unless we do so with complete sincerity and in a spirit of humility
and obedience, for these attitudes require that God not allow us to be deceived or
not allow us to err in any detrimental way.
When it is appropriate to consult a spiritual director, one must be chosen who
knows religion, respects the gospel, and has some knowledge of man. Care must
be taken that worldliness has not corrupted him, that friendship has not left him
soft and complacent, and that he neither fears nor hopes anything from us. One in
a thousand must be chosen, says Saint Theresa, who, as she herself says. thought
herself lost through the fault of a foolish spiritual director.
The world is full of deceivers, those of good faith as well as others. Those who
are our friends seduce us through complacence, those who are below us please us
out of respect or fear, those who are above us do not attend to our needs because
of contempt or unconcern. In addition. everyone gives us advice according to the
reports we give them of what goes on within us, and we never fail to present
ourselves in our best light, because we imperceptibly hide our afflictions when
they cause us shame. We often deceive those directing us in order to deceive

652

Nicolas Malebranche

ourselves, for we pretend to be safe while following them. They lead us where
we wish to go, and in spite of our light and the secret reproaches of our reason,
we try to convince ourselves that we act out of obedience. We deceive ourselves,
and God permits us to do so, but we do not deceive Him who fathoms the depths
of our heart; and though we may close our ears as tightly as we can to the voice of
inner truth, because sovereign Truth reproaches us by abandoning us to ourselves, we are still aware that it lights our darkness and reveals the strategems of
our self-love.
It is clear, then, that Reason must be consulted for the health of the soul, just
as the senses must be consulted for the health of the body; and that when, after
being consulted as carefully as possible, Reason gives no clear reply, it is
necessary to rely on spiritual directors, just as physicians must be relied on when
the senses fail us. But this must not be done indiscriminately, because unenlightened spiritual directors can sometimes bring death to our soul, just as inexpert physicians can bring death to our body.
Since I am not giving the complete account that might be provided of the rules
for choosing and making proper use of spiritual directors and physicians, I ask
that my opinions be viewed fairly and that it not be imagined that I eschew all
possible help from other men. I realize that it is a particular blessing to submit
one's opinions to wise and enlightened people, and I should think that the general
rule, that one must die according to the rules, is better for the common man than
any I might propose for the preservation of life.
But because it is always worthwhile to withdraw into oneself, to consult the
gospel and to listen to Jesus Christ (whether he speaks to our mind or heart
directly, or through faith to our eyes and ears), I thought I could say what I did,
for our spiritual directors deceive us when what they tell us is contrary to what
faith and reason teach us. And since we honor God with our belief that His works
have everything necessary to their preservation, I thought I could show men that
their corporeal machine is constructed in so remarkable a way that it can find
what is necessary to its preservation more easily and often more safely by itself
than through science or even the experience of the most skillful of physicians.

ELUCIDATION FOURTEEN

On the third chapter of the fifth book. That love is different from pleasure and
joy.
The mind often confuses very different things when they occur at the same time
and are not altogether contrary. In this work I have produced several examples of
this because it is mainly in this that our errors are to be found with regard to what
takes place in us. Since we have no clear idea either of what constitutes the nature
or essence of our soul, or of any of the modifications of which it is capable, it
often happens that entirely different things need only occur in us at the same time
in order for us to confuse them, for we easily confuse what we do not know
through a clear and distinct idea.
Not only is it impossible to know clearly what constitutes the difference
between things that take place in us at the same time, but it is even difficult to
know that there is a difference between them. To do so, we must tum away and
withdraw into ourselves, not to relate them to good or evil, which we can easily
do, but to consider ourselves from a bare and abstract point of view, which we
can do only with a great deal of difficulty and distraction.
We have no difficulty in understanding that the roundness of a body is different from its motion. And although we know through experience that a ball on a
flat surface cannot be pushed without being moved, and that thus motion and
roundness are found together, nonetheless, we do not confuse the two because
we know motion and figure through very clear and distinct ideas. But such is not
the case with pleasure and love, which are almost always confused. Our mind
becomes mobile, as it were, through pleasure, just as a ball does through roundness; and because it is never without an impression toward the good, it immediately sets itself in motion toward the object causing or seeming to cause this
pleasure. As a result, this impulse of love occuring in the soul while it feels the
pleasure suffices for it to confuse its pleasure with its love because it has a clear
idea of neither its love nor its pleasure as it does of some figure or an instance of
motion. Because of this, some people believe that pleasure and love are not
different and that I make too many distinctions in each of our passions.
But in order to show clearly that pleasure and love arc two very different

653

654

Nicolas Malebranche

things, I shall distinguish two kinds of pleasure. There is the pleasure that
precedes reason such as pleasant sensations, and they are ordinarily called bodily
pleasures. Then there are those that precede neither the senses nor reason, and
these are called pleasures of the soul. Such would be the joy excited in us as a
consequence of the clear knowledge or the confused sensation we have that some
good has happened or will happen to us.
For example, a man tasting a fruit with which he is not familiar feels pleasure
in eating it if the fruit is nourishing. This pleasure is prevenient, for since he
perceives it before knowing that the fruit is good for him, it is clear that this
pleasure precedes his reason. A hunter who is hungry expects to fmd, or actually
does find, something to eat; he actually experiences joy. Now, this joy is a
pleasure that follows the knowledge he has of his present or future good.
It is perhaps clear from this distinction between pleasure that follows reason
and pleasure that precedes it, that there is no pleasure that is not different from
love. For the pleasure that precedes reason certainly precedes love, since it
precedes all knowledge, whereas some knowledge is presupposed by love. And
joy, on the contrary, or pleasure that presupposes know ledge also presupposes
love, since joy presupposes the confused sensation or clear knowledge that we
possess or will possess of what we love. For if we possessed something for which
we had no love, we would receive no joy from it. Thus, pleasure is quite different
from love because the pleasure that precedes reason precedes and causes love,
and the pleasure that follows reason necessarily presupposes love as the effect
presupposes its cause.
Although we cannot clearly know the nature of prevenient pleasure because we
have a clear idea neither of our soul nor of its modifications, nonetheless, if we
pay close attention to the inner sensation we have of it, we shall see that this kind
of pleasure is but a pleasant perception of some object, a perception produced in
the soul by the idea affecting it. Now, there is a big difference between the soul's
perceptions on the one hand and its impulses and love on the other. Whoever
touches a burning coal feels pain only because when his finger is burned the idea
of his finger affects his soul with an unpleasant sensation; but the aversion
excited by this perception is always very different from it, although the former
naturally follows the latter. Thus, natural love is quite different from prevenient
pleasure, although it always accompanies it.
This is even more evident with regard to voluntary Jove. For if prevenient
pleasure were the same thing as Jove, there would never be any pleasure without
Jove or Jove without pleasure, for a thing cannot be without itself. Yet a Christian
voluntarily loves his enemy, and a well-brought-up child loves his father, however unreasonable or vexing he might be. The perception of their duty, the fear of
God, the Jove of order and justice, make them Jove not only without pleasure but
even with a kind of dread people whom they find altogether unpleasant. I grant
that they sometimes feel pleasure or joy when they think they are performing
their duty, or when they hope to receive their just reward. But this pleasure is
clearly very different from the love they have for their father, although it might
be the motive for it.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

655

It is also quite certain that habitual love is different from pleasure, for this love
continues in us during distractions and during sleep. Pleasure certainly subsists in
the soul only as long as it makes itself felt by it. Thus, given that habitual love or
charity reside in us without pleasure or delight, it cannot be maintained that
pleasure and love are but the same thing.
As pleasure and pain are contraries, if pleasure were the same thing as love,
pain would not be different from hatred. Now, it is clear that pain is different
from hatred, for the former often subsists without the latter. A man, for example,
who is suddenly injured suffers a real and piercing pain, but he has no hatred; for
he does not even know the cause of his pain or the object of his hatred, or rather,
since the cause of his pain does not deserve hatred, it cannot arouse it. Thus, he
does not hate the cause of his pain, although his pain leads him or disposes him to
hatred. It is true that the man hates his pain, for pain deserves hatred; but the
hatred of pain is not pain, it presupposes pain. The hatred of pain does not
deserve hatred as does pain. It, on the other hand, is very pleasant, for we take
pleasure in hating pain as we have just the opposite feeling when suffering pain.
Pain, then, is not hatred, and pleasure, which is the contrary of pain, is not love,
which is the contrary of hatred. And consequently, the pleasure that precedes
reason is not the same thing as love. I shall now likewise prove that joy, or the
pleasure that follows reason, is distinct from love.
As joy and sadness are contraries, if joy were the same thing as love, sadness
would not be different from hatred. Now, it is clear that sadness is different from
hatred, for the former sometimes subsists without the latter. For example, a man
has the ill fortune to be deprived of certain necessities -this is enough to cause in
him a certain sadness; but it cannot excite hatred in him, whether because there is
no cause of his deprivation or because the cause does not deserve hatred and so
cannot arouse it. True, the man hates the privation of the good he loves; but it is
clear that this kind of hatred is really love, because the man hates the privation of
good only because he loves good. And since fleeing from the privation of good is
to tend toward good, it is clear that the impulse of his hatred is not different from
the impulse of his love. Thus, given that his hatred, if he has any, is not contrary
to love, whereas sadness is always contrary to joy, it is clear that this sadness is
not his hatred and consequently, joy is different from love. Finally, it is clear that
we are affected by sadness due to the presence of some object we hate, or rather
due to the absence of some object we love. Thus, sadness presupposes hatred or,
rather, love, but it is very different from these two things.
I realize that Saint Augustine asserts that pain is an aversion conceived by the
soul due to the fact that the body is not disposed as it would wish, and that he
often confuses delight with charity, pleasure with joy, pain with sadness, pleasure and joy with love, and pain and sadness with aversion or hatred. But there is
every likelihood that the holy doctor said all these things in the ordinary language
of the common man, who confuses most of the things that simultaneously take
place in him. Or perhaps he just did not examine these things in a precise or
philosophical enough way. Yet I think I can and must say that it seems to me
these things must be carefully distinguished in order to explain dearly and

656

Nicolas Malebranche

unequivocally many of the questions that Saint Augustine dealt with. For even
those whose opinions are completely contrary are accustomed to appeal to the
authority of this great man because of the different interpretations provided by his
expressions, which are not always precise enough to reconcile people perhaps
more interested in dispute than agreement.

ELUCIDATION FIFfEEN

On the third chapter of the second part of the sixth book. Concerning the efficacy
attributed to secondary causes.
Since the sin of the first man, the mind constantly spreads itself externally; it
forgets itself and Him who enlightens and penetrates it, and it lets itself be so
seduced by its body and by those surrounding it that it imagines fmding in them
its perfection and happiness. God, who alone is capable of acting on us, is now
hidden to our eyes; His operations contain nothing sensible, and although He
produces and conserves all beings, the mind, which so arduously seeks the cause
of all things, has difficulty in recognizing Him, although it encounters Him at
every moment. Some philosophers prefer to imagine a nature and certain faculties as the cause of the effects we call natural, than to render to God all the honor
that is due His power; and although they have neither a proof nor even a clear idea
of this nature or these faculties, as I hope to show, they prefer to speak without
knowing what they say and to respect a purely imaginary power, than to make
any effort of mind to recognize the hand of Him who does everything in all things.
I cannot help believing that one of the most deplorable consequences of Original Sin is that we no longer have any taste or feeling for God, or that we
experience and encounter Him only with a kind of horror or fear. We should see
God in all things, sense His power and might in all natural effects, admire His
wisdom in the marvelous order of creatures-in a word, we should adore only
Him, fear and love only Him in all His works. But there is now a secret opposition between man and God. Feeling himself a sinner, man hides, flees the light,
fears encountering God and prefers to imagine in the bodies surrounding him a
blind nature or power that he can master and without remorse use toward his
bizarre and disordered intentions. than to find in them the terrible power of a just
and holy God who knows all and who does all.
I grant that there are many people who through a principle different from that
of the pagan philosophers follow their opinion on nature and secondary causes.
But I hope it will be seen from the following discourse that they yield to this
opinion only through a prejudice from which it is almost impossible to deliver
oneself without the aid that can be drawn from the principles of a philosophy that

657

658

Nicolas Ma/ebranche

has not always been sufficiently known. For it is apparently this which has
prevented them from declaring themselves in favor of the opinion I think ought to
be held.
There are many reasons preventing me from attributing to secondary or
natllral causes a force, a power, an efficacy to produce anything. But the principal one is that this opinion does not even seem conceivable to me. Whatever
effort I make in order to understand it, I cannot find in me any idea representing
to me what might be the force or the power they attribute to creatures. And I do
not even think it a temerarious judgment to assert that those who maintain that
creatures have force and power in themselves advance what they do not clearly
conceive. For in short, if philosophers clearly conceived that secondary causes
have a true force to act and produce things like them, then being a man as much
as they and participating like them in sovereign Reason, I should clearly be able to
discover the idea that represents this force to them. But whatever effort of mind I
make, I can find force, efficacy, or power only in the will of the infmitely perfect
Being.
In addition, when I think about the different opinions of philosophers on this
subject, I cannot doubt what I am proposing. For if they clearly saw what the
power of creatures is, or what in them truly has this power, they would all agree
in their opinion about it. When people who have no special interest preventing
them from agreeing cannot agree, it is a sure sign that they have no clear idea of
what they are saying and do not understand each other, especially if they are
disputing about subjects that are not complex or difficult to discuss, such as the
present question, for it would not be very difficult to resolve it if man had some
clear idea of a created power or force. Here then are some of their views so that
you might see how little they agree with each other.
There are some philosophers8 who assert that secondary causes act through
their matter, figure, and motion, and these philosophers are right in a sense;
others assert that they do so through a substantial form; others through accidents
or qualities, and some through matter and form; of these some through form and
accidents, others through certain virtues or faculties different from the above.
There are some who maintain that the substantial form produces forms and the
accidental form accidents, others that forms produce other forms and accidents,
and others, finally, that accidents alone are capable of producing accidents and
even forms. But it should not be imagined that those who say, for example, that
accidents can produce forms through the virtue they have received from the form
to which they are joined understand this in the same way. Some would have it that
these accidents are but the very power or virtue of the substantial form; others
that these accidents incorporate the influence of the form and thus act only
through its virtue; and others, finally, that they are only instrumental causes. But
these last are not yet in total agreement among themselves about what should be
understood by instrumental cause, nor what the virtue is that it receives from the
"For the most extraordinary of these views, sec Suarel's Mt•ltlplt. Disp. I H. sec. 2 & ]; Scotus, in
4 St•nt. Dis. 12.1. D. 37.2. D. 17; LaPalud, in 4 Smt. D. 12. Q. I. an. I; Pereir•. R Phy. <·h. 3;
Conimhrin·nw·.• nn Aristotle'~ physics. and several others cited by Suarez.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

659

primary cause. Philosophers do not even agree about the action by which secondary causes produce their effects. a Some of them claim that causality must not be
produced, for it is what produces. Others would have them truly act through their
action; but they find such great difficulty in explaining precisely what this action
is, and there are so many different views on the matter that I cannot bring myself
to relate them.
There you have a great variety of views, although I have not related those of
the ancient philosophers, or those who were born in very distant countries. But
you can judge well enough that they no more entirely agree among themselves on
the subject of secondary causes than those of whom I have just spoken. Avicenna, for example, does not believe that corporeal substances can produce
anything but accidents. And hereb is his system as related by Ruvio. He claims
that God immediately produces a very perfect spiritual substance, that this substance produces another, less perfect substance, and this substance a third, and so
on, till the last, which produces all corporeal substances, and the corporeal
substances produce the accidents. But since he was unable to understand how
corporeal substances,c which cannot penetrate each other, should be capable of
altering each other, Avicebron claims that only minds are capable of acting on
bodies because only they can penetrate them. For as these gentlemen did not
accept the void or the atoms of Democritus, and as Descartes's subtle matter was
not sufficiently known to them, they did not join the Gassendists and the Cartesians in the view that there are bodies small enough to enter the pores of those
that appear hardest and most solid.
It seems to me that this diversity of views gives us the right to view men as
often talking about things they do not know, and that since the power of creatures
is a fiction of the mind of which we naturally have no idea, it is fancy that leads
everyone to imagine it.
It is true that in all times this power has been recognized as real and true by
most men, but this certainly has been without proof-I do not say without
demonstrative proof, I say without proof capable of making any impression on an
attentive mind. For the confused proofs that are based only on the deceiving
testimony of the senses and imagination should not be accepted by those who
make use of their reason.
Speaking of what is called nature, Aristotled said that it is ridiculous to wish to
prove that natural bodies have an inner principle of their motion and rest, because, he says. this is a thing known by itself. Nor does he doubt that a ball that
collides with another has the force to set it in motion. This is the way it appears to
the eyes, and that is enough for this philosopher: for he almost always follows the
testimony of the senses and rarely that of reason, and he is indifferent as to
whether that testimony be intelligible or not.
"Sec

l'ons~l·a's

M,.,,,,,,. 'I·

I J. sec _,; Soncinas's and Javelle's on lhc same ljUCslion.

"Ruvin. h<>ok 2. ph. lral'l. -1. q. 2.

··sec Suarct. Disp. I X.

s~c

I.

"Ch. I. or bk. 2. or his l'hysio.

660

Nicolas Malebranche

Those who contest the view of certain theologians who have written against
secondary causes say, as did Aristotle, that the senses convince us of their
efficacy; this is their first and chief proof. It is clear, they say,a that fire bums,
that the sun illuminates, and that water cools; one must be a fool to doubt these
things. The authors of the opposite view, says the great Averreos, are out of their
minds. Almost all the Peripatetics say that those who deny this efficacy must be
convinced through sensible proofs and must thus be obliged to admit that they are
capable of being acted upon and hurt. This is a judgment that Aristotleb has
already pronounced against them, and we should execute it.
But this alleged demonstration is pitiful. For it shows the weakness of the
human mind, and it shows that even philosophers are infinitely more sensuous
than they are rational. It shows that those who glory in seeking the truth do not
even know what they must consult to learn of it, whether it is the sovereign
Reason, who never deceives and who always discloses things as they are in
themselves, or whether it is the body, which speaks only in self-interest and
which discloses things only in relation to the preservation and convenience of
life. For in the end, what prejudices shall we not justify if we take the senses as
judges, to which practically all prejudices owe their origin, as I have shown in
the Search after Truth.
When I see one ball strike another, my eyes tell me, or seem to tell me, that the
one is truly the cause of the motion it impresses on the other, for the true cause
that moves bodies does not appear to my eyes. But when I consult my reason I
clearly see that since bodies cannot move themselves, and since their motor force
is• but the will of God that conserves them successively in different places, they
cannot communicate a power they do not have and could not communicate even
if it were in their possession. For the mind will never conceive that one body, a
purely passive substance, can in any way whatsoever transmit to another body
the power transporting it.
When I open my eyes, it seems clear to me that the sun is brilliant with light,
that not only is it visible by itself but that it makes all the bodies surrounding it
visible, that it covers the earth with flowers and fruits, gives life to animals, and,
penetrating by its heat even to the bowels of the earth, produces stones, marble,
and metals. But when I consult Reason, I see nothing of all this; and when I
consult it faithfully, I clearly recognize that my senses seduce me, and that it is
God who does everything in all things. For since I know that all the changes that
occur in bodies have no other principle than the different communications of
motion that take place in both visible and invisible bodies, I see that it is God
who does everything, since it is His will that causes, and His wisdom that
regulates, all these communications.
I assume that locomotion is the principle of generation, corruption, alteration,
and generally of all the changes that occur in bodies; this is now an opinion that is
"See hmseca, Ruvio. Suarez, and the others already cited.
"Bk. I. of the Topin·, ch. I.

'"I have proved this truth at greater length in the seventh Dit1/ogut• mr Mt•taphysio and elsewhere.
Sec also the fifth and si~th Meditation•· chrhi•·•me ..-.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

661

well enough received among the learned. But whatever view is held on this, it
makes no difference. For it seems easier to conceive that one body pushes
another when it collides with it than it is to understand that fire produces heat and
light and that it draws from the potentiality of matter a substance that was not
there beforehand. And if God must be recognized as the true cause of the
different communications of motion, a fortiori we must judge that only He can
create and annihilate real qualities and substantial forms. I say create and annihilate, because it seems to be at least as difficult to draw from matter a substance
that was not there, or to introduce it without it being there, as it is to create or
annihilate it. But I do not pause over terms; I make use of these only because
there are no others I know of that clearly and unequivocally express the changes
that philosophers assume are constantly occuring through the power of secondary
causes.
I find some difficulty in relating here the other proofs that are ordinarily given
of the power and efficacy of natural causes, for they seem so weak to those who
resist prejudices and who prefer their reason to their senses, that it does not seem
likely they could have persuaded reasonable people. Nevertheless, I relate and
answer them because there are many philosophers who use them.
First Proof

If secondary causes did nothing, say Suarez, Fonseca, and some others, 8 we
could not distinguish living things from those not living, for neither of them
would have an inner principle of their actions.
Reply

I reply that men would still have the same sensible proofs that have convinced
them of the distinction they make between living things and those not living.
They would still see animals perform certain actions such as eating, growing,
crying, running, jumping, and so forth, and they would see nothing similar in
stones. And it is this alone that has caused ordinary philosophers to believe that
beasts are alive and stones not. For it should not be imagined that they know
through a clear and distinct perception of the mind what the life of a dog is; their
senses determine their decisions on this question.
If it were necessary, I would prove here that the principle of a dog's life is not
very different from that of the motion of a watch. For the life of bodies, whatever
they might be, can only consist in the motion oftheir parts; and it is not difficult
to judge that the same subtle matter that produces the fermentation of blood and
animal spirits in a dog, and which is the principle of its life, is no more perfect
than that which gives motion to the mechanism of watches or which causes
heaviness in the weights of clocks, which is the principle of their life. or to speak
as do others, of their motion.
It is up to the Peripatetics to give to those whom they term Cartesians a dear
idea of what they call hestialli(e. corpon•al soul, body that paccires. tftosirn.
"In M<"lcif'll. Disp. Ill. sec I. ass<"rt. 12. In Mei<IJ>II ..4rl.ll.

ljliCSI.

7. se.:. !.

Nicolas Malebranche

662

sees, senses and wills, and then we shall clearly resolve their difficulties if after
this they continue to produce them.
Second Proof
We could recognize neither the differences nor the virtues of the elements. It
could happen that fire would cool as water does; nothing would be of a fixed and
detenninate nature.
Reply
I reply that while nature remains as it is, i.e., while the laws of the communication of motion remain the same, it is a contradiction that fire should not bum or
separate the parts of certain bodies. Fire cannot cool like water unless it becomes
water, for since fire is only wood whose parts have been agitated with a violent
motion by an invisible matter surrounding them, as is easy to demonstrate, 8 it is
impossible for these parts not to communicate some of their motion to the bodies
with which they collide. Now, since these laws are constant, the nature of fire
and its virtues and qualities do not change. But this nature and these virtues are
but consequences of the general and efficacious will of God, who does everything in all things. As a result, the study of nature is false and vain in every way
when true causes are sought in it other than the volitions of the Almighty, or the
general laws according to which He constantly acts.
I grant that recourse to God or the universal cause should not be had when the
explanation of particular effects is sought. For we would be ridiculous were we to
say, for example, that it is God who dries the roads or who freezes the water of
rivers. We should say that the air dries the earth because it stirs and raises with it
the water that soaks the earth, and that the air or subtle matter freezes the river
because in this season it ceases to communicate enough motion to the parts of
which the water is composed to make it fluid. In a word, we must give, if we can,
the natural and particular cause of the effects in question. But since the action of
these causes consists only in the motor force activating them, and since this
motor force is but the will of God, they must not be said to have in themselves
any force or power to produce any effects. And when in our reasoning we have
come at last to a general effect whose cause is sought, we also philosophize badly
if we imagine any other cause of it than the general cause. We must not feign a
certain nature, a primum mobile. a universal soul, or any such chimera of which
we have no clear and distinct idea; this would be to reason like a pagan philosopher. For example, when we ask how it is that there are bodies in motion, or that
agitated air communicates its motion to water, or rather how it is that bodies push
one another, then, since motion and its communication is a general effect on
which all others depend, it is necessary, I do not say in order to be a Christian but
to be a philosopher, to have recourse to God, who is the universal cause, because
His will is the motor force of bodies and also produces the communication of
their motion. Had He wished not to produce anything new in the world, He
"See the following Elucidation.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

663

would not have set its parts in motion. And if He wishes some day to make some
of the beings He has formed incorruptible, our bodies after the resurrection, for
example, He will cease to will certain communications of motion with respect to
these beings.
Third Proof
It would be useless to plow, a water, and dispose bodies in a certain way in
order to prepare them for what we hope will happen to them. For God has no
need to prepare the subjects on which He acts.

Reply
I reply that God can absolutely do all He pleases without finding dispositions
in the subjects on which He acts. But He cannot do so without a miracle, or by
natural ways, i.e., according to the general laws of the communication of motion
He has established, and according to which He almost always acts. God does not
multiply his volitions without reason; He always acts through the simplest ways,
and this is why he uses the collision of bodies to move them, not because their
impact is absolutely necessary for their motion, as our senses tell us, but because
with impact as the occasion for the communication of motion, very few natural
laws are needed to produce all the admirable effects we see.
A plant must be watered in order for it to grow because, according to the laws
of the communication of motion, there is almost nothing but the parts of water
that, by their motion and due to their shape, can work their way up between the
fibres of plants to carry with them certain salts and other small bodies, and by
congealing or attaching themselves to each other in different ways take the shape
necessary to nourish them. The subtle matter the sun constantly diffuses can raise
water in plants by agitating it, but it does not have enough motion to raise coarse
parts of earth. Nevertheless, earth and even air are necessary for the growth of
plants: earth to keep water at their roots, and air to excite in the same water a
moderate fermentation. But since the action of the sun, air, and water consists
only in the motion of their parts, properly speaking only God acts. For, as I have
just said, only He through the efficacy of His volitions and through the infinite
extent of His knowledge can produce and regulate the infinitely infinite communications of motion occurring at each instant and conserving in the universe all
the beautiful things we note in it.
Fourth Proof
No one struggles against himself; no one resists himself. Bodies collide,
strike, and resist each other. Therefore, God does not act in them, except through
His concourse. If God alone produced and conserved motion in bodies, He
would divert them before their impact, for He knows that they are impenetrable.
Why thrust bodies in order to make them rebound, why make them advance in
order to make them withdraw, why produce and conserve useless motion? Is it
•suarez. ibid.

Nicolas Malebranche

664

not an extravagant thing to say that God struggles against Himself and that He
destroys His works when a bull fights with a lion, when a wolf devours a sheep,
and when the sheep eats the grass that God makes grow. Therefore, there are
secondary causes.
Reply

Therefore, secondary causes do everything and God does nothing. For God
does not act against Himself, and to cooperate [concourir] is to act. To cooperate
with contrary actions is to give contrary cooperation, and consequently to perform contrary actions. To cooperate with the actions of creatures that resist each
other is to act against oneself. To cooperate with useless motion is to act
uselessly. Now, God does nothing uselessly; He performs no contrary action; He
does not struggle against Himself. Therefore, He does not cooperate with the
action of creatures, which often destroy each other and perform useless motions
or actions. That is where this proof of secondary causes leads. But this is what
reason teaches us.
God does everything in all things, and nothing resists Him. He does everything
in all things, for His volitions produce and regulate all motion, and nothing
resists Him because He does everything He wills. But here is how this must be
conceived. Having resolved, as agreeing more with the immutable order of His
attributes, to produce through the simplest ways, this infinite variety of creatures
we admire, He willed that bodies move in a straight line because that line is the
simplest. But since bodies are impenetrable, and since their motion occurs along
lines that are contrary or that intersect, they must strike each other and, as a
result, cease to move in the same way. God foresaw this, and yet He positively
willed the collision or impact of bodies, not because He is pleased to struggle
against Himself, but because He intended to make use of this impact of bodies as
an occasion to establish the general law of the communication of motion by
which He foresaw He must produce an infinity of admirable effects. For I am
convinced that these two natural laws, which are the simplest of all-namely,
that motion occurs or tends to occur in a straight line, and that the impact of
bodies is communicated in proportion to, and along the line of, their pressureare sufficient, if the first instances of motion are wisely distributed, to produce
the world such as we see it, i.e., the sky, the stars, the planets, the comets, earth
and water, air and fire, in a word, the elements of all bodies that are not
organized or living; for organized bodies depend on the initial construction of
those of which they are born, and it is likely that they were formed at the creation
of the world, though not as they appear to our eyes, and that with time they
receive nothing more than the growth necessary to become visible. Nevertheless,
it is certain that they receive this growth only through the general laws of nature
according to which all other bodies are formed, with the result that their growth is
not always regular and that monsters are bred.
I say, therefore, that God through the first of the natural laws positively wills,
and consequently produces, the impact of bodies, and that He then makes use of
this impact, which obliges Him to diversify His action due to the impenetrability

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

665

.of bodies, as an occasion to establish the second natural law, which regulates the
communication of motion, and that thus actual impact is the natural or occasion a/
cause of the actual communication of motion by which God without altering His
ways produces an infinity of admirable works.
If you consider this well, you will clearly see that nothing could be better. But
on the assumption that God had not ordained it thus, and that He diverted bodies
about to strike each other as if there were a void to receive them, then first,
bodies would not be subject to that continuous vicissitude which produces the
beauty of the universe, for the generation of bodies occurs only through the
corruption of certain others; it is the contrariety of their motion that produces
their variety. Secondly, God would not act through the simplest ways, because in
order for bodies about to strike each other to continue their motion without
striking each other, they would have to describe lines curved in an infinity of
different ways; and consequently, different volitions would have to be admitted
in God in order to determine their motion. Finally, if there were no uniformity in
the action of natural bodies, and if their motion did not occur in a straight line,
there would be no sure principles for reasoning in physics and, in a number of
instances, for conducting ourselves in life.
It is no disorder for lions to eat wolves, wolves sheep, and sheep the grass that
God tends so carefully that He has given it all the things necessary for its own
preservation and even a seed for the preservation of its species. This no more
proves the efficacy of secondary causes than it does the plurality of causes or the
contrariety of the principles of good and evil the Manicheans imagined in order to
explain these effects. Rather, it is a sure sign• of the grandeur, wisdom, and
magnificence of God. For God produces only works worthy of an infinite wisdom, and He produces them with a profusion that sufficiently indicates His
power and grandeur. Everything that is destroyed is restored by the same law that
destroyed it-so great is the wisdom, power, and fecundity of this law. God does
not prevent the destruction of beings through a new volition, not only because
His first volition suffices to restore them, but especially because His volitions are
much more worthy than the restoration of these beings. They are even much
more worthy than everything they produce. And if God has produced this visible
world, though unworthy in itself of the action by which it is produced, He did so
because He had considerations that are not known to philosophers, and because
He could honor Himself in Jesus Christ with an honor that creatures cannot give
Him.
When a house crushes an honest man to death, there occurs a greater evil than
when one beast devours another, or when a body is required to rebound by the
impact of the body it strikes; but God does not multiply His volitions in order to
remedy the true or apparent disorders that are the necessary consequences of
natural laws. God must not correct or change these laws. although they sometimes produce monsters. He must not upset the uniformity of His conduct and the
simplicity of His ways. He must ignore insignificant things, i.e .• He must not
•see the Dialoll'""·' "" M.-raplry.,·io (9 -13) where I explain divine Provilicnce.

666

Nicolas Malebranche

have particular volitions to produce effects that do not merit them, or that are
unworthy of the action of Him who produces them. God produces miracles only
when the order He always follows requires it; I mean the immutable order of
justice that He wills to render to His attributes. And this order would have it that
He act through the simplest ways, and 3 that there be exceptions to His volitions
only when absolutely necessary to his intentions, only when the simplicity and
uniformity of His conduct honor His immutability and foreknowledge less than
miraculous conduct would honor His wisdom, justice, goodness, or some other
of His attributes; in a word, only on certain occasions that are entirely unknown
to us. Although we are all joined to the order or wisdom of God, we do not know
all its rules. We see in it what we must do, but we do not understand in it, and
must not make too much effort to understand, everything that God must will.
We have a great example of what I have just said in the damnation of an
infinite number of people whom God has allowed to perish during the centuries
of error. God is infinitely good, He loves all His works, He wills that all men be
saved and that they arrive at knowledge of the truth, for He made them to possess
Him; and yet the greatest number damn themselves, the greatest number live and
die in blindness and will remain there for all eternity. Is this not because God acts
through the simplest waysb and follows order? We have shown that according to
order God should not have advised through involuntary pleasuresc the will of the
first man, whose fall caused the disorder of nature. It was fitting that all men
come from a single man, not only because this way is simple, but also for reasons
that are too theological and too abstract to be deduced here. Finally, we must
believe that this agrees with the order God follows and the wisdom He always
consults in the formation and execution of his intentions. The sin of the first man
produced an infinity of evils, it is true. But certainly order required God to permit
it and to place man in a state of being able to sin, as I have proved elsewhere. d
In willing to restore His work, God only rarely gives those victorious graces
that overcome the malice of the greatest sinners. He often gives graces that are
useless for the conversion of those receiving them, although He foresees their
uselessness with respect to them. He sometimes distributes a great number of
them, which nonetheless produce but very little effect in relation to our salvation.
Why all these roundabout or indirect ways? He has only to will positively the
sinner's conversion in order to produce it in an invincible and efficacious way. Is
it not clearly because He acts through the simplest ways and because order would
have it so, although we do not always see it so? For God can act only with order
and wisdom, although His order and wisdom are often impenetrable abysses for
the human mind. There are certain very simple laws in the order of gracee
•see the seventh of the M<•ditations clrrhiennes.
•see the Elucidation on the fourth chapter of the second part on Method. (This was Elucidation 16
in earlier editions; though the Elucidation was withdrawn fn>m later editions. the reference to it
stood.)
'See the second Elucidation on ch. 5 [5).
dSee the second Dialogue of the Conversation.• chrhiemws of the Paris edition, 1702, pp. 60 ff.
•See the second discourse of the Treatise on Nature and Grace.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

667

according to which God ordinarily acts, for this order has its rules as does the
order of nature, although we do not know them as we see the rules for the
communication of motion. Let us only follow the counsel that He who perfectly
knows the laws of grace has given us in the gospel.
I say this to satisfy the unjust complaints of sinners, who despise the counsel of
Jesus Christ and blame God for their malice and disorders. They would have God
perform miracles in their favor and not follow the ordinary laws of grace. They
live in pleasure and seek honors; they constantly reopen the wounds sensible
objects have caused in their brain, and they often receive new ones; they would
have God heal them through a miracle. They are like the wounded who, in the
extremes of their pain, destroy their clothes, reopen their wounds, and then, at
the sight of approaching death, complain of the cruelty of those who bandage
them. They would have God save them because, they say, God is good, wise,
and powerful; it is up to Him only to make us happy; He should not have made us
in order to lose us. Let them know that God wills to save them and that, to this
end, He has done everything He must according to the order of the justice He
owes His attributes. We must not believe that He abandons us, because He has
given us His own Son to be our Mediator and our victim. Yes, God wills to save
us, and to save us all, but through ways we must study with care and exactly
follow. God should not consult our passions in the execution of His intentions.
He should consult only His wisdom, He should follow only order-and order
would have it that we imitate Jesus Christ and that we follow His counsel in order
to sanctify and save ourselves. But if God has not predestined all men to conform
to the image of His Son, who is the model and exemplar of the elect, it is because
in this God acts through the simplest ways in relation to His intentions, which all
favor His glory; it is because God is a universal cause and must not act as do
particular causes, which have particular volitions for everything they do; it is
because His wisdom, which in this is only an abyss for us, would have it so.
Finally, it is because this conduct is more worthy of God than some other that
would be more favorable to the damned. For the damned are condemned by an
order that is as worthy of our adoration as that by which the elect are sanctified
and saved; and only ignorance of order and self-love would make one condemn
conduct the angels and saints will eternally admire. Elsewhere8 I reply more fully
to the difficulties that might be raised against divine Providence. But let us return
to the proofs of the efficacy of secondary causes.
Fifth Proof
If bodies did not have a certain nature or force to act, and if God did all things,
there would be only the supernatural in even the most ordinary effects. The
distinction between the natural and the supernatural, which is so widely accepted
and which is established by the universal assent of the learned, would be extravagant and chimerical.
•see the DitlioRII<'S on M•·tuphysics. the Treatise on Nat11re and Grau. and the Re1>onses
especially the Re1><mse a sa Dissertation s11r /e.f Mirac/e.f de L" Ancien Testament.

Arna~tltl.

a M.

Nicolas Malebranche

668
Reply

I reply that this distinction is extravagant in the mouth of Aristotle, for the
nature this philosopher has established is a pure chimera. I say that this distinction is not clear in the mouth of the ordinary man, who judges things through the
impressions they make on his senses, for he does not know precisely what he
means when he asserts that fire bums by its nature. I say that this distinction is
allowable in the mouth of theologians, if they mean that natural effects are
those that are the consequences of the general laws that God has established for
the production and preservation of all things, and that supernatural effects are
those that do not depend on these laws. The distinction is genuine in this sense.
But the philosophy of Aristotle combined with the impression of the senses
renders it dangerous, it seems to me, because this distinction can tum away from
God those who have too much respect for the opinions of this miserable and
pitiful philosopher, or who consult their senses instead of withdrawing into
themselves in order to consult the truth. Therefore, we should not make use of
this distinction without explaining it. Having made use of the termfortuna, Saint
Augustine 8 retracted it, although there are few people who might be deceived
with respect to it. Speaking of sacrificial flesh, Saint Paulb warns that idols are
nothing. If the nature of pagan philosophy is a chimera, if this nature is nothing,
we must be advised of it, for there are many people who are mistaken with
respect to it. There are more than we might think who thoughtlessly attribute to it
the works of God, who busy themselves with this idol or fiction of the human
mind, and who render to it the honors due only to the Divinity. They would have
God be the author of miracles and certain extraordinary effects, which in one
sense are little worthy of His grandeur and wisdom, and they attribute to the
power of their imaginary nature the constant and regulated effects that the wise
alone are able to admire. They even pretend that the marvelous disposition that
all living bodies have for preserving themselves and begetting their kind is a
production of their nature, for according to these philosophers, it is the sun and
man that beget men.
We can still distinguish the supernatural order from the natural in several
ways. For we can say that the supernatural order relates to future goods, that it
was established in expectation of the merits of Jesus Christ, that it is the first and
principal order in the intentions of God, and other things sufficient to preserve a
distinction the elimination of which we perhaps fear without reason.
Sixth Proof

The main proof adduced by philosophers for the efficacy of secondary causes
is drawn from man's will and his freedom. Man wills, he determines himself by
himself; and to will and determine oneself is to act. Certainly, it is man who
commits sin. God is not the author of sin any more than He is of concupiscence
and error. Therefore, man acts through his own efficacy.
"Bk. I of the Retract.
bJ Cor. 10:19.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

669

Reply
I have sufficiently explained in several passages of the Search after Truth what
the will is, and what man's freedom is, especially in the first chapter of the first
book, and in the first Elucidation on the same chapter; it is useless to repeat it. I
grant that man wills and that he determines himself; but this is because God
makes him will by constantly leading him toward the good. He determines
himself; but this is because God gives him all the ideas and sensations that are the
motives by which he determines himself. I also grant that man alone commits
sin. But I deny that in this He does something; for sin, error, and even concupiscence are nothing. They are only lacks of something. I have sufficiently explained myself on this topic in the first Elucidation.
Man wills, but his volitions are impotent in themselves; they produce nothing; 8
they do not preclude God's doing everything, because God himself produces our
volitions in us through the impression He gives us toward the good in general, for
without this impression we would be able to will nothing. From himself man has
only error and sin, which are nothing.
There is quite a difference between our minds and the bodies that surround us.
Our mind wills, it acts, it determines itself; I have no doubts about this whatsoever. We are convinced of it by the inner sensation we have of ourselves. If we
had no freedom, there would be no punishment or future reward, for without
freedom there are no good or bad actions. As a result, religion would be an
illusion and a phantom. But what we clearly do not see, what seems incomprehensible, and what we deny when we deny the efficacy of secondary causes is
that bodies have the power to act.
The mind itself does not act as much as is imagined. I know that I will and that
I will freely; I have no reason to doubt it that is stronger than the inner sensation I
have of myself. Nor do I deny it. But I deny that my will is the true causeb of my
arm's movement, of my mind's ideas, and of other things accompanying my
volitions, for I see no relation whatever between such different things. I even see
clearly that there can be no relation between the volition I have to move my arm
and the agitation of the animal spirits, i.e., of certain tiny bodies whose motion
and figure I do not know and which choose certain nerve 1=anals from a million
others I do not know in order to cause in me the motion I desire through an
infinity of movements I do not desire. I deny that my will produces my ideas in
me, for I do not see even how they could produce them, because my will, which
is unable to act or will without knowledge, presupposes my ideas and does not
produce them. I do not even know precisely what an idea is. I do not know
whether they are produced from nothing and whether they return to nothingness
as soon as we cease to perceive them. I speak according to the view of some
people.
I produce my own ideas, they will say, by the faculty that God has given me
for thinking. I move my arm because of the union God has established between
a••Nemo babel de suo nisi mendacium & pecca!Um."' Cone. Araus. 2. Can. 22.
"According 10 !he sense explained in !he chapler of which !his is an Elucidalion.

670

Nicolas Malebranche

my mind and my body. Faculty and union are terms from logic; they are vague
and indeterminate words. No particular being or mode of being can be a faculty
or a union; these terms must be explained. If they say that the union of my mind
with my body consists in the fact that God wills that when I will my arm to move,
animal spirits disperse in the muscles of which it is composed in order to move it
in the way I wish, I clearly understand this explanation and I accept it. But this is
to say exactly what I maintain; for since my will determines the practical will of
God, it is evident that my arm will be moved not by my will, which in itself is
impotent, but by God's, which can never fail to have its effect.
But if they say that the union of my mind with my body consists in the fact that
God has given me the power 8 to move my arm, just as He has given to my body
the power to make me feel pleasure and pain in order to apply me to this body and
interest me in its preservation, then surely they suppose what is at issue and go in
a circle. They have no clear idea of this power the soul has over the body, nor of
that the body has over the soul; they do not fully know what they are saying when
they positively assert it. They have arrived at this view through prejudice; they
have believed it to be so since infancy and as long as they have been capable of
sensing; but the mind, reason, and reflection have no role in it. This is sufficiently clear from the things I have said in the Search after Truth.
But, they will say, I know through the inner sensation of my action that I truly
have this power; therefore, I am not mistaken in believing it. I reply that when
they move their arm they have an inner sensation of the actual volition by which
they move it; and they are not mistaken in believing that they have this volition.
They also have an inner sensation of a certain effort accompanying this volition,
and they also believe that they make this effort. Finally, I grantb that they have an
inner sensation that the arm is moved during this effort; and on this assumption I
also agree to what they say, that the movement of the arm occurs at the instant we
feel this effort, or that they have a practical volition to move it. But I deny that
this effort, which is only a modification or sensation of the soul, which is given
to us to make us understand our weakness, and to give us an obscure and
confused sensation of our strength, is by itself able to impart motion to animal
spirits, or to determine them. I deny that there is a relation between our thoughts
and the motion of matter. I deny that the soul has the least knowledge of the
animal spirits of which it makes use to move the body it animates. Finally, even
if the soul had an exact knowledge of the animal spirits, and even if it were
capable of moving them, or of determining their motion, I deny that it could

"I still mean a true and efficacious power.
"It seems to me evident that through inner sensation or consciousness the mind does not even know
the movement of the arm it animates. Through consciousness it knows only its own sensation, for the
soul is conscious only of its thoughts. Through inner sensation or consciousness they know the
sensation they have of the movement of their arm; but it is not through consciousness that they are
informed of the movement of their arm, of the pain they suffer there, any more than they are of the
colors they see on objects. Or if they do not wish to agree with this, I say that inner sensation is not
infallible, for error is almost always found in these sensations when they are compound. I have
sufficiently proved this in the first book of the S•·urcil after Truth.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

671

thereby select the nerve ducts, of which it has no knowledge, in order to impel
the spirits into them and thus move the body with the promptness, exactness, and
force observed even in those who least know the structure of their body.
For, even assuming that our volitions were truly the motor force of our bodies
(although this seems incomprehensible), how is it conceivable that the soul
should move the body? Our arm, for example, is moved only because spirits
swell certain of the muscles composing it. Now, in order for the motion that the
soul impresses on the spirits in the brain to be communicable to those in the
nerves, and thence to others in the muscles of our arm, the soul's volitions must
multiply or change proportionately to the almost infinite collisions or impacts
that would occur in the particles composing the spirits; for bodies cannot by
themselves move those they meet, as I feel I have sufficiently shown. But this is
inconceivable, unless we allow in the soul an infinite number of volitions for the
least movement of the body, because in order to move it, an infinite number of
communications of motion must take place. For, in short, since the soul is a
particular cause and cannot know exactly the size and agitation of an infinite
number of particles that collide with each other when the spirits are in the
muscles, it could neither establish a general law of the communication of motion,
nor follow it exactly had it established it. Thus, it is evident that the soul could
not move its arm, even if it had the power of determining the motion of the
animal spirits in the brain. These things are too clear to pause any longer over
them.
The same is true of our faculty of thinking. We know through inner sensation
that we will to think about something, that we make an effort to do so, and that at
the moment of our desire and effort, the idea of that thing is presented to our
mind. But we do not know through inner sensation that our will or effort produces our idea. We do not see through reason that this could happen. It is through
prejudice that we believe that our attention or desires are the cause of our ideas;
this is due to the fact that a hundred times a day we prove that our ideas follow or
accompany them. Since God and His operations contain nothing sensible, and
since we sense nothing other than our desires preceding the presence of ideas, we
think there can be no cause of these ideas other than our desires. But let us take
care. We do not see in us any power to produce them; neither reason northe inner
sensation we have of ourselves tells us anything about this.
I do not think it necessary to relate all the other arguments of which the
defenders of the efficacy of secondary causes make use, because these arguments
seem to be so weak that it might be imagined that my aim in doing so would be to
ridicule them, and I would make myself ridiculous if I were to respond to them
seriously. For example, one author says, quite seriously, in favor of his view,
"Created beings are true material, formal and final causes; why will they not be
efficient or efficacious causes as well?" It seems to me that I would not satisfy
many people if to answer this author's question I paused to clarify so gross an
equivocation, and to show the difference between an efficacious cause and the
cause it pleased philosophers to call material. Therefore, I leave such arguments
in order to come to those drawn from Sacred Scripture.

Nicolas Malebranche

672
Seventh Proof

Those who maintain the efficacy of secondary causes commonly adduce the
following passages to support their view: ''Germinet terra herbam viventem:
Producant aquae reptile animae viventis & volatile: Producat terra an imam viventem. " 8 Therefore, the earth and the water have received through the word of God
the power to produce plants and animals. God then commanded the birds and the
fishes to multiply: "Crescite & multiplicamini, & replete aquas maris, avesque
multiplicentur super terram. ••b Therefore, He gave them the power to beget their
kind.
In the fourth chapter of Saint Mark,c Jesus Christ says that the seed that falls
on good earth yields a hundredfold, and that the earth ''produces of itself first the
blade, then the ear, then the com in the ear." Finally, it is also written in the
book of Wisdomd that fire had, as it were, forgotten in favor of God's people the
power it has to bum. It is therefore certain from the Old and New Testaments that
secondary causes have a true power to act.

Reply
I reply that in Sacred Scripture there are also several passages that attribute to
God the alleged efficacy of secondary causes. Here are some of them.
"Ego sum Dominus faciens OMNIA, extendens coelos SOLUS, stabiliens terram, & NULL US mecum." Isa. 44:24. "Manus tuae fecerunt me & plasmaverunt
me TOTUM in circuitu." Job 10:8. "Nescio qualiter in utero me apparuistis . . . . Singulorum membra NON EGO IPSA COMPEGI, sed enim mundi creator
qui hominis formavit navitatem," &c. Mach. 1:2,7:22-23. "Cum ipse Deusdet
omnibus vitam, inspirationem, & omnia." Acts 17:25. "Producens foenum
jumentis, & herbam servituti hominum, ut educas panem de terra." Ps. 103 and
148. There is an infinity of such passages, but these are sufficient.
When an author seems to contradict himself, and natural equity or some
stronger reason obliges us to make him agree with himself, it seems to me that we
have an infallible rule to discover his real view. For we have only to observe
when this author speaks according to his lights, and when he speaks according to
common opinion. When a man speaks as do others, that does not always signify
that he is of their opinion. But when he positively says the opposite of what is
customarily said, though he might say it only once, we have reason to judge that
it is his view-provided that we know that he is speaking seriously, and after
having given careful thought.
For example, an author speaking about the properties of animals will say in a
hundred places that beasts sense, that dogs know their master, that they love and
fear him, and in only two or three places will he say that beasts do not sense, that
•Gen. ch. I [vv. II and 20-21).
"Ibid. [v. 22.].
,... Ultro cnim terra fructificat primum hcrbam; dcindc spicam. dcindc plenum fmmcntum in spica"
(4:2K).
•"Etiam suac vinutis oblitus est." Ch. 16 [v. 23).

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

673

dogs are incapable of knowledge, that they neither fear nor love anything. How
shall we make this author agree with himself, for he seems to contradict himself?
Shall we group all the passages pro and con, and judge his view by the larger
number? If so, I do not think there is a man to whom, for example, we can
attribute the view that animals do not have a soul; for even the Cartesians always
say that a dog senses when struck, and it rarely happens that they say it does not
sense. And although I myself attack an infinity of prejudices in this work, several
passages can be drawn from it by which it will be proved, unless the rule I am
explaining be received, that I uphold them all, and even that I hold the view
concerning the efficacy of secondary causes that I am now refuting; or perhaps it
will be concluded that the Search after Truth is a book full of gross and obvious
contradictions, as some people might conclude who perhaps do not have enough
equity and penetration to set themselves up as judges of the works of others.
Sacred Scripture, the Fathers, and most men more often speak of sensible
goods, riches, and honors according to the common opinion than according to the
true ideas they have of them. Jesus Christ through Abraham says to the evil rich
man: "FiJi recepisti BONA in vita tua" [Luke 16:25], you have received goods
during your life, i.e., riches and honors. What through prejudice we call good,
our good, i.e., our gold and silver, is called in Sacred Scripture in a hundred
places, our support or our substance, and even our honor, or what honors us.
"Paupertas & honestas a Deo sunt. " 8 Do these manners of speaking used by
Sacred Scripture and the most virtuous of people make us believe they contradict
themselves, or that riches and honors are truly good with regard to us, and that
we must love and seek them? Undoubtedly not, because as these manners of
speaking agree with prejudice, they signify nothing, and because we see besides
that Jesus Christ compared riches to thorns, that He said they must be renounced,
that they are deceitful, and that all that is great and glorious in the world is an
abomination before God. Passages from Scripture and the Fathers, then, must not
be grouped to judge their true opinion by the greatest number of these passages,
unless one wishes constantly to attribute to them the most unreasonable prejudices.
With this assumed, we see that Sacred Scripture says positively that it is God
who makes everything, right down to the grass of the fields, that it is He who
provides the lilies with the adornments that Jesus Christ preferred to those had by
Solomon in all his glory. b There are, not two or three, but an infinity of passages
that attribute to God the alledged efficacy of secondary causes, and that destroy
the nature of the Peripatetics.
Moreover, we are led by an almost natural prejudice not to think of God with
respect to natural effects, and to attribute power and efficacy to natural causes;
ordinarily only miracles make us think of God, and sensible impression initiates
our view of secondary causes. Philosophers hold this view because, they say,
their senses convince them of it; this is their strongest argument. In the end this
"Eccles. I: 14 [II: 14).
"Man. 6:28-30.

674

Nicolas Malebranche

view is held by all those who follow the judgment of their senses. Now, language
is formed on this prejudice, and we say as commonly that fire has the power to
bum as we call gold and silver our good. Therefore, the passages drawn from
Scripture or the Fathers for the efficacy of secondary causes prove no more than
those an ambitious or avaricious man would choose to justify his conduct. But
the same is not true of the passages that can be adduced to prove that God does
everything. For as this view is contrary to prejudice, these passages must be
understood in a strict sense, for the same reason that we must believe the view of
a Cartesian to be that beasts do not sense, although he might have said so only
two or three times, and although he might constantly say to the contrary in
ordinary discourse that they sense, perceive, and understand.
In the first chapter of Genesis, God commands the earth to produce plants and
animals; He also orders the waters to produce fishes. And consequently, say the
Peripatetics, the water and the earth have received a virtue capable of producing
these effects.
I do not see that this conclusion is certain. And even if one were obliged to
explain this chapter by itself and without appeal to other passages from Scripture,
there would be no necessity to accept this consequence. This way of explaining
creation is accommodated to our way of speaking about the production of things.
Thus it is not necessary to take it literally. One should not make use of it to
support prejudices. Since the animals and plants are on the earth, and since the
birds live in the air and fish in the water, God, in order to make us understand
that it is through His order that they are in these places, produced them there.
From the earth He formed the animals and plants, not because the earth was
capable of begetting anything nor because God gave it for this purpose a power or
virtue that still subsists now, for there is agreement enough that the earth begets
neither horses nor oxen, but because the bodies of these animals were formed
from the earth, as is said in the following chapter: "Formatis igitur Dominus
Deus de humo cunctis animantibus terrae & universis volatilibus coeli. " 8 The
animals were formed from the earth, "formatis de humo," and were not produced by the earth. Thus, after Moses related how the animals and fishes were
produced by virtue of the command God had made to the earth and water to
produce them, he adds that it is God Himself who made them, in order not to
attribute their production to the earth and water. "cREAVITQUE Deus cete grandia,"; and "omnem animam viventem atque motabilem quam PRODUXERANT
AQUAE in species suas, & omne volatile secundum genus suum." And further
below, after having spoken of the formation of animals, he adds' ''Et FECIT DEUS
bestias terrae juxta species suas, & jumenta & omne reptile terrae, in genere
suo" [Gen. 1:21, 25].
We might note in passing that where our Vulgate contains "Germinet terra
herbam ... producant aquae reptile animae viventis & volatile super terram"
[Gen. I: II, 20], expressions that might lead one to believe that the earth and the
waters have received some true power to pn>duce the animals and plants, the
"V.I9 [2: 19).

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

675

words of the original are far from this thought. They signify simply that God said
let the earth be covered with plants, let the waters be abundant with fish, and let
the birds fly in the air. The verbs and nouns in this passage have the same root,
which cannot be translated in other languages. It is as though it had been, let the
earth be verdant with verdure, let the waters be fishy with fish, let the flying
creatures fly. The Vulgate has also omitted the word vole, which has made some
people believe that the birds were drawn from the waters, but we find in the
Hebrew, volatile VOLITET. This last omitted word shows that the birds were not
produced by a virtue in the water. Moses' aim here, therefore, was not to prove
that the waters had received a real power to produce these fishes and birds, but
only to indicate the place destined for each thing by God's order, whether to live
in it or to be produced in it; volatile VOLITET super terram. For ordinarily when
we say that the earth produces trees and plants, we mean to signify only that it
provides the water and salts necessary to the germination and growth of seeds. I
do not pause to explain the other passages from Scripture that taken literally favor
secondary causes, for one is not obliged, and it is even dangerous to take literally
expressions that are based on the ordinary judgments according to which language is formed; since the ordinary man speaks of all things according to the
impressions of the senses and the prejudices of youth, the mind of God often
accommodates itself to their weakness in order to instruct the simple as well as
more enlightened people. "Inclinavit Scripturas Deus usque ad infantium &
lactentium capacitatem,'' says Saint Augustine. a
The same reason that obliges us to take literally the passages from Scripture
directly opposed to prejudice also permits us to think that the Fathers never had
the express intention of maintaining the efficacy of secondary causes or the
nature of Aristotle. For though they often speak in a way that favors the prejudices and judgments of the senses, they sometimes explain themselves in a way
that sufficiently discloses the disposition of their mind and heart. Saint Augustine, for example, gives sufficient indication that he believes the will of God
to be the power or nature of each thing when he speaks as follows:b "We are
wont to say that wonders are contrary to nature; but this is not true. For as the will
of the Creator is the nature of each of the creatures, how could what occurs by the
will of God be contrary to nature? Miracles or wonders are therefore not contrary
to nature, but contrary to what is known to us about nature."
It is true that in several places Saint Augustine speaks according to prejudice.
But I maintain that this proves nothing, because only passages contrary to prejudice need be explained literally. I have just related the reasons for this.
If in all his works Saint Augustine had never said anything against the efficacy
of secondary causes, and had always favored this view, one perhaps might use
his authority in order to establish it. But should it not appear that he seriously
"In Ps. 8 [8:8).
•··omnia quippe portenta contra naturam dicimus esse, sed non sunt. Quomodo enim est contra
naturam quod Dei fit voluntate: cum voluntas tanti utique conditoris conditae rei cujusque natura sit?
Portentum ergo fit non contra naturam, sed contra quam est nota natura.'' St. Aug. De cil'irare Dei,
bk. 21. ch.S. See also, ibid., bk.5. ch.ll, and his Lener 205 to Consentius, number 17.

676

Nicolas Malebranche

examined this question, one would always have the right to think he had no fixed
and settled view on this topic, and that perhaps he was carried along, as it were,
by the impression of the senses to believe without reflection a thing that appears
certain until examined with some care.
It is certain, for example, that Saint Augustine always spoke of animals as if
they had souls -I do not say a corporeal soul, for this holy doctor knew too well
to distinguish the soul from the body to think that there could be corporeal souls.
I say a spiritual soul, for matter is incapable of sensation. Nonetheless, I believe
that it is more reasonable to use the authority of Saint Augustine to prove that
animals have no soul than to prove that they do; for" from the principles he
carefully examined and securely established, it manifestly follows that they do
not, as Ambrosius Victor shows in his sixth volume of the Philosophia Christiana. But since the view that animals have a soul, or that they feel pain when
struck, agrees with prejudice (for there is no child who does not believe it), we
maintain the right to think that Saint Augustine spoke on this according to
common opinion, that he did not seriously examine this question, and that had he
begun to doubt it and reflect on it, he would not have said a thing so contrary to
his principles.
Should the Fathers have favored the efficacy of secondary causes, therefore,
perhaps one would not be obliged to consider their view unless it appeared that
they had carefully examined this question and that what they said about it did not
result from language formed and based on prejudice. But surely just the opposite
is the case, for the Fathers and the holiest and most enlightened people in religion
have ordinarily shown in several passages of their works what the disposition of
their mind and heart was with respect to the question we are discussing.
The most enlightened, and even the greatest number, of theologians, seeing on
the one hand that Sacred Scripture opposed the efficacy of secondary causes and
on the other that the impression ofthe senses, public opinion, and especially the
philosophy of Aristotle, which was esteemed by the learned, established it (for
Aristotle believes that God does not involve Himself in the detail of what takes
place in the sublunary region, that this attention is unworthy of His grandeur, and
that the nature he supposes in all bodies suffices to produce everything occurring
here below)-theologians, I say, in order to accord faith with the philosophy of
the pagans. and reason with the senses, have been inclined to the view that
secondary causes would do nothing unless God lent them His cooperation. But
because this immediate cooperation by which God acts with secondary causes
involves great difficulties, some philosophers have rejected it, claiming that in
order for them to act it is enough that God should conserve them with the virtue
•some of these principles of St. Augustine are: that what has never sinned can suffer no evil; now
according to him himself, pain is the greatest of evils, and animals suffer it. That the more noble
cannot have as an end the less noble; now according to him the soul of animals is spiritual & more
noble than the body, & yet they have no other end than their bodies. That what is spiritual is
immortal; & the soul nf animals, although spiritual, is subject to death. There are many other such
principles in the works of St. Augustine from which we can conclude that animals do not have a
spiritual soul such as he admitted in them. See St. Augustine. chs. 22-23 VI! anima & l!jus origine.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

677

He gave them in creating them. And as this opinion agrees entirely with prejudice, since God's operation in secondary causes involves nothing sensible, it is
ordinarily received by the common man, and by those who have attended more to
the physics and medicine of the ancients than to theology and meditation on the
truth. Most men imagine that God first created all things, that He gave them all
the faculties or qualities necessary for their preservation, that, for example, He
gave the first motion to matter and then left it to itself to produce by the communication of its motion this variety of forms we admire. It is ordinarily supposed that bodies can move each other, and this opinion is even attributed to
Descartes, contrary to what he expressly says in articles 36 and 37 of the second
part of his Principles of Philosophy. Since men cannot avoid the realization that
creatures depend on God, they reduce this dependence as much as they can,
whether through a hidden aversion for God or through stupidity and a dreadful
insensitivity toward His operation. But as this view is ordinarily received only by
those who have not studied religion, and who follow their senses and the authority of Aristotle rather than their reason and the authority of the holy books, there
is no reason to fear their becoming too well established in the mind of those who
have any love for truth and religion; for however little we apply ourselves to the
examination of this view, we easily discover its falsity. But the opinion of the
immediate cooperation of God with each action of secondary causes seems to
agree with passages from Scripture, which often attribute the same effect to God
and to creatures. I shall prove in the last Elucidation (number 43) that God alone
can give the soul perceptions of objects, and that no creature, no finite intelligence whatever power it might have, can in this case be prepared to act and to
require God's cooperation.
We must consider, then, that there are passages in Scripture where it is said
that God alone acts: "Ego sum Dominus," says Isaiah, 8 "faciens OMNIA, extendens coelos SOL US, stabiliens terram, & NULL US mecum." A mother moved by
the spirit of God tells her children that it was not she who formed them: ''Nesciob
qualiter in utero meo apparuistis, singulorum membra NON EGO IPSA COMPEGI,
sed mundi creator," &c.c It does not say, as do Aristotle and the school of
Peripatetics, that it is to her and the sun that they owe their birth, but to the
Creator of the universe. Now, this view that only God acts and forms children in
their mother's womb does not agree with common opinion and prejudice.d According to the principle I have previously established, these passages must be
explained literally. But on the contrary, since the view of the efficacy of secondary causes agrees with common opinion and sensible impression, even if
passages should be fo•md that expressly say that secondary causes act alone, they
"44:24.
"2 Mach. 7:22-23.
'"Sol & homo generant hominem." Arist. Pllys. A usc. 1.2 c.2. See St. Thomas on this text.
""Nee qui concumbit, nee qui seminal est aliquid, sed qui format Deus [ ....) Ipse namque
ope ratione qua nunc usque operatur, facit ut numeros suos explicent semina & a quibusdam Jatentibus
atque invisibilibus involucris in formas visibiles hujus quod aspicimus decoris evolvant.'' Aug. De
civ. Dei bk. 22. ch. 24 n.2.

678

Nicolas Malebranche

would have no force compared with these. Cooperation, then, is not enough to
reconcile the different passages from Sacred Scripture; all force, power, efficacy
must be placed on the side of God.
But even if God's immediate cooperation with secondary causes could reconcile the different passages of Sacred Scripture, I do not know if withal it should
be received. For the holy books were not produced solely for contemporary
theologians, but also for the Jewish people. As a result, if the Jews of yore were
not enlightened or subtle enough to imagine a cooperation such as is admitted in
Scholastic theology, or to agree with something the cleverest theologians have
difficulty in explaining, it seems to me to follow that the Sacred Scripture that
attributes to God, and even to God alone, the production and conservation of all
things would plunge them into error, and that the authors ofthe holy books would
have spoken to men a language not only unknown but deceptive. For in teJling
them that God does all, they would only have claimed that God provides His
cooperation for all things; and certainly the Jews did not have this cooperation in
mind, those nonphilosophical among them believing that God does everything
and not that God cooperates with everything.
But for a surer judgment about cooperation, a careful explanation is required
of the different systems the Scholastics have made of it. For besides the impenetrable obscurities common to a11 opinions that can be explained and supported only by vague and indeterminate terms, there is such a wide variety of
views on this matter that we would have no great difficulty in discovering their
cause. But I have no wish to involve myself in a discussion that would be too
wearisome both for me and for those who will read this. I prefer on the contrary
to try to show that my views might agree to some extent with those of the greater
number of Scholastic theologians, although I cannot conceal the fact that their
language appears to me quite equivocal and confused. I shall explain.
I hold, as I have said elsewhere, that bodies, for example, do not have the
force to move themselves and that therefore their motor force is but the action of
God, or in order not to use a term signifying nothing distinct, their motor force is
but the will of God, always necessarily efficacious, which conserves them successively in different places. For I do not believe that God creates certain beings
to make them the motor force of bodies -not only because I have no idea of this
sort of being, and because I do not see that they could move bodies, but also
because these beings would need others to move them, and so on to infinity. For
only God is at once both motor and immobile.
This being so, when a body collides with and moves another, I can say that it
acts through the cooperation of God, and that this cooperation is not different
from its own action. For a body moves the one with which it collides only by its
action or its motor force, which ultimately is but God's will, which conserves
this body successively in several places-the transport of a body being not its
action or its motor force but the effect of its motor force. Almost all theologians
speak as follows: that the action of secondary causes is not different from the
action by which God cooperates with them. For although they understand it in
different ways, they hold that God acts in creatures through the same action as do

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

679

creatures. And they are obliged to speak this way, it seems to me; for if creatures
acted through an action God did not produce in them, their action qua efficacious
action would be, it seems to me, independent; now they believe, as they must,
that creatures depend immediately on God, not only for their being, but for their
operation as well.
Likewise with respect to free causes, I hold that God constantly gives to the
mind an impression toward the good in general, and that He even determines this
impression toward particular goods by the impression ofthem He places in us, as
I have explained in the first Elucidation; and this is also held by theologians, who
assert that God moves and predisposes our wills. Thus, the force that sets our
minds in motion is the will of God, which animates us and leads us toward the
good; for God does not create beings to make them the motor force of minds for
the same reasons He does not create beings to make them the motor force of
bodies. Since God's volitions are efficacious by themselves, it is enough that He
should will in order to produce, and it is useless to multiply beings without
necessity. In addition, everything real in the natural determinations of our impulses also comes solely from God's action in us; for I am not speaking here
about our consent to these determinations. So much is clear from the first Elucidation. Now we act and produce nothing except through our volitions, i.e.,
through the impression of God's will, which is our motor force. For our volitions
are efficacious only insofar as they come from God, just as moving bodies impel
others only insofar as they have a motor force transporting them. Thus, we act
only through God's cooperation, 8 and our action viewed as efficacious and
capable of producing some effect is not different from God's; as most theologians
say, they are the same action: Eadem numero actio.
Now, all the changes occurring in the world have no other natural cause than
the motion of bodies and the volitions of minds. For according to the general
laws of the communication of motion, the invisible bodies surrounding visible
bodies produce by their various motion all the changes whose cause is not
apparent to our eyes; and according to the laws concerning the union of soul and
body, when the bodies surrounding us act on our own, they produce in our soul
an infinity of sensations, ideas, and passions. Likewise, our mind, according to
the same laws, excites in itself by its volitions an infinity of different perceptions;
for our volitions apply and modify our mind as natural causes, the efficacy of
which nonetheless comes from the laws God has established. And when our mind
acts on our body, it produces in it several changes, always in virtue of the laws
concerning its union with the body; and by means of our body it also produces in
those surrounding us a very great number of changes in virtue of the laws of the
communication of motion. Consequently, no natural effect has any natural or
occasional cause other than the motion of bodies and the volitions of minds. This
is something to which one will easily agree however little one attends to it. For I
assume that one is not prejudiced by those who speak without knowing what they
say, who constantly imagine beings of which they have no clear ideas, and who
"See Suare.t. bk. I D•· nmcurm Dt•i cum wlmriCII<" ch. 4.

680

Nicolas Malebranche

claim to explain things they do not understand through things that are absolutely
incomprehensible. Thus, since it has been shown that God executes through His
cooperation, or rather through His efficacious will, everything the motion of
bodies and the volitions of minds do as natural or occasional causes, there is
nothing God does not do by the same action as His creature's-not because
creatures have any efficacious action by themselves but because God's power is,
as it were, communicated to them by the natural laws God has established in their
favor.
This is all I can do to reconcile what I think with the view of theologians who
maintain (a) the necessity of immediate cooperation and (b) that God does
everything in all things through the same action as that of creatures. For as to the
other theologians, I believe that their views are untenable in every way, especially Durand's,8 and that of certain ancients refuted by Saint Augustine,b who
absolutely denied the necessity of cooperation, and would have had secondary
causes do all things through a power God gave them in creating them without
further concerning Himself with them. For although this opinion might involve
fewer difficulties than that of other theologians, it appears to me so contrary to
Scripture, and so consonant with prejudice, to say no more of it, that I do not
think it can be maintained.
I grant that the Scholastics who say that God's immediate cooperation is the
same action as that of creatures do not understand it exactly as I have explained
it, and that with the possible exceptions of Biel and Cardinal d 'Ailly, c all those I
have read think the efficacy that produces effects comes from the secondary
cause as well as the primary. But as I am attempting to observe this law, to say
only what I conceive clearly and to side with what best agrees with religion, I
believe I shall not be found amiss in relinquishing a view that to many people
seems the more incomprehensible the more effort is spent to understand it, and in
establishing another that perfectly agrees not only with reason but also with the
sanctity of religion and Christian morality. This is a truth I have already proved
in the chapter being elucidated; but it is appropriate for me to say something
additional in order to justify fully what I have already said about the present
question.
Reason and religion convince us that God wills to be loved and respected by
His creatures-loved as a good, feared and respected as a power; this is a truth
that cannot be doubted without impeity and foolishness. To love God as He wills
and deserves to be loved, we must, according to the first Commandment of the
Law and of the Gospel, and even according to reason, as I have shown
elsewhere,d love Him with all our strength or according to our capacity for
loving. It is not enough to prefer Him to all things; we must also love Him in all
things. Otherwise our love is not as perfect as it must be, and we do not render to
"See Durand. in 2. Dist. I. Quest. 5. & Dist. 37.
"Uh. imp. dt' Gen. ad /itt. bk 5. ch. 20.
'In 4 Sent. Dist. I. quest. I. De Aliaco. ibid.
"Bk. 4, ch. I.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

681

God all the love He impresses in us, and impresses in us only for Himself
because He acts only for Himself. And to render God all the respect due Him, it
is not enough to adore Him as the sovereign power and to fear Him more than His
creatures; we must also fear and adore Him in all His creatures, all our reverence
must be directed toward Him, for honor and glory are due only Him. This is what
God has commanded us with these words: "Diliges8 Dominum Deum tuum ex
toto corde tuo, & ex tota anima tua, & ex tota fortudine tua." And with these:
"Dominum Deum tuum timebis, & illi soli servies." Thus, the philosophy that
teaches us that the efficacy of secondary causes is a fiction of the mind, that
Aristotle's, and certain other philosophers', nature is a chimera, that only God is
strong and powerful enough not only to act in our soul but also to give the least
motion to matter, this philosophy, I say, agrees perfectly with religion, the end of
which is to join us to God in the closest way.
We ordinarily love only things capable of doing us some good; this philosophy
therefore authorizes only the love of God, and absolutely condemns the love of
everything else. We should fear only what can do us some evil; this philosophy
therefore sanctions only the fear of God and absolutely condemns all others.
Thus, it legitimizes all the soul's impulses that are just and reasonable, and it
condemns all those that are contrary to reason and religion. For by this philosophy you will never legitimize love for riches, passion for grandeur, debauched
behavior, since the love of the body appears absurd and ridiculous according to
the principles established by this philosophy.
It is an incontestable truth, a natural opinion, even a common notion that we
should love the cause of our pleasure and should do so in proportion to the
felicity it does or can make us enjoy. Not only is it right, it is even necessary, as
it were, that the cause of our happiness be the object of our love. Thus, following
this philosophy we should love only God, for it teaches us that only He is the
cause of our happiness. According to this philosophy, the bodies surrounding us
do not act on the one we animate, and a fortiori, do not act on our mind. It is not
the sun that illumines us and gives us movement and life. It does not cover the
earth with fruits and flowers and does not provide us with our food. This philosophy teaches us, as does Scripture, that it is God who provides the rain and
regulates the seasons, who gives to our bodies their food and fills our hearts with
joy, that only He can do us good, and that He never ceases to witness thereby
what He is, although in ages past He suffered all nations to walk in their own
ways. b Following the language of this philosophy, we must not say that nature
provides us with goods;c we must not say that it is God and nature. We must say
"Deut. ch. 5 [6:5].
b"ln praeleritis generalionibus dimisi! omnes gentes ingredi vias suas. Et quidem non sine testimonio semelipsum reliquil benefaciens de coelo. dans pluvias & tempora fractifera. implens cibo &
laelitia corda nostra."" Acts 14:15-16.
• '"Ergo nihil agis, ingratissime monalium, qui te negas Deo debere, sed naturae: quia nee natura
sine Deo est, nee Deus sine natura. sed idem: est utrurnque. nee distal. Officium si quod a Seneca
accepisse. Annaen lc dicercs debere, vel Lucio: non creditorem mulares, sed nomen." Seneca De
hent'jiciis hk. 4. ch. 8.

682

Nicolas Malebranche

that it is God alone and speak in this way without equivocation in order not to
deceive the simple. For we must distinctly recognize the sole cause of our
happiness if we wish to make it the sole object of our love.
It is also an incontestable truth that we should fear things capable of causing us
evil, and fear them in proportion to the evil they can cause us. But this philosophy teaches us that only God can cause us evil-it is He, Isaiah 8 says, "who
creates the darkness as well as the light, who makes both good and evil" -and
even that no evil occurs that He does not produce, as another prophet says. Thus,
we should fear only Him. We should fear neither plague, nor war, nor famine,
nor our enemies, nor even devils; we should fear God alone. We should flee a
sword with which someone would stab us, we should avoid fire, we should leave
a house about to crush us; but we should not fear these things. We can flee bodies
that are the natural or occasional causes of evil; but we should fear only God as
the real cause of all the misfortunes of the wicked, and we should hate only sin,
which obliges the cause of all goods to become the cause of all our evils. In a
word, all the mind's impulses [mouvemens) should be referred only to God, for
only God is above the mind, and the motion [mouvemens) of our body can be
referred to those surrounding us. This is what we are taught by the philosophy
that does not admit the efficacy of secondary causes.
But on the assumption of the efficacy of secondary causes, it seems to me that
we have some grounds for fearing and loving bodies, and that to regulate our love
according to reason, it is enough to prefer God to all things, the first and
universal cause to secondary and particular causes. It does not seem necessary to
love God with all our strength: "Ex tota mente, ex toto corde, ex tota anima, ex
totis viribus," as the Gospel says [Mark I2:30].
Yet when one is content to prefer God to all things and to adore Him with a
worship and love by preference, without continually striving to honor and love
Him in all things, it often happens that one is deceived, that charity is lost and
dissipated, and that one is concerned more with sensible goods than with the
sovereign good. For if one were to ask the greatest sinners, and perhaps even
idolaters, whether they preferred the universal cause to particular ones, they
would perhaps have no fear in reply to us from the midst of their debauches and
aberration that they do commit a breach of so essential a duty, and that they fully
know what they owe God. I grant that they are mistaken, but without the efficacy
of secondary causes they have no likely excuse to justify their behavior; and upon
the supposition of this efficacy, the following is what they can say to themselves
when their passions blind them and they listen to the reports of their senses.
I am made to be happy; I cannot prevent myself from wishing to be happy. I
must therefore occupy my mind with everything that can give me what I invincibly want, and my heart must devote itself to it. Why then should I not love
sensible objects, if they are the true causes of the happiness I find in their
possession? I recognize the Sovereign Being as alone worthy of sovereign worship; I prefer Him to everything. But since I do not see that He wishes anything
"''Ego Dominus, & non est alter, formans lucem & creans tenebras. faciens pacem & creans
malum: Ego Dominus faciens omnia haec." lsa. 47:7 [6-7); Amos 3:6.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

683

of me, I enjoy the goods He gives me by means of the secondary causes to which
He has subjected me, and I do not uselessly concern myself with Him. That there
is no good He affords me immediately and by Himself, or at least without
creatures playing a role in it, is a sign that He does not will that my mind and
heart apply themselves immediately to Him, or at least that He wills that the
sentiments of my mind and heart be shared between Him and His creatures. Since
He has communicated some of His power and glory to the sun, has surrounded it
with brilliance and majesty, has made it sovereign over all His works, and since
through the influence of this great star we receive all the goods necessary for life,
why should we not use part of this life to enjoy ourselves in its light, and to bear
it witness of the feeling we have for its grandeur and its benefits? Would it not be
the ultimate ingratitude to receive the bounty of all things from this excellent
creature and to have for it no feeling of gratefulness? And would it not be
dreadful stupidity and blindness not to have any impulse of respect and fear for
that the absence of which freezes and kills us, and which approaching us would
bum and destroy us? I repeat, we must prefer God to all things and esteem Him
infinitely more than His creatures; but we must also fear and love His creatures.
This is how we justly honor Him who made them, merit His good graces, and
require of God new benefits. It is clear that He approves of the honor we pay His
creatures, because He has communicated His power to them, and every power
deserves honor. But as the honor must be proportionate to the power, and as the
power of the sun and other sensible objects is such that we receive from it all
sorts of goods, it is right for us to honor them with all our strength, and to
consecrate to them, after God, all that we are.
This is how one naturally reasons when following the prejudice of the efficacy
of secondary causes. And this is manifestly how the founders of idolatry reasoned. This is what is thought by the one esteemed most learned among the Jews.
He 8 begins a treatise he composed on idolatry as follows: "In the time of Enos
men fell into strange errors and the wise men of that age lost their sense and
reason. Enos himself was among these deluded people. These were their errors.
Because, they said, God created the stars and their heavens to govern the world,
placed them in a high place, surrounded them with brilliance and glory, and uses
them to carry out his orders, it is right for us to honor them and pay them our
homage and respect. It is the will of our God that we honor these things He has
raised up and covered with glory, just as a prince wishes his ministers to be
honored in his presence because the honor paid them reflects on him. [. . . ]
After this thought came into their heads, they began to build temples to the stars.
make sacrifices to them, speak their encomiums. and even prostrate themselves
before them, imagining that they were thereby making themselves pleasing to
Him who created them.'' This is the origin of idolatry.
It is so natural and fitting to have feelings of gratitude in proportion to the
goods we receive that almostb all people have adored the sun because they have
all judged it to be the cause of the goods they enjoyed. And if the Egyptians
"R. Moses Maimonidcs.
"See Vossius f),• i<lo/o/utriu bk. 2.

684

Nicolas Malebranche

adored not only the sun, the moon, and the river Nile, whose overflow caused the
fertility of their country, but also went as far as the vilest animals, it was,
according to the report of Cicero,a because of some utility they derived from
them. Thus, since we cannot and indeed should not banish from the mind of men
their natural inclination for the true causes of their happiness, it is clear there is at
least some danger in maintaining the efficacy of secondary causes, although there
might be joined to it the necessity of immediate cooperation, which involves
something incomprehensible I know not what, and which comes after the event,
as it were, in order to justify our prejudices and the philosophy of Aristotle.
But there is no danger in saying only what we see and attributing power and
efficacy only to God, because we see only His volitions to have an absolutely
necessary and indispensable connection with natural effects. I grant that men
nowadays are sufficiently enlightened not to fall into the gross errors of the
pagans and idolaters; but I have no fear in saying that often our mind is turned, or
rather that our heart is disposed as was the pagans', and that there will always be
a kind of idolatry in the world until the day when Jesus Christ ''restoresb His
kingdom to God His father, having destroyed every empire, every dominion, and
every power, so that God may be everything in all things.'' For is it not a kind of
idolatry to make a god of one's belly, as Saint Paule says? Is it not to be an
idolater of the god of riches to work ceaselessly to acquire goods? Is it to render
God the worship due Him and to adore Him in mind and in truthd to have a heart
full of sensible beauty and a mind dazzled by the brilliance of some imaginary
grandeur?
Since men think they will receive from the bodies surrounding them the
pleasures they enjoy in using them if they join themselves to these bodies with all
the strength of their soul, the source of their disorder is therefore their sensible
conviction in the efficacy of secondary causes. Only reason tells them that God
alone acts in them. But beside the fact that this reason speaks so low that they
almost do not hear it, and that the senses contradicting it cry so loud that their din
stuns them, they are further confirmed in their prejudice in ways and by arguments all the more dangerous as they bear the external marks of truth.
Philosophers, and especially Christian philosophers, should constantly battle
against the judgments of the senses or prejudices, and especially prejudices as
dangerous as that of the efficacy of secondary causes; and yet, for I do not know
what reason, people whom I rightfully respect a great deal try to confirm this
prejudice, and even to pass off as superstitious and ridiculous a doctrine so holy,
pure, and well-founded as that which maintains that only God is a true cause.
They do not want us to love and fear God in all things, but, they say, to fear all
things in relation to God. We should love creatures, they say, because they are
• ·"I psi qui irridentur Aegyptii, null am belluam nisi ob aliquam utilitatem. quam ex ea caperent.
consccmveranl. •· De llll/tml clt•tmun bk. I [ch. 36). See Sextus Empirit·us. bk. K. ch. 2.

•t Cor. 15:24
•· 'Quorum Deus venter est." Phil. 13:9. (3: 19). '"Omnis ornicator. aut immundus. aut a varus.
quod est idnlorurn servilus. ·· Eph. 5:5.
d·

'In spiritu & veritate oportet adorare. ··John 4:24

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

685

good; we must love and respect our father, honor our prince and our superior,
because God commands it. I do not deny this, but I deny that we must love
creatures as our goods, though they are good or perfect in themselves. I deny that
we can serve and respect men as we do our master. Or, to explain myself more
clearly, I claim that we must not serve our master, obey our father and our prince
with any other intention than to serve and obey God. This is what Saint Paul8
says, who became all things to all men and who obliged in all things for the
salvation of those to whom he preached: '' Servi, obedite Do minis camalibus cum
timore & tremore in simplicitate cordis vestri SICUT CHRISTO; non ad oculum
servientes quasi hominibus placentes, sed ut servi Christi facientes voluntatem
Dei ex animo, cum bona voluntate servientes SICUT DOMINO ET NON
HOMINIBUS. "b And in another Epistle:c "Non ad oculum servientes quasi
hominibus placentes, sed in simplicitate cordis Deum timentes. Quodcumque
facitis ex animo operamini SICUT DOMINO ET NON HOMINIBUS." We should
therefore obey our father, serve our prince, honor our superiors as UNTO GOD AND
NOT UNTO MEN: ''Sicut Domino & non hominibus. ''This is clear and can have no
evil consequences. Superiors will always be better honored and better served by
it. But I believe I can say that a master who wished to be honored and served, as
having in him a power other than God's, would be a demon, and that those
serving in this spirit would be idolaters; for I cannot help believing that honor and
love unrelated to God are kinds of idolatry. SOLI DEO HONOR ET GLORIA.

"I Cor. 9:22. I O:.U.
"Eph. 6:6 [5-6).

··col. .l22 [ -2.1). ""N•" si hominem patll'm v<x:amus. honoll'm actati dclerimus. non Auton.·m
vitae nostrac ostendimus. ·· llicr. in ,·h. 23. Matt.

Nicolas Malebranche

686

Foreword
Although the following discourse is in part found in the memoires of the
Academie Royale des Sciences, it was thought appropriate to append it to this
work, not only because it might serve as an elucidation of what I have said in it
about light and colors, but also because about ten years ago part of it was printed
in London at the end of the last English translation of the Search after Truth. I
understand that this translation does not represent my view with sufficient precision, not through the fault of Taylor, its author, but through the deficiency of the
manuscript that fell into his hands. It is to be desired that translators be so kind as
to inquire of authors as to the most exact editions of the works they intend to
translate; their work would then be more useful to the public. It is partly for this
reason that I placed a list of the best editions of my books after the preface of this
work, because I have learned that they have been translated on the basis of rather
imperfect copies.

ELUCIDATION SIXTEEN

t

On light and colors, the generation of fire, and several other effects of subtle
matter.
l. In order to explain my view on the natural causes of light and colors, let us
conceive of a large balloon compressed from without by an almost infinite force,
and filled with a fluid matter whose motion is so rapid that not only does it tum
with great speed about a common center but also that each part of it in order to
expend all its motion, i.e., to move as much as it has force to, is also required to
tum on the center of an infinity of tiny vortexes and to flow between them, and
all this with extraordinary rapidity. In a word, let us conceive of the matter
contained in this balloon roughly as Descartes described the matter of our vortex,
except that the tiny balls of his second element, which he assumed to be hard, are
themselves but tiny vortexes, or at least are hard only through the compression of

c

687

688

Nicolas Malebranche

the matter surrounding them. For if these tiny balls were hard by themselves, as I
believe I have sufficiently shown not to be true 8 , they could not, as will be seen
in what follows, transmit light and colors through the same point where rays
cross. But finally, if this assumptionb is difficult to imagine, it now suffices for
us to conceive of a balloon full of water, or rather of matter that is infinitely fluid
and also extremely compressed. The circle ABC is the cross section of this
balloon.
2. On this assumption, should a small hole be made in the balloon, for instance
at A, I say that all the parts of the water, such as those, for example, at R, S, T,
V, will tend toward the point A in the straight lines RA, SA, and so on, for since
all its parts that were equally pressed cease to be so in the direction of the hole A.
they must tend toward it, because every pressed body must move in the direction
in which it finds less resistance.
But if a piston is placed at the opening A and is quickly inserted, the same
parts R, S, T, V, and so on, will all tend to recede from the hole by the same
straight lines AR, AS, and so forth, because while the piston is being inserted,
they are pressed more in the direction away from the piston than in any other.
Finally, if the piston is conceived to be inserted and withdrawn very quickly,
all the parts of the fluid matter that exactly fill the balloon, which I assume to be
very elastic, or to stretch or expand only with difficulty, will receive an infinity
of disturbances that I call pressure vibrations. Let us apply this to light and
colors.
Because everything is a plenum, our eyes, though closed or in the dark, are
actually compressed. But this compression of the optic nerve does not excite any
sensation of colors, because this nerve is always equally compressed-for the
same reason that we do not feel the weight of the air surrounding us, although it
weighs more than twenty-eight ounces of quicksilver. But if we conceive of an
eye at T, or elsewhere, turned toward a torch A, the parts of the flame, which are
in continuous motion, will, by very rapid vibrations or disturbances, constantly
press the subtle matter from all sides more strongly than they do in the dark, and
consequently, due to the plenum, they will press it as far as the fundus of the eye;
the optic nerve, being more compressed than usual, and disturbed by vibrations,
will excite in the soul a sensation of light or of bright and vivid whiteness.
But if a black body M is assumed at S, since the subtle matter is not reflected
toward the eye turned in that direction and does not disturb the optic nerve, we
shall see black, as when we look at the opening of a cellar or of the pupil of an
eye.
If the body M is such that the matter disturbed by the torch is reflected by the
body toward the eye and produces in it equally frequent vibrations, the body will
appear white, and the more white as there are more rays reflected. It will even
appear as luminous as the flame of the torch if the body M is polished and all the
"The last chapter of The St•arch after Truth.
""The proof of this assumption will be seen below.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

689

rays, or a large number of them in the same order, are reflected, because brilliance results from the force ofthe vibrations and color from their frequency. But
if the body M is such that the reflected subtle matter excites vibrations in the eye
that are more or less frequent in degrees I do not think can be determined exactly,
we shall have one of the primitive or homogeneous simple colors, such as red,
yellow, blue, and so forth, and we shall have the other compound colors, and
even whiteness, which is the most compound of all, according to the different
mixtures of rays having different frequencies. I say that whiteness is the most
compound of all because it is composed of the assemblage of vibrations of
different frequencies that each different part of the flame produces in the subtle
matter. Since everything is a plenum, and is infinitely compressed, each ray
preserves for its full length the same frequency of vibration as the tiny part of the
flame producing it. And because the motion of the flame's parts is variable, the
rays of colors necessarily have vibrations and produce different refractions. But
on this the experiments found in Newton's excellent work must be consulted.
This is what I meant when in several of my books I proposed that light and
colors consisted only in different disturbances 8 or vibrations of ethereal matter,
or in more or less frequent pressures vibrations thatb subtle matter produces on
the retina.
This simple presentation of my view will perhaps make it seem probable
enough, at least to those who know Descartes's philosophy and who are not
content with the explanation this learned man gives of colors. But for you to be
able to judge soundly of my view, it is not enough to have presented it; some
proof of it must be given.
3. To do this, it must first be noted:
a) That sound is heard only by means of the vibrations in the air that disturb
the nerve of the ear; for when the air has been withdrawn as much as possible
from a pneumatic machine, weak sound is no longer transmitted in it, or is
transmitted less as the air in it is rarefied.
b) That the difference between tones results not from the force of the
vibrations in the air but from their greater or lesser frequency, as everyone
knows.
c) That although the impressions objects make on our sense organs sometimes differ only quantitatively, the sensations the soul receives from them differ
essentially. There are no sensations more contrary than pleasure and pain. Yet
whoever scratches himself with pleasure feels pain if he scratches himself a little
harder, because the degrees of motion in our fibers differ essentially in relation to
the good of the body, and our senses instruct us only about this relation. It is
likely that the sweetness and bitterness that cause such contrary sensations often
differ only quantitatively, for there are people who find bitter what others find
sweet. There are fruits that are today sweet and tomorrow bitter; a small differ"Part 2, on Method; ch. 4.
0 Diah>RII<'.f 011

Mt•taph. Dial. 12.

690

Nicolas Malebranche

ence in the bodies therefore enables them to cause quite contrary sensations. In a
word, this is because the laws concerning the union of soul and body are arbitrary, and nothing in objects is like the sensations we have of them.
4. It is certain that colors naturally depend on the disturbance of the organ of
vision. Now, this disturbance can be only weak or strong, and more or less
frequent. But experiment teaches that the degree of strength of the disturbance of
the optic nerve does not change the species of color, since the degree of daylight,
on which the degree of this strength depends, does not ordinarily make us see
colors of a different and entirely contrary species. It must be concluded, then,
that the degree of frequency in the vibrations of the optic nerve, or in the
disturbances in the spirits contained in it, changes the species of colors, and
consequently that the cause ofthese sensations results basically from the more or
less frequent vibrations of the subtle matter compressing the retina.
Thus, the same is true of light and the different colors as of sound and the
different tones. The loudness of sound results from the degree of force of the
vibrations in gross air, and the di1•ersity of tones from the degree of frequency of
these same vibrations, as everyone agrees. The strength [force] or brilliance of
colors, therefore, also results from the degree of force of vibrations, not in the
air, but in the subtle matter, and the different species of colors from the degree of
frequency of these same vibrations.
5. Since the air is compressed only by the weight of the atmosphere, some time
is required for a part of it to move an adjacent part. Thus, sound is transmitted
rather slowly. It does only about one h·undred eighty fathoms per second. But
such is not the case with light, because all the parts of ethereal matter are in
contact, because they are very fluid, and especially because they are compressed
by the weight, as it were, of all the vortexes that are themselves compressed by
an infinite force corresponding to the infinite power of the Creator, or at least an
almost infinite force. Consequently, pressure vibrations, or the action of luminous bodies, must be communicated instantaneously or within a short time. And
if the compression of the parts composing our vortex were infinite, pressure
vibrations would have to occur in&tantaneously.
In his treatise De Ia lumiere, Huygens 8 concluded from the eclipses of the
moons of Jupiter that light is transmitted about six hundred thousand times faster
than sound. Thus, the weight or the compression of all the celestial matter is
incomparably greater than that produced on the earth by the weight of the atmosphere. I believe I have establishedb elsewhere that the hardness of bodies depends on the compression of subtle matter. And if that is so, it must be extremely
great, since there are bodies so hard that a very great force must be employed to
separate their least parts. It seems to me that the ratio of the weight of the ether to
that of the atmosphere is much greater than six hundred thousand to one, and that
it might be regarded as almost infinite; for Cassini has observed the eclipses of
"Page 9.
0 The Search after Truth, last chapter. The proof will be seen below.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

691

the moons of Jupiter at different distances from the earth, and they do not agree
with Huygens's conclusion.
6. Let us now suppose, therefore, that all the parts of the ether or of the subtle
and invisible matter of our vortex are compressed with an almost infinite force by
those surrounding it, and that each of its parts is very fluid, and is hard only
through the motion of those surrounding it and compressing it on all sides. And
let us see in the system I propose how it is possible for the impressions of an
infinity of different colors or rays to be communicated without being confused.
Let us see how ten thousand rays, which cross at one physical or sensible point,
transmit all their vibrations through this point, since I have just proved that
difference in colors can result only from the degree of frequency of these same
colors. Manifestly, the world system that will elucidate this great difficulty will
conform to the truth.

Let APEN be the cross section of a room painted with an infinity of colors, and
even let them be the most glaring colors possible, that is, white at A next to black
n, blue b next to red r, yellow i next to violet u. If from all these points A, n, b. r,
i, u, we draw straight lines that intersect at a point such as Q, and if we place our
eye beyond at points E, c, d, f. g, h, we shall see all these different colors
through the medium of the point of intersection Q. And since this figure represents only one row of colors, while as many rows must be imagined as the eye
can distinguish parts in a sphere, the point of intersection Q must receive and
transmit a very great number of different impressions without them destmying
each other.
7. If the physical point or tiny ball Q were a hard body. as Descartes assumes.
it would be impossible for the eye atE to see white at A. and for another eye at c
to see black at 11. For when a body is perfectly hard. if part of it moves somewhat.

692

Nicolas Malebranche

or tends from A toward the optic nerve, for example, toward E, all its parts must
tend in the same direction. Therefore, we shall not be able to see only black and
white simultaneously through rays intersecting at Q.
Descartes also claims that red is produced by the revolution of tiny balls that is
communicated from one to the other along the whole ray from the object to the
eye. This view is untenable for many reasons. But it is enough to destroy it to
consider that if the tiny ball Q turns on the axis PN from r where there is some
redness tof where the eye is, it cannot at the same time tum on the axis rf from N
where I again assume there is some redness to P where I assume another eye.
Furthermore, when I say that the rays intersect in the tiny ball or in the little
vortex Q, I do not claim that these little vortexes are exactly spherical, nor that
visible rays have the thickness of a tiny ball of the second element or of a small
vortex. I do not specify what the grossness of these rays must be for them to be
able to disturb the optic nerve sufficiently to make us see colors. But what I said
of a single ball must be understood of a thousand or a million, if one ray to be
sensible must be as extended as a thousand or a million balls or vortexes.
8. It is not possible, then, that the tiny ball Q, or any like it, can transmit the
action of light appropriate for making us see all sorts of colors, given that these
balls are hard. But if we conceive them as infinitely fluid or soft-as the simple
idea of matter represents all bodies, since (a) rest has no force, and (b) each part
of a body is indifferent to whether it is adjacent to another and must easily
separate from it unless some force, i.e., some motion, restrains it (for we conceive in bodies no other force than their motion)-if, I say, we conceive these
bodies as very soft, or rather, as I truly believe, as small vortexes composed8 of
an almost infinitely fluid and extremely agitated matter, they will allow of an
infinity of different impressions, which they will be able to communicate to
others on which they press and with which they are almost infinitely compressed.
This is what we must try to explain and prove.
9. To do so, it must be well understood that reaction, which, like action, is
communicated rectilinearly, is here necessarily equal to action, for this reason
essential to the effect in question, that our vortex is almost infinitely compressed,
and that consequently, there can be no void. If, for example, you push your cane
against a solid wall, your hand and cane will be repelled with the same force by
which they were impelled. The reaction will be equal to the action. Now, although rays are not hard like sticks, the same thing happens with respect to
reaction due to the compression and fullness of our vortex. For if we suppose a
cask full of water, or a balloon as in the first figure full of air, and if, after having
fitted it with a pipe, we insert a piston into this pipe, the piston will be repelled as
much as it is impelled. And if in addition we make a small hole in the middle of
this piston through which water can pass and leave the cask, and if we push the
piston, all the water compressed by it will at the same time, due to its fluidity,
tend to withdraw from each point of the piston through action and through
reaction it will approach the whole in its middle. For if we pushed the piston with
"The proof and

con~equcnccs

of this will be

~ecn

below.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

693

enough violence and frequency, the cask would burst at the weakest spot, wherever it might be, a sure sign that through the action of the piston the water presses
the cask throughout; and if we pushed the piston ever so little, the water would
immediately gush out through the little hole as a result of reaction. This is all
because reaction is equal to action in the plenum, and water or subtle matter is
sufficiently soft or fluid for each part to shape or arrange itself to satisfy evecy
sort of impression.
10. It should be noted that the more forcefully the piston with the hole is
pushed into the cask, the more forcefully the water, though impelled toward the
concave surface of the cask, is repelled toward the piston and gushes out its
opening. From this it is easy to judge that a black point must be more visible on
white paper than on blue paper, because since white repels light more forcefully
than any other color, not only does it disturb the optic nerve, but it causes the
subtle matter to tend through reaction toward the black point with greater force.
But if the ethereal matter were not infinitely soft or fluid, then as the tiny balls
that transmit the impression of white are hard, they clearly would obstruct the
impression of black, because as these balls resist each other, they could not tend
toward the same black point. And if this ethereal matter were not compressed,
there would be no reaction.
What I have just said about white and black must be applied to the other
colors. But it would be difficult to do so in detail, and to respond to the difficulties many people might raise on the same subject; for objections on obscure
matters are easily raised. But not all those capable of raising objections are in a
position to understand the principles on which the resolution of their objections
depends. It is not impossible to conceive how a sensible point of infmitely fluid
matter pressed on evecy side receives an almost infinite number of different
impressions at the same time, when attention is paid to two things: (a) that matter
is infinitely divisible, and that the smallest sphere can correspond to all the parts
of a large sphere; (b) that each part tends and moves in the direction in which it is
less pressed, and that thus every soft and unequally compressed body receives all
the traits of the mould, as it were, surrounding it, and receives them the more
rapidly as it is more fluid and compressed. I therefore omit detailing the consequences following from the principles I have just explained, by which consequences it seems to me we can remove or at least diminish the extraordinacy
difficulty, that the rays of different colors must confuse their vibrations in intersecting. And this difficulty seems to me such that only the true natural system of
subtle matter could entirely elucidate it. However that may be, I think I have
clearly proved that d(fferent colors consist only in the differentfrequl'llcy of the
pressure vibrations of subtle matter, as diflerent tones of music result only from
the different frequency of the vibration of gross air (as experiment teaches),
which vibrations also intersect without destroying each other. And I do not think
that the way all these vibrations are communicated can be physically explained
unless the principles I have just set out are followed.
Moreover, it must not be imagined that what I have said about the tiny balls of
the second clement (which, far from believing hard, I regan! rather as small

Nicolas Ma/ebranche

694

vortexes of a subtle matter) must upset Descartes's physics. On the contrary, my
view might serve to reform and perfect the general aspect of his system. For if
my view can serve to explain light and colors, it seems to me suited to resolve, in
conformity with the principles and method of this philosopher, the most general
questions of physics, as, for example, how to explain the generation and surprising effects of light, as I am going to try to show.

The generation of fire.
11. As bodies cannot naturally acquire motion unless it is communicated to
them by some others, it is clear that fire can begin to bum only through the
communication of motion from subtle matter to gross bodies. Descartes, as we
know, claims that only the first element communicates its motion to the third, of
which gross bodies are composed, and sets it on fire. According to him, when we
strike the steel, we forcefully detach a small part of the flintstone. (I should
believe that it is rather the detached part of the steel that ignites, for when with a
microscope we look at the sparks of fire we have collected, we see that it is the
iron that has been melted and reduced to balls or shards, and I have noticed no
change in the slivers broken from the flint. But basically this is of no consequence.) This particle, then, spinning around forcefully, drives out the tiny balls
of the second element and makes the first element flow onto it, which element
communicates to it part of its rapid motion making it appear on fire. This is
roughly Descartes's view on the generation of fire. It can be found explained at
greater length in the fourth part of his principles, nos. 80 and following. But if
the tiny balls are hard and all touch, as he assumes in order to explain colors, we
have difficulty in understanding how the first element could flow toward the
detached part of iron, and in sufficient quantity to surround it and set it on
fire -not only it, but all the powder of a cannon or a mine, whose effects are so
violent. For the first element, in order to flow, cannot be any more than a very
small portion of the subtle matter filling the small triangular and concave spaces
that contiguous balls leave between them; but furthermore, the force that would
make the first element flow by pressing the second is not great enough, as is easy
to prove. Here, then, is how I explain the generation of fire and its violent effects
on the assumption that the tiny balls of the second element are in fact only small
vortexes of a fluid and very agitated matter.
12. But it must first be well noted that air is not necessary to strike a small
spark of fire, though in the absence of air the spark is immediately extinguished
and cannot be communicated even to gun powder, however flammable it might
be. Experiment teaches that when a well-primed pistol is fired in a vacuum
machine, the priming is not ignited for Jack of air, and that it is even very
difficult to notice any spark in it. Finally, everyone knows that fire is extinguished for lack of air and is kindled by blowing on it. This being assumed, here
is how I explain the generation of fire and its quick effect in mines.
If the steel is struck in a vacuum, a particle of the imn or steel is broken off by
the force ofthe blow. Spinning ahout and quil·kly striking several small vortexes
of the second element that necessarily counterbalance each other, this particle
easily upsets their equilibrium, for very little force is required to upset it; and

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

695

consequently it causes the parts of the vortexes to surround it, and then to agitate
it and set it on fire. But the matter of these vortexes (which cannot be imagined
too agitated), after having had a great deal of irregular motion for an instant,
quickly regroups, in part, into new vortexes due to the resistance it finds to its
motion, and in part escapes through the interstices of surrounding vortexes,
which interstices become larger when these vortexes approach the detached piece
of iron. These latter vortexes are not upset because the round or roughly cylindrical iron particle, turning on its center or lengthwise, no longer strikes the surrounding vortexes in a way to upset them. All this occurs almost instantaneously
when the iron and flint are stuck in a place void of air, and the spark is then
almost invisible and does not last.
13. But when the steel is struck in the air, the part broken from the iron, by
forcefully spinning about, collides with and disturbs not only several small
vortexes but many parts of air, which, being branched, strike and consequently
upset many more vortexes by their motion than the iron particle alone. As a
result, the subtle matter of these vortexes then surrounds the air and fire gives
them sufficiently diverse motion to forcefully repel the other vortexes, and to
excite in us a lively sensation of light. Thus, the sparks must be much more
brilliant in the air than in a vacuum; they must also last longer and have more
force to ignite gun powder. And this powder does not lack subtle matter that sets
it on fire or in motion, whatever quantity of powder there might be, because it is
not only the matter of the first element, as Descartes believed, but much more
that of the second, or of the small vortexes that have been upset, that produces
the extraordinary motion of fire in mines. If you reflect on what happens to fire
when you blow on it, i.e., when you impel a great deal of air against it, you will
not doubt that the parts of air are well suited to upsetting a great many vortexes of
the second element and, consequently, to causing subtle matter to communicate
to the fire a part of its motion. For only from this matter can fire draw its force or
motion, because it is certain that a body can move only through the action of
those surrounding it or striking it. The prodigious effects of large heat mirrors
sufficiently prove that subtle matter is the true cause of fire. With the rays of light
intersecting at the focus of these mirrors, the small vortexes of etheral matter of
which these rays are composed must change their circular motion in different
directions, and must all tend to move in the same direction, i.e., along the axis of
the cone of reflected light, and to pass through and thus upset the parts of the
bodies they meet.
What follows to the end of the work was not in the pre\·ious editions.
PROOF OF THE ASSUMPTION I MADE: that subtle or etheral matter is necessarily
composed cJf" small \'Ortexes, and that they are the natural causes of all the
changes occurring in matter, which I confirm by an explanation of the most
!{t'tlt'ral e{/(•cts of physics, such as the hardness of bodies, their .fluidity, their
lll'm·ine.u, their lightness. light and the• refraction cmd re.f7ection of its rays.

14. The assumption I made that subtle or ethereal matter is composed only of
an infinity of small vortexes that tum on their center with extreme rapidity, and

696

Nicolas Malebranche

that counterbalance each other like the large vortexes Descartes explained in his
Principles of Philosophy, this supposition, I say, is not arbitrary. And as I am
convinced that it is the true principle of general physics on which particular
effects depend, I believe I must prove it and deduce from it the explanation of
some truths of consequence. But I beg the reader to compensate with his attention
for the principles I assume to be known to true physicists, and to suspend his
judgment until he has read and reflected awhile on my proofs.
The rapidity of the motion of subtle matter is clearly proved by the effects of
thunder, or rather by those of gunpowder. For it is clear that a body is moved
only because it is impelled, and it can be impelled only by the one immediately
touching it. Thus, the ball leaves the cannon only because it is impelled by the
gun powder, and this powder is set on fire 8 or in motion only by the subtle matter
touching it and penetrating it. And consequently, subtle matter moves with great
rapidity, because it is the primitive cause of the ball's violent motion.
It is further necessary that it group and move in small vortexes that counterbalance each other by their centrifugal forces, and that the vortexes establish a kind
of equilibrium among themselves so that they might all be equally pressed or
compressed. For since every body goes in the direction in which it is less
pressed, if a given part of the ether were less pressed than the others, it is clear
that the others would fall back on it. We see that if all the ethereal matter were
not equally compressed, different colorsb or different pressure vibrations could
not be instantaneously transmitted across vast spaces without any change in the
frequency of their vibrations.
It therefore appears to me certain from what I have just said, and from other
reasons I do not believe necessary to relate, that the entire motion of etheral
matter is not used in the roughly circular or elliptical course of the large vortexes,
which carry the main planets around the sun, and their moons around the sun and
the planet around which they revolve. All the particles of this matter are in very
rapid motion. And because the universe is compressed by an infinite, or almost
infinite force, and because there is no void, these parts of subtle matter, mutually
resisting each other by their different particular motions, must continuously
divide and form small vortexes, and in these others yet smaller, and still others
less stable in the concave interstices that contiguous vortexes leave between themselves. All this is because matter is infinitely divisible, and because no part offers
any resistance to being divided, since rest has no force, and because the hardness
of bodies results only from the motion of those compressing them, as I have
proved at length in the last chapter on Method.
It therefore appears to me evident that subtle matter, whose rapidity is extreme, groups and thus moves in small vortexes, and that these vortexes counterbalance each other. For if this matter moved in the same direction, all the bodies
it surrounds would be transported in its flow with more speed than lightning, for
the speed of lightning, as well as that of a cannonball, ha'i as a primitive cause the
"See the article above on the generation of fire.

"Above, no. 3.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

697

speed of ethereal matter. This is so for the same reason that the earth, the air,
cities, and so forth, are carried around in twenty-four hours by the large vortex
surrounding us. But as these little vortexes are required by their mutual resistance
to arrange and counterbalance themselves in such a way that they can complete
their motion by establishing among themselves a kind of equilibrium, they only
compress the parts of gross bodies against each other when the parts of these bodies
are immediately touching. In this way they make them hard so that to break these
bodies, or to separate their parts, a force must be used, i.e., some motion (for the
force of bodies8 is only their motion) that can overcome the centrifugal force of
these vortexes that compress the parts of hard bodies between them.
Thus, since the vortexes of ethereal matter that are mingled with the powder of
the cannon, and that surround it, are in a state of equilibrium, they cause no
change in it. Far from moving and separating them, they compress its parts. But
when it is ignited, i.e., when the equilibrium of the vortexes has been disturbed,
and the parts of the powder are enveloped and are floating in the flow or the small
new torrents of the matter from several upset vortexes, as has already been
explainedb and, I believe, sufficiently proved, then the parts of the powder
receive from them some of their motion, of which they communicate to the ball
only a sixth part, assuming that the best powder with which the cannon has been
loaded occupies at its core only the length of the diameter of its caliber, since the
hollow cylindrical surface against which the powder acts is equal to six circular
planes of the diameter of the caliber. I said that the powder receives only some of
the motion of the matter surrounding it, not only because not all of the powder is
ignited, nor all at the same time, but also because it floats in the flow of the
matter carrying it only for a short time. For when a body is moved only by the
communication of motion from the fluid surrounding it, it does not instantaneously receive as much motion as the fluid has; but moreover, since the small
streams of subtle matter veer in every direction, they mutually resist each other.
15. It is evident, then, that the motion of ethereal matter is of an awful
rapidity, because a very heavy ball, which receives only a very small part of it,
leaves a cannon with so much speed. Now, since it has been demonstratedc that
the centrifugal force of bodies is equal to the square of their speed divided by the
diameter of the circle in which they are constrained to revolve, you should not be
surprised that the hardness of iron should be the effect of compression by the
small vortexes of subtle matter, especially if you assume them to be very small,
such that several million diameters of these vortexes, for example, would hardly
equal a twelfth of an inch. Now, some of them must be very small, because they
easily pass through the pores of not only glass in order to transmit the action of
light, perhaps a hundred or a thousand in each pore, but also those of steel. For
since there is no force in bodies other than their motion, a sword resists when it is
bent and strives to straighten itself only because the small vortexes of ether in its
"Last chapter on Method.

"No. 12.
'The demonstration is at the end of this work for those who do not know it.

698

Nicolas Malebranche

pores are not free to perfonn their circular motion, the curvature of the sword
necessarily changing the round figure of the pores in which they are constrained
to revolve into an ellipse. If, then, you multiply the astonishing speed of the
subtle matter by itself and then divide it by the almost infinitely small size of the
small vortexes' diameter of revolution, you will find a quantity of centrifugal
force that is, as it were, infinitely great in relation to other forces of the same
nature-a force such that you will perhaps cease being surprised by the hardness
of diamond, which certainly can be the effect only of the ether's compression,
just as I proved for the hardness of all bodies.
16. If you wish to compare the centrifugal force of the small vortexes to that of
the large ones in order thereby to judge whether the fonner of these forces can be
the cause of bodies' hardness and elasticity, you can compare the centrifugal
force had by a very small particle or a physical point to recede from its center
with the centrifugal force had by a similar part of the earth to recede from the
sun, which is the center of its revolution, or with a similar part of the volume of
ethereal matter that is in equilibrium with the earth and that with a centrifugal
force equal to its own constrains it to remain at the same distance from the sun.
To do this, let us suppose that the speed of a physical point of a small vortex is
only ten times greater than that of a ball leaving a cannon. This is surely to
decrease greatly the speed of the ether; so much is clear from what I have just
said. Let us also suppose that a physical point of earth revolving annually about
the sun has a thousand times more speed than a ball. This is perhaps to increase
its motion. We can now calculate it, for we know roughly the distance through
which the ball passes in one second, and thereby the distance it would pass
through in a day or a year. And we also know that the distance from the earth to
the sun is at least ten thousand terrestial diameters, and we thereby know the
distance through which the earth travels in a day or a year. We can therefore
discover the approximate ratio of these two speeds, that of the earth around the
sun to that of the ball, and consequently to that of the subtle matter we have
proved to be at least ten times greater than that of the ball.
Supposing then that the speed of a physical point of a small vortex is 1/100 the
speed of a physical point of the large vortex. The square of 1/100 will be
1/10,000. Let us now look for the ratio of the diameters of the revolutions. The
diameter of the earth's revolution is at least twenty thousand terrestrial diameters,
and each diameter contains at least 6,000,000 fathoms. It contains 6,538,594
according to the measurement conducted by the gentlemen of the Academic. But
I ignore the five hundred thousand or so fathoms, although this number greatly
increases the ratio of the centrifugal force of the small vortexes to that of the large
ones. And finally each fathom will contain as many pores or small vortexes.
Those who make use of good microscopes will not doubt this. For there are
animals so small that a single eye of a butterfly would containa twenty-four to
twenty-five million of them. You will doubt this even Jess if you attend to the
organic parts of insects, or rather, of the seeds from which they are born, for their
"De Puget's Lett., p. 121.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

699

tiny organs can receive their figure and different consistency only through the
pressure of the small vortexes surrounding them. Consequently, I could justifiably further decrease the diameters of the small vortexes by several million
million; in a word, I could give them an indefinite smallness, which would
infinitely increase their centrifugal force.
Thus, on the assumption that one fathom contains only 6,000,000 times the
diameter of a small vortex, in order to find out how many times this diameter is
contained in that of the earth's revolution around the sun, i.e., following the
assumption, in 20,000 times 6,000,000 fathoms, we must multiply 6,000,000 by
itself and the product by 20,000, and we shall see that the diameter of a small
vortex will stand to that of a large one as I to 720,000,000,000,000,000. Now,
the centrifugal force of bodies is equal to the square of their speed divided by the
diameter of the circle in which they are compressed and constrained to revolve.
Therefore, by dividing 1/10,000-the square of the small vortex's speed compared to the large one's-by l/720,000,000,000,000,000-the small vortex's
diameter compared to the large one's-we shall have 720,000,000,000 as the
centrifugal force of a physical point of the small vortex, which will stand to that
of a physical point of the large one as this huge number stands to unity. Although
not very exact, this calculation might give some idea of the excessive centrifugal
force of small vortexes, which alone is the cause of the hardness of bodies, and
which resists our efforts to break them.
17. With respect to the fluidity of bodies, of water, for example, we clearly see
without pausing over the matter that small vortexes can communicate this quality
to them. For not only do they surround and compress on every side the particles
of which fluid bodies are composed, for it can be only their pressure that gives
these particles their figure and consistency according to what I have just said, but
they also keep them apart and make them slide over each other, in which their
fluidity consists. And since they are also surrounded by air and are heavy, they
slide between them and separate from them only after some time.
We also understand through the generation of fire how very different fermentations are produced by mixing different liquids together. For acids mixed with
alkalis more or less upset the small vortexes and consequently cause greater or
lesser fermentations and motions. But the particular reasons for each fermentation cannot be clearly explained. Let us leave conjectures, then, and come to
weight, whose cause seems so hidden.
18. Some philosophers, not having well understood Descartes's view, or
rather, having understood it from his letters published after his death instead of
from his Principles of Philosophy published during his lifetime, attribute the
weight of bodies to the centrifugal force that subtle matter draws from its circular
motion around the earth. But it would be necessary, as has been proved by
several people, and even by those who are of this opinion and wish to support it,
it would be necessary, I say, for this matter to revolve about seventeen times
faster than the earth without changing the perpendicular direction of a falling
feather, and without offering the least resistance to a man walking in the opposite
direction of its motion, although it offers a great deal of resistance to our effort to

700

Nicolas Malebranche

raise ourselves from the earth, which seems to contain a manifest contradiction.
For if the subtle matter, revolving ten times faster than the earth, were to pass
through a feather without changing its perpendicular fall, i.e., without communicating to it any of its motion, it seems to me that bodies thrown in the air
should never fall down, the subtle mauer passing through without repelling them,
and its centrifugal force not being even comparable to its speed. I believe, on the
contrary, it is evident that bodies enveloped in a complete fluid, or one filling an
entire space, and that float in this fluid, whatever its nature might be, must
receive its impression and after a while even travel almost as fast as the fluid.
Otherwise the generation of fire would be impossible. The effects of gunpowder
and thunder would be miraculous or supernatural. For the powder that impels the
ball would be moved without being impelled by the flow of subtle mauer, which
is the only body with great motion immediately touching the powder, and this is
contrary to the natural law that a body can be moved only by one touching it. I
believe, on the contrary, that the planets revolve on their center only through the
motion they receive from the fluid surrounding them; I mean that if God had not
created them in motion, but only the subtle mauer surrounding and penetrating
them, by the end of several months or several years they would revolve as they
now do. I do not speak of several other objections raised against this explanation
of weight, such as this: that bodies would have to fall perpendicularly to the
earth's axis and not directly toward its center, which has been answered with

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

701

great ingenuity and subtlety. I leave the other objections against this view on
weight, I say; here is mine. I assume that close attention is paid to the centrifugal
force of the small vortexes, which an: pressed and counterbalanced in every
direction.
Let us conceive of a stone P sunounded on every side by the ether E, E. It is
clear that the ether below the line AB, concentric with the surface of the earth, as
well as that above the line CD, is in perfect equilibrium: for being of the same
nature, and composed of small vortexes, all its parts are equally pressed and
counterbalanced by their centrifugal force. But the ethereal matter between the
lines AB and CD is not in equilibrium with the stone, because the parts of the
stone have no circular motion or centrifugal force by which they act and tend to
recede in every direction as do the small vortexes. Thus, the ether must seize the
top of the stone and make it descend, for two reasons: one, because the small
vortexes apparently can have more room above than below, since the speed of the
ether is greater below than above, its various distances from the center standing
to each other reciprocally as the squan: of its speed at these distances, as we shall
soon see. But the other reason, which I believe to be the main and true one, is
that the reaction undergone by the small vortexes is much greater on the side of
the large terrestrial vortex dian on any other. This is why gross bodies fall directly
toward the center of the earth, as I am going to try to demonstrate.
It is certain that the earth RST, or its center 0, is equally pressed above and
below, left and right, in relation to its own vortex, which compresses it equally
on every side. Thus, the action of the centrifugal force of all the small vortexes
above, aligned along AO, is returned to them due to the immobility or resistance
of 0, which is equally impelled by the vortexes below. If we imagine two small
vortexes marked I and 2 set on top of each other, and compressed by those
sunounding them on every side, the action of the centrifugal force of the first, by
which it tends to recede toward 0, will be entirely returned to it due to the
immobility of the center 0. The second vortex will be repelled even more from
the center than the first, for besides the fact that its own action will be returned to
it along the line OA, it will also be impelled by the reaction of the first. And if
you set up a thini one, it will be repelled even more than the second, and so on.
But it must be noted that these additions diminish as they an: shared by a greater
number of vortexes receding from the center, so that at a certain distance from
the center they cease, or rather, become almost nil.
But if we now conceive, instead of a twentieth vortex, a small solid body
without motion, or without a centrifugal force that might fall back on it, it will be
forced up by the nineteen vortexes below it, which are in equilibrium with the
nineteen adjacent vortexes; but it will not be repelled as much as the twentieth,
since it does not have, like the twentieth, a centrifugal force capable of falling
back on it and driving it from the center of the earth.
From this it therefore follows that all the vortexes below the line AB and above
CD at an equal distance from the center 0 are in equilibrium and undergo the
same reaction from bottom to top. But those between the line AB and CD are not.
For since there are more vortexes in the area E, E than in the stone P, the ether in

702

Nicolas Malebranche

E, E is forced up by the reaction it undergoes proponionately more than the stone
since there are more vonexes in it than in the stone. Thus, since the ether is
forced up more than the stone and is compressed on every side, it spreads out
over the stone due to its extreme mobility and fluidity, and impels it toward the
center of the eanh. This is the same reason that water, being more impelled from
above to below than wood, slides under wood and makes it rise.
Let us now imagine that the large vonex of subtle matter surrounding the
earth, being equally compressed on every side, presses the matter it contains
toward the eanh, and that it is composed of tiny balls that are infinitely hard and
solid and consequently, inelastic and without centrifugal force, instead of small
vonexes. The tiny balls I, 2, 3, and so on, will bear the weight compressing
them on both sides from the center of the eanh; but they will not rebound, since
they have no elasticity. For we saw in the explanation of the laws of motion that
it is elasticity that makes bodies rebound, and we have just seen that the elastic
force of bodies consists only in the centrifugal force of the small vonexes in their
pores. Now unless they rebound, the stone P will remain in equilibrium with the
ether E, E surrounding it.
Let us again examine whether the stone's weight does not result from the fact
that the subtle matter revolves around the earth much faster than the stone, and
that thus tending to grasp its top by the centrifugal force resulting from its greater
speed, it impels the stone toward the earth. But to make this investigation more
useful and more agreeable, let us first seek the cause of the weight of the planets
that forces them to revolve around the sun, in order to see whether it is the same
cause that makes heavy bodies fall here below.
I assume (a) that the matter contained in the large vortex whose center is the
sun and that carries the main planets and their vonexes, is extremely agitated,
and that it is constrained to revolve only because it is equally compressed on all
sides by the matter surrounding it; (b) that usuming this exterior compression to
be equal, it equally presses all the matter of the vonex toward the sun, which is
ill center; (c) that through the centrifugal force it derives from the speed of its
motion, the compressed matter counterbalances the force of the compression
impelling it toward the sun. This compression, or kind of weight of subtle matter,
is equal to the centrifugal force. For all the parts of the universe are, or tend to
put themselves, in equilibrium through this general principle of physics, that
every body less impelled in one direction than another moves until equally
impelled in all directions. This assumed, and setting aside the difficulties that
might be raised against these assumptions, let us imagine that all the celestial
matter of this large vortex, or only that in the plane of the ecliptic from which the
planets hardly deviate, is divided into layers, from the surface of the vonex to the
sun. All its layers will stand to each other as the squares of their diameters or of
their distances from the sun. From this it follows by the general principle of
mechanics, or the common notion, that equilibrium obtains only when contrary
forces are equal, from which it follows, I say, that in order for these superior and
inferior layers to be in equilibrium and also to carry-not by their simple speed,
but by the centrifugal force resulting from their speed -the weight of their

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

703

compression toward the sun, their circumferences. as will be demonstrated in
what follows, must stand to each other in inverse proportion tu the squares of
their speeds. For the centrifugal force of each point of these layers is equal not to
its speed but to the square of its speed divided by the diameter of its revolution. If
needed, the proof of this will be found at the end of this volume. The speed of the
layers, increasing inversely with the square nx1ts of the layers, or of the diameters, or, finally, of the distances from the sun (for the circumfen.."'lccs or the
layers are in the same proportion a.o; their radii or diameters), the speed of the
ethereal matter ncar the sun, I say. must have an awful rapidity. For a.'suming
that the distance from here to the center of the sun is thirty million leagues, and
that the distance from the surface of the sun to its center is thirty thousand
leagues, for equilibrium to be preserved the speed of the subtle matter ncar the
sun must stand to that surrounding the earth a.o; the square n1ot of thirty million
stands to that of thirty thousand. Yet the ce lcstial matter is everywhere m equ ilibrium up to the surface of the sun. where its equilibrium is upset bcl·ause the
surface of the sun, which only turns in twenty-seven and a half days. would have
to tum in about three hours to preserve equilibrium as do the superior layers of
the vortex of which it is the center. Thus, the subtle matter at the surface of the
sun does not have one two-hundredth of the circular speed necessary to support
the compression or weight of the vortex through its centrifugal force, for whatever impels matter toward the center around which it revolves can be called
weight. The calculation of the circular speed celestial matter must have at the
surface of the sun to preserve the equilibrium there can be seen in the sixth
chapter of Villemot's new system, a work that marks the author with great
strength and scope of mind.
It seems to me to follow from what I have just said that the sun is a fire, i.e., a
mass of disturbed vortexes, and that since it is unable to support the weight of the
vortex solely by the centrifugal force that would be generated by the circular
motion of the matter of which it is composed. it support.~ it by repelling the layers
next to it. but not by a uniform pressure like that of the superior layers. which
would only preserve equilibrium in the vortex's matter. and not pruduce any heat
or light in it: for equilibrium alone produces nothing. Rather. it support.'i thi!>
weight with very rapid vibrations that animate. as it were, all the matter of which
different bodies are composed. and produce all the changes we see at different
seasons: but this is not my topic.
By the principle of mechanics that all the spherical layers from the surface of
the sun to the edge of the vortex cannot be in equilibrium and also carry the
compression or weight pressing e\·erything toward the center by their centrifugal
forces alone, it is therefore certain that the inferior spheres cannot stand to the
superior inversely as the square of their speeds. From the observations of astronomers, it is also certain that the squares of the times of revolution of the
principal planets around the sun, and especially of the moons of Jupiter and
Saturn around these two planets. stand to each other as the cubes of the distances
from the center of their revolution. From this it follows that the astronomical
observations agree perfectly with what has just been proved by reason. For if in

704

Nicolas Malebranclte

the ratios yielded by observation we substitute for the times their values, i.e., the
planets' revolutions divided by their speeds, we shall fmd the same ratio as that
which according to reason is necessary to preserve equilibrium in the layers of
subtle matter. I shall soon give the specific operation. The planets are thereby
seen to have the same speed as the layers sunounding them, or rather, to complete their full revolution in the same time. I say their full revolution, because the
planets must go somewhat less fast when their layers increase their speeds, and
somewhat faster when their layers go more slowly at different parts of their
revolution. But they complete the full revolution in the same time as their layers,
for otherwise after their revolutions they would not be at the same distance from
the sun, nor would moons be at the same distance from their planets.
We see, then, that the true weight of the planets and the spherical layers, (a)
which impels them toward the center of the vortex, (b) which forces them to
revolve, and finally (c) which they resist by the centrifugal force generated by
their speed, springs not from the center of the vortex but from its exterior
compression. The weight of bodies near the earth or near the planets, on the
contrary, results from the reaction this same exterior compression undergoes at
the center of the vortex, which is equally pressed in the opposite direction on all
sides. As I have just explained above, this weight resuhs from the centrifugal
force of the small vortexes that, like so many springs wound up by the compression they undergo due to the immobility of the planet or the earth, seize the top of
partly inelastic gross bodies; for the small vortexes can be considered as springs,
since without them nothing would be elastic.
It should be carefully noted, then, that when the inferior layers resist the
exterior, or carry the weight of the vortex only by their centrifugal forces,
Kepler's rule must be exactly observed for equilibrium to be preserved. This is
evident through reason, and certain through astonomical observations. Now,
when the layers are too distant from the center of the vortex, the reaction that
results from the compression there, weakening and dissipating with the distance,
does not reach these too distant layers, and does not combine with their centrifugal forces (or does so very little) to support the weight of the superior layers.
Thus, the moons of Jupiter and the layers carrying them must follow Kepler's
rule.
For the same reason, if the layer of subtle matter surrounding the earth supported the compression of the vortex solely by its centrifugal force, or, what
comes to the same, if it caused weight by this kind of centrifugal force, this layer
of subtle matter would demonstrably have about sixteen times the speed of the
earth's equator. But the reaction resulting from the compression at the immobile
center combines sixteen times as much force as the centrifugal force of this layer
to support the weight of the superior layers and preserve equilibrium. And it is
this concurrence and this reaction that is the cause of the true weight of gross
bodies. For since according to Kepler's rule the layer of subtle matter surrounding us must have seventeen times more speed than the earth in order to
preserve equilibrium by its centrifugal force, it follows that if it revolves less
quickly, another force equal to that it lacks must be added to it; otherwise the

ElucidatiotU of the Search after Truth

105

equilibrium would be upset. Given that the tendency of the subtle matter from the
center toward the circumference, or the resistance it offers here below to the
superior layers is always the same, whether or not it revolves seventeen times
faster than the earth, because equilibrium must be preserved and the superior
layers supported, it follows that we can conclude nothing of certainty about the
speed of subtle matter, neither by comparison with the speed of the moon nor by
following Kepler's rule.
It should be noted that Kepler's rule has only the two proofs I have given; one
is drawn from the principle of mechanics, and it is very certain. But this is
because it assumes that the celestial layers are mutually resisted and counterbalanced only by their centrifugal forces. Now, certainly this is not true with
respect to the layers near the centers of vortexes. The other, which is drawn from
astronomical observations, is quite adequate for the planets and the distant layers
carrying them. But it is evident that there cannot even be observations to determine the speed of celestial layers right next to the planets. On the contrary.
observations teach us that neither the sun, nor the earth, nor Jupiter revolves as
fast as is required by Kepler's rule-in my view good enough evidence for
judging that the subtle matter immediately surrounding them does not follow that
rule. But there are so many other convincing proofs that matter does not revolve
seventeen times faster than the earth and it is so easy to discover them that I
would fear boring the reader if I stopped to relate them.
In order to explain better how the speed and centrifugal force of the small
vortexes is the general principle of natural effects, I am going to try to prove that
certain properties of light uniquely depend on it, and especially that of reflecting
and undergoing refraction on, or rather, near the surface of bodies; but I shall do
so after having given the demonstration I just promised, and did not produce,
because some readers do not need it and most will not be able to understand it or
will not wish to read it. Here is that demonstration.

or WHAT I just said: that if in the known proponion of the times of the
revolutions of planets to their distances from the sun we replace times ITy their
values, we shall find the same proportion as that preserving equilibrium in the
celestrial layers of the vone;ces.

PI.OOF

Astonomical observations teach that the squares of the times of the revolutions
of planets stand to each other as the cubes of their distances from the common
center of their revolution. Thus, 11:TI:: d 3 :1)1, taking 1 for the time of revolution
of tbe inferior planet, and d for its distance from the ceneer, and likewise forT
and D and the superior planet.
This assumed, and taking v for the speed of a point B of the circle or inferior
arc AB, and JC for that of a point Don the superior arc CD, the time 1 of the
revolution of the point B around the planet or sun S will be c/v and the square 11
will be cc/vv, taking c for the arc or the circle AB; for time is equal to distance
divided by speed. And for the same reason, we shall have TI=CC/XX, taking C
for the arc or superior circle CD. Therefore, since the planets revolve with the
same speed, or complete their revolution in the same time as the fluid that

Nicolas Malebranche

706

D

s
sunounds and transports them, we shall have tt:TI. or cclvv:CC /XX :-a3 :03, or, by
replacing the circumferences by the diameters proportional to them, dd/vv:DD/XX:-a3:D3. Therefore, d/xx=Divv. According to observations, it must be that
d stand to D, ore to C, asxx to vv, i.e., that the square of the speed of point B, or
of the arc AB, which travels with the same speed, stands to the square of the speed
of the arc CD, as the arc CD to the arc AB, i.e., in inverse proportion of arcs,
circles, or diameters, which causes the equilibrium in celestial matter.
But had not astronomers identified by their observations the ratio of the time of
the revolutions of the planets to their distances from the common center of their
revolutions, we could discover it in the following way from the knowledge we
have of centrifugal forces. For in a vortex, the sphere composing it must be
counterbalanced and in equilibrium because if the sphere represented by the arc
AB were not in equilibrium with that represented by the arc CD, it would put
itself in equilibrium by the principle that every body travels in the direction in
which it is least pressed. Now, in order for the inferior spherical layer AB to be in
equilibrium with the superior spherical layer CD, or for it to carry equally the
weight of the vortex, their centrifugal forces must, by the general principle of
mechanics, stand in inverse proportion to them. Thus, since the centrifugal force
of a point of the ethereal matter composing the inferior layer AB is wid by the
demonstration• of centrifugal forces, the force of the entire layer will be vvccld.
And for the same reason, that of the superior layer will be XXCC/D. Now, since
these two forces must be equal in order equally to resist the compression of the
vortex, we shall have the equation vvccld = XXCC/D, or vvc = XXC, because c ld
equals C/D, or finally vvd=XXD. By replacing v andx in this last equation by
their values, viz., the circumferences divided by the times of revolutions, or the
circumferences by the diameters proportional to them, we shall have D 3/TI =d 3/
tt, or tt:TT::d 3 :D3 , which is precisely what astronomers have discovered by their
observations. Thus, reason agrees with experience in this, because all celestial
matter is, or tends to put itself in, perfect equilibrium. I come to the properties of
light.
19. When a ray of light AC is in a rare or subtle matter like air and obliquely
meets the surface MN of a transparent body denser and heavier than air, like
"This demonstration is at the end of this volume.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

707

water or glass, experiences teaches that this ray or its action divides along two
lines, one of which enters the glass and thereupon deviates toward the line TC
perpendicular to the line MN separating the air and water, while the other is
reflected along a line that with the same perpendicular makes an angle of reflection equal to the angle of incidence ACL.

Experience teaches:
a) that if a ray of light passes, for example, through the point R right next to
the surface of the water and meets it at point C around which the circle RTVQ
has been described, this ray will be refracted and pass through a point such as r,
and that it will also be partially reflected in skimming the line MN.
b) It must be noted that the sine RP of the angle of incidence RCT, or the
half-diameter RC, stands to the sine rs made by the refracted ray rC of the level
ray RC as the sine of every other angle of incidence such as AB stands to the sine
ab of its angle of refraction; that is, if RC stands tors as 4 stands to 3, AB will
stand to ab, as 4 stands to 3.
c) But if a ray, or its action traveled from water to air along the line rC, it
would be refracted at point C, and skimming the line MN, it would go through
point R. It would also be partially reflected toward K and would make in the same
water an angle of reflex ion equal to the angle of its incidence rCs, and its sine Ks
would be equal to the angle of refraction of the level ray RC that passed from air
into water. In a word, rays passing from one medium to another follow the same
path in both directions. Those who treat optics8 number this among the axioms,
for there is no experiment in dioptrics that does not confirm it, and we shall see
the reason for it.
•Newton. page 5 of his Opricks.

708

Nicolas Malebranche

d) From this axiom that is the foundation of dioptrics, that rays passing from
one medium to another follow exactly the same path in both directions, it follows
that almost all the rays in air meeting the surface of water, however level they
might be, enter it, even if the angle made by the level ray with the surface should
be only a second or a third. [It also follows] that none of those going from water
to air enter it so long as the angle they make with the surface is less than 41
degrees 25 minutes, which is the value of the angle rCs; the ratio ofthe refraction
of water to that of air being 3 to 4. But if the rays were to leave glass to enter the
air, none of the rays would do so as long as the angle it made with the surface was
less than 49 degrees 5 minutes; the ratio of the refraction of glass to that of air
being 20 to 31.
e) It should be noted that if the obliqueness of the angle rCE of light falling
from water on the surface of the air is increased somewhat, say one degree,
almost all the rays then enter the air, and appear to do so as abundantly as if the
angle were increased tenfold.
f) Finally it should be noted that the heavier or more dense transparent bodies
are, the greater the refraction of rays entering them is. These experiments assumed, let us now look for their physical explanations.
It should not be imagined that the reflection of rays occurs as does that of hard
bodies rebounding against a flat surface. Since everything is a plenum and is
infinitely compressed, rays are reflected and transmit their action without the
small vortexes of ether changing place. Only pressure without motion is to be
found here, unless motion is c_onceived as necessary for pressure vibrations, and
rays are variously either reflected or refracted along the straight line of the
various determinations of pressure.
It is ordinarily believed that rays are reflected only because they strike the solid
parts of glass that resist them. But this so natural and plausible opinion is
untenable for several reasons.
a) There is no likelihood that the most oblique rays on the surface of the water
or glass, which skim it, could easily enter it, the greater part of them doing so
without meeting gross parts which would make them reflect, and that none of the
rays which would travel from glass to air could do so unless the angle of their
obliqueness were greater. For can we believe that air, which transmits light so
easily, has incomparably more gross parts to make it reflect than water and glass,
and that there are not at least some rays that leaving the glass are able to fmd
passage to the air or to transmit their action to it when the angle of obliqueness is
39 degrees or less?
b) Can we conceive that none of the rays that would leave water or glass could
enter the air when the angle of their obliqueness is less than 40 degrees because
the gross parts of air make them reflect, and that however slightly the angle of
obliqueness increases, they almost all enter it, and apparently as many when the
angle is increased by one degree as by twenty? Does not this clearly indicate a
cause of the reflection of rays occurring only on the surface of the air, a cause
other than collision with its gross parts? But here is another, more demonstrative
proof.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

709

If you make a small hole in a card that you expose to the sun or to daylight, and
place below it a piece of glass on which the intercepted ray falls, you will see two
small illuminated circles, one of which is seen by the light reflecting at the
surface of the lens, and the other by the light reflected at the inferior surface of
the air when the ray enters it. Here is the path it follows, assuming the glass to be
flat and of equal thickness.

Striking the glass FK at point C, the intercepted ray AC reflects to L; diminished by the reflected light, it enters the glass and is refracted toward B; from
B it is again refracted toward D, and diminished by the direct light, it reflects to
M; and diminished by the light reflected toward 7 by the second meeting with the
air, it finally is refracted toward N, and the line MN, which according to experience and the laws of optics is parallel to CL, is that of the ray which makes us see
the less illuminated of the small circles, and the ray derives its light only from the
light reflected from the ray CB while passing from the glass to the air below.
Now, the inferior surface of the glass cannot be said to reflect the ray BMN; only
subtle matter or the gross parts of air can do so. Experiment teaches that it is not
the gross parts of air. For when a vacuum machine is used on the glass, and as
much gross air as possible has been pumped from it, no perceptible change is
brought about in the force of the ray reflected below the glass. Now, although not
all the air can be removed, according to Boyle not the ten-thousandth part
remains. So little remains that a feather seems to fall in it as fast as lead, and it is
certain that the slow fall of a feather results only from the resistance of air. It is
evident, then, that the reflection of rays does not result from collision with the
gross parts of glass, water, air, or as I believe, from any other gross body, as will
be seen in what follows.
But what then becomes of the rays that encounter the solid particles of which
glass and all other bodies are composed. I believe they are extinguished. Here is
how and why. Since rays consist only in rectilinear pressure vibrations in small
vortexes, which are all in equilibrium and which mutually resist each other by

710

Nicolas Malebranche

their centrifugal forces, they are not repelled when they fall on a solid particle of
glass that has no centrifugal force. It is as if they were to fall on a soft particle.
True, the particle is hard; but as it is so only through the compression from the
centrifugal force of the small vortexes surrounding it and giving it, like all
particles of which bodies are composed, its figure and consistency, the pressure
of each vibration that falls on the particle and disturbs it somewhat is irregularly
distributed on the vortexes compressing it. Now, this extinguishes the ray, for it
consists only in rectilinear pressure vibrations, and this gradually excites only
heat, for warm bodies are so only through the disturbance of the particles of
which they are composed. Thus, we see that black bodies exposed to the sun are
heated much more than white bodies. which reflect rays. and transparent bodies,
which transmit almost all of them.
Various views with respect to the cause of refraction have been published, of
which the most likely is that air being grosser than the subtle matter that fills the
pores of transparent bodies, rays upon entering them must have been repelled by
the gross air, which resisted them, and be refracted toward the perpendicular. But
the preceding experiment and several others that have been performed do not
agree with this view. And in fact, the rays that meet the gross parts of air and
disturb them are extinguished, as I have just said; or they are not repelled by
them, at least not in the way necessary to continue or transmit vibrations, nor
with sufficient force to refract rays as much as they are at the surface of glass or
diamond, whose refraction is about 5 to 2.• For even here below, where the air is
compressed by the weight of the atmosphere, in a volume composed of air and
subtle matter, gross air does not occupy the ten-thousandth part.
Since the reflection and refraction of rays is not produced by the action of air
or glass in their passage from one to the other, it is therefore necessary that the
cause be derived from the very action of subtle matter, because there is only the
action of it, the air, and the glass.
To explain bow this occurs, it must be noted that all the parts of ether, or all
the small vortexes that I believe I have demonstrated it is composed of, are
equally compressed and are in equilibrium among themselves, or continually
tend to put themselves in equilibrium. For as every body actually moves in the
direction in which it is less pressed, if some part of the ether were less pressed
than the others, it is clear that the others would fall upon it and press it as much as
they themselves are. Without this equilibrium and equality of pressure in which
the small vortexes put themselves by their centrifugal forces, their various vibrations produced by the various motions of the particles of which the stars are
composed, some of which appear with a light bordering on blue and others with a
reddish light, could not be transmitted to us, nor could it be done instantaneously. Our perception of them could well be interrupted by interruption of the
pressure vibrations causing it, and could be interrupted longer than it when some
particle flying about in the air crosses the line of their rays to our eyes. For
because of the distance of the stars, which is so great that they appear only as a
"Accordina to Newton, page 232 of his Opriclu.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

711

luminous point even with telescopes, which so greatly enlarge the planets, the
collection of all their rays has so little thickness that the smallest of the gross
parts, still different from ether, interrupt their action and make them twinkle by
constantly crossing their rays.
Assuming, then, that all the small vortexes of ether are equally and almost
infinitely compressed, and that they are all counterbalanced by their centrifugal
forces, as soon as the particles ofthe luminous body press the small vortexes they
meet, their pressure is communicated to all the others right up to us, and this
happens instantaneously because there is no void. These particles of the luminous
body, disturbing by their different motions the vortexes which offer them resistance, cause pressure vibrations in them. Now, all these pressure vibrations occur
in a straight line so long as they are in the ether. For with all the vortexes
counterbalanced by their centrifugal forces, the rays or pressure vibrations are
pressed to the right as much as to the left. Thus the rays cannot change direction.
But when they obliquely meet the surface of glass, they undergo refraction there
and are diverted toward the perpendicular to that surface; and this refraction is
greater as the bodies they enter are heavier or denser than those they are leaving.
We have already seen the reason for this, but it must be explained more distinctly.
Let us assume that FK represents the surface of the glass, and that I, 3, 5. 7
indicate the solid parts of this surface and that 2, 4, 6 indicate the pores filled
with small vortexes of ether. Assuming the same thing for the lower surface of
the glass, and that the ray or line of pressure vibrations AC falls obliquely on the
glass, it is evident that it must be diverted toward the perpendicular. For since
there are more vortexes in air than in glass, there are also more centrifugal forces;
and since the ray is no longer equally pressed by the centrifugal forces of the
surrounding vortexes, the direction of the pressure vibrations must be diverted in
the weakest direction. Now, since there is the same ratio between the centrifugal
force of the vortexes in the air above and below the glass to the force at the two
surfaces of the glass, the ray is diverted as much from the perpendicular at the

712

Nicolas Malebranche

point of the surface from which it leaves the glass as it was in entering the glass.
But if the lower surface of the glass were dipped in water, since there are fewer
vortexes in water than in air and more than in glass (because water weighs more
than air and less than glass), the ray upon going from the glass to the water must
recede a bit more from the perpendicular to point B, but as less than if it were
entering air as there are less vortexes and centrifugal force in water than in air.
Finally, if we place a convex lens such as the objective lens of a telescope in
contact with the lower surface of a flat piece of glass at a perceptible point, the
rays passing through this point are neither refracted nor reflected, there being
equal vortexes and centrifugal force in the two lenses. The objective lens will
appear to have a hole at the point of contact. Finally, in the experiment I have
already mentioned of a ray intercepted by a small hole in a card and falling upon
a piece of glass producing two quite perceptible reflections, if we dip the lower
surface of the glass in the water where the second reflection occurs, we shall so
weaken it that we shall hardly see its weak light. Weak, I say, in relation to the
light of the first reflection, and all the weaker as there are fewer vortexes in water
than in air.
It evidently follows from all this that since the reflection and refraction of rays,
or the deviation from the line of light pressures, is not produced by the gross parts
of air in the ether, nor by those making up the lens, this deviation can result only
from the centrifugal force of the vortexes of subtle matter by which they compress each other and all the bodies they surround in order to preserve equilibrium
among contrary forces according to the natural law that all bodies move in the
direction in which they are least pressed.
But in order that you might conceive the truth of my view still more distinctly,
I am going to deduce from it that the ratio of the sines of the angles of incidence
and reflection must be constant and always the same in whatever oblique way
rays meet the surface of glass.
Let us first imagine that the circle RTVQ represents a glass ball; the ray RC
will not be refracted at point C, nor anywhere else, if the glass is of equal density
throughout. But if we suppose (a) that the upper hemisphere is cut off, (b) that
above the line MN of the surface of the glass there are only vortexes with very
little gross air, (c) that on the surface of the glass itself MN there also are only
vortexes with very little air, but with many of the gross parts of which the glass is
composed, and (d) that a ray of light obliquely intersects these two rows of matter
with unequal vortexes, and hence with unequal force; it is evident that upon
passing from the air to the glass the ray will be diverted toward the perpendicular
to these two rows or surface of unequal force, and this will occur in direct
proportion to the obliqueness of its intersection of the line MN. for if it fell
perpendicularly, upon entering the glass it would be equally pressed or directed
on both sides of the perpendicular.
To have another, more distinct idea of what I have just said, and shall say in
what follows. let us imagine that the figure MTNQ represents one of these small
vortexes that transmit the action of luminous bodies not by their motion but by
their pressure, and that this small vortex is between the two rows of matter of
unequal force just mentioned. If the incident ray or the line of its pressure is AC,

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

713

it is clear that the upper row, the one in which there are more vortexes and
consequently more centrifugal force, will press the small vortex along the perpendicular TC more than the other row. Now, this perpendicular pressure along
TC is not fully applied to the ray, or line of its pressures, along AC; rather, the
full pressure along TC stands to the part of this same pressure applied to the ray
AC as TC stands to the perpendicular drawn from point T to AC, which is equal
to AB, both being equal to the sine of the angle of incidence ACT. The same is
true with respect to every other ray. The sine RP, for example, of the angle of
incidence RCT of the level ray RC will express the force of the pressure by which
the row containing more vortexes compresses it. Thus, given that the sines of the
angles of incidence of different rays express the different forces whose total force
(which causes the deviation and which is but the excess of the centrifugal force of
the vortexes in the air over those in the glass, a force that always remains the
same and is expressed by the perpendicular CT), is applied to these rays and
presses them, it follows that since the deviations of these rays must stand to each
other as the forces causing them, the sines of the angles of refraction of the
different rays must necessarily stand in the same ratio to the sines of their angles
of incidence, i.e., RP:AB::rs:ab, and RP:rs::AB:ab. And as the sine RP of the
level ray can be taken as the half-diameter, all the sines of the angles of incidence
stand to the sines of the angles of refraction as the half-diameter stands to the sine
of the angle of refraction of the level ray, i.e., as MC stands to CE, equal tosr.
We therefore see that the centrifugal force of the small vortexes and the
equilibrium in which they constantly tend to place themselves easily provides the
physical explanation of a truth that is the foundation of all optics, and of the
remarkable construction of our eyes that I shall explain in the Elucidation which
follows.

714

Nicolas Malebranche

With respect to the reflection of rays, I believe I demonstrated that they are not
made to reflect by the gross parts of bodies that we call transparent, and that are
indeed much more transparent than all others, such as glass, water, and air. I say,
that ll'e call transparent, for all very thin bodies are transparent because they all
have pores through which certain pressure vibrations of the small vortexes continue on. even gold, which is the densest and heaviest of all metals, for it reflects
certain rays and allows others to pass. It reflects the rays whose pressure vibrations make us see a yellow color, and when it is reduced to very thin leaves, it
allows those rays to pass whose vibrations make us see a blue color. But even if
we saw no color through the gold leaves, we should not thereby conclude that no
rays pass through them, but only that there are so few of them that they are
insufficient to disturb the retina and the brain enough to occasion some sensation
in the soul. For the matter revolving around a magnet passes through it as easily
as it does the air, and even water when extremely compressed in a gold bottle
passes through it like perspiration and forms in beads. It is therefore clear that the
small vortexes, at least most of which are smaller than the particles of which gold
is composed, since they give these particles their consistency with their centrifugal force, it is clear, I say, that these vortexes, or at least some of them, can
continue their vibrations in a straight line, and that all bodies of very little thickness are transparent. Let this be said in passing. Now let us come to the reflection
of rays without which we would see only luminous bodies.
It seems to me I have sufficiently proved that neither the gross parts of which
glass and other bodies are composed nor the air surrounding them is the true
cause of the reflection of rays, from which we must conclude that it is found in
the centrifugal forces of the vortexes themselves.
As we already know why a very hard or perfectly elastic ball obliquely falling
on a flat surface rebounds due to the resistance of the flat surface in such a way
that the angle of reflection is equal to its angle of incidence, I feel that to explain
the reflection of light it is enough to indicate the differences between these
reflections, without repeating what we already know.
a) Vortexes are not in motion like the ball. For the reflection of a ray oflight is
only a new determination in the line of pressure of the small vortexes that remain
in their place.
b) The reflection of rays does not occur at the point where the ray and the
vortex touch the solid parts of the glass, which have no centrifugal force, but at
the vortexes they press, which are diverted toward the perpendicular by the
greater number of vortexes above the glass, as I have explained.
c) The reflection of rays, i.e., the pressure of vortexes does not reflect entirely;
the greatest pressure occurs in the glass and traverses it. Since the reflected
pressure results only from the reaction of the vortexes pressed by the action of
those that are above the glass and that direct them toward the perpendicular, the
reflected ray is much weaker than the refracted.
d) The elasticity that makes the ball rebound results only from the centrifugal
force of the small vortexes in its pores. The elasticity that makes rays rebound is

El~~eUitltions

of the Search after Truth

71S

but the centrifugal force of the small vonexes themselves of which the ray is
composed.
Finally, the angle of incidence of the ray is equal to that of reflection, the
explanation of which is similar to that of the perfectly elastic ball. This is what I
think about the reflection of rays, which seems to follow from the properties of
light that I have tried to explain and prove.
I believe we now see the physical explanations, i.e., the explanations that
depend on this incontestable principle, that evel)'lhing tends toward eqqilibrium,
or that every body moves as soon as it is unequally pressed. I believe, I say. that
we see clearly:
a) Why rays that undergo refraction passing through different media follow the
same path in both directions, and that if a luminous or an illuminated object is
moved to its focus, i.e., 10 the point where its image appears, the same image
will be seen at the point from which it was transported.
b) Why the sines of the angles of incidence of all rays, although variously
inclined, all stand in the same ratio to the sines of their angles of refraction, and
why the sines of incident rays are equal to those of reflected rays.
c) Why hard bodies in particular ordinarily undergo a refraction exactly proportional to their weight, refraction and weight coming from the same cause, that
there are more vonexes and consequently more centrifugal force in air than in
heavier and harder bodies. It is true that refraction is not so exactly proportional
10 weight in fluid bodies whose weight is practically the same. Water, for
example, though somewhat heavier than spirits or wine does not undergo as
much refraction according to experiments performed on them. One of the main
reasons for this is clearly that although the particles of fluid bodies do not have as
much centrifugal forces as the small vonexes, they do have some force since
they, like fluids, have some motion. Thus they can offer more or less resistence
to the sunounding vonexes as their motion changes. Now, as the difference in
weight between water and spirits of wine, and consequently between the force of
the vonexes sunounding these two liquids, is not very great, the difference
between the different motion of the particles of wine and those of spirits of wine
might be such as to upset the ratio of weight to refraction. Other causes of it
might be conceived, but clearly I have mentioned the main one. For it must be
noted that the same water does not always produce the same refraction; warm it
produces less than when cold, because then it is not only less heavy than it was
when cold, but also the parts of which it is composed are more in motion. But
when of two object lenses of a telescope equally well ground in the same bowl
the one is excellent and the other worthless, the only explanation is the unequal
weight or density of the parts of the glass, which causes the inequality in the
refraction.
Since it is certain that all the rays of different colors constantly cross without
confusing and destroying each other, it is clear that their action does not consist
in the direct motion of the small vonexes, but solely in the pressure they receive
from luminous and lighted objects and immediately return to them by their

716

Nicolas Malebranche

centrifugal force. For a vortex cannot simultaneously move in all directions, but
it can simultaneously press and be pressed in all directions.
Assuming, then, that the range of colors results only from the different frequency of pressure vibrations, as I believe I have sufficiently proved, we can
clearly see the reason why all the simple rays-red, orange, yellow, green, blue,
indigo or dark blue, and violet-do not change their color or the frequency of
their vibrations, and that their refractions always stand in the same ratios to each
other, as Newton has proved with several decisive experiments. For since there is
no void, and since everything is a plenum and is almost infinitely compressed, a
ray cannot press at one point without at the same time pressing everywhere along
to the optic nerve, where it is extinguished or weakened after having disturbed it,
and through it the brain in the way necessary to occasion in the soul a given
sensation of color.
It is true that when a yellow ray presses some fiber of the retina in conjunction
with a blue ray, it makes us see a green color. But this color, although similar
insofar as it is a sensation similar to that produced by the simple green ray, has a
very different cause. For if the simple green ray is passed through glass prisms, it
will always remain green; but the other passing through it will become yellow
and blue-since the yellow produces less refraction than the blue, these two rays
will separate. The cause producing it should not be judged by the sensation. It is
easy to understand how two or more unequal vibrations, falling together on the
same fiber of the optic nerve can disturb the principal part of the brain in the same
way as intermediate vibrations. There is no white ray, for example, which is
simple. Every very white ray is composed of all the simple rays, red, yellow,
blue, and so on, which all produce different refractions and vibrations; and aU the
different colors by which objects appear to be colored result only from the
different mixtures of simple rays, either transmitted or reflected by the transparent particles of opaque objects.
It is very likely that upon leaving the sun, in which nothing is in equilibrium
and where all the matter composing it drives by its various motion the spherical
layer of small vortexes which is in equilibrium with the superior layers (as I
mentioned while discussing the weight of the planets), it is very likely, I say, that
upon leaving the sun the small vortexes, although caused by the irregular motion
of the sun's parts, are constrained to arrange themselves to produce their vibrations at commensurable times, and that once this arrangement is produced or this
kind of equilibrium acquired, each ray maintains the same frequency in its
vibrations. From this it follows that a determinate number of simple rays that
always maintain the same frequency in their vibrations always undergo the same
amount of refraction, which fact is certain because of Newton's experiments. For
just as there can be only a determinate number of sounds when an octave is
divided harmonically, i.e., in such a way that the different tones it contains are
commensurable or the vibrations in the air causing them agree and recur together
as quickly as possible without being destroyed, so there can be only a determinate number of simple rays. In addition, in the experiment he performed-p.
I04-to determine exactly the particular amount of refraction of each simple ray,

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

717

Newton found that the band of simple colors was divided harmonically. He had
separated these colors very precisely by means of various prisms, as can be seen
in his excellent book. I therefore believe that we can with great probability
conclude from this that the red ray, which has the greatest force since it undergoes less refraction than the other rays, is not driven so quickly, or repeats its
vibrations less often than those following it, and that the violet, which is the last
and weakest, is of all the one whose vibrations are smallest and most frequent, or
repeat most often.
When we place a convex lens under a flat piece of glass, through reflection we
see a small black circle at the point of contact between them and several concentric coronas of different colors that are very perceptible, especially when the lens
is very slightly convex. But when we look through, we see white what we saw
black, red what we saw blue, violet what we saw yellow. In a word, through
reflection and refraction we ordinarily see the sharpest and most contrary colors.
This clearly shows, it seems to me, that the frequency of vibrations does not
change and the line of a ray's pressure has the same disturbance throughout, and
that we see objects each of a given color only due to the fact that of the light that
contains all the simple rays, only certain of them are reflected whose various
mixtures produce all the various colors.
Furthermore, I feel I must warn that you should regard only as conjectures or
as general views that are insufficiently proved what I have just said in these last
articles in order to account for the principal experiments that Newton, that
learned geometer so renowned in England and everywhere else, has performed
with such precision that I cannot doubt of their truth. For my principal aim in this
Elucidation has been to show that all of physics depends on the knowledge of
subtle matter, that this matter is composed only of small vortexes that through the
equilibrium of their centrifugal forces produce the consistency of all bodies, and
through the disruption of their equilibirum, which they constantly tend to restore.
all the changes that occur in the world. My prinicpal aim has been to prove that
rest has no force, that everything occurs through motion, and that the source of
motion is only in that invisible matter that some otherwise very learned people
take for nothing, or regard only as an inefficacious and inert matter when it is in
equilibrium and does not make itself perceptible.
Many other conclusions might be drawn from what I said before in order to
explain weight. That a feather, for example, must fall perpendicularly to the
surface of the earth, and must do so at the poles as well as at the equator. That in
the temperate zones the parts of the earth's surface revolve with precisely the
same speed as the ether at the surface, and everywhere else with a speed that
cannot be perceptibly very different. That weight must be perceptibly equal at the
equator and at the poles, and consequently that the earth must be round. That all
the planets must be summnded by large vortexes. and by the small ones of whid1
I have just spoken. for without them there would he no weight or. wnsl·quently.
any accumulation of gross matter different from the ethl'r. That since ethcn.·al
matter is l'!lmposed of small vortexes that an· in equilibrium and that <ll"l' 1>l an
extreme fluidity and smallness, they should not he felt to offer rl'sistanl'l' to

718

Nicolas Malebranche

horizontal motion. That the speed of bodies' fall is not proportional to their
weight, that without the air's resistance they would all fall equally fast, and that
in an air vacuum a feather must fall as fast as lead. That the weight of hard bodies
must be precisely equal to their mass, i.e., to the real and motionless matter they
have, not counting their pores full of vortexes. But if I entered into detailed
proofs of these conclusions, and of all those we might draw from the supposition
I made in order to explain the transmission of light and colors and the generation
of fire, 1•iz., that ethereal matter is composed only of small vortexes, infinitely
compressed, that counterbalance each other by their centrifugal forces, if, I say, I
detailed these consequences, it would soon lead me into a country where I fear to
make too long a voyage and where I would be sure to go astray. It is enough for
me to have proved my supposition through the astonishing rapidity of ethereal
matter, and through the resistance it meets in the plenum that forces its parts
moving in every direction to place themselves in vortexes, and to have confirmed
my proofs by the most general effects of physics such as the transmission of light
and colors, the production of fire and its effects, the weight of bodies, their
hardness and fluidity, on which depend all natural effects, and whose causes
physicists look for; but certainly they will never find them except in the ethereal
matter for this evident reason, that it is the source of all motion, and nothing
occurs except through motion.
It would be more appropriate or at least more useful for my readers to dwell
upon the infinite wisdom of the Creator, who in the creation of the universe so
distributed and directed motion to the different parts of matter that He formed
from it a work all of whose parts mutually depend on each other, a work that is
conserved and constantly renewed through the general and simplest imaginable
law that every body is moved in the direction in which it is most pressed, and to
the extent to which it is pressed, I say a law that, let it be noted, does not draw its
efficacy from matter-a purely passive substance whose motor force is nothing
in it or belonging to it, as I have proved in the fifteenth Elucidation and
elsewhere -but a law that the Almighty created and observes exactly in the
ordinary course of His general providence over the arrangement of bodies, not
only to endow His conduct with the character of His attributes in which He finds
His law and motives, as I have proved elsewhere, but also to give to men and
even to animals certain rules in order to preserve and conduct themselves. For if
God did not regularly follow the law He established after having foreseen all its
consequences and after having determined all the first motions according to it
with an infinite goodness and wisdom, if He acted like particular causes and
limited intelligences, there would be nothing certain in physics, and no principle
of experience; in a word, everything with respect to us would fall into a chaos
where nothing could be understood. But through the exact observance of this
law, God produces light as I have just explained, by which He joins us not only
to each other, but also to vast spaces. For extinguish light, or let the small
vortexes surrounding us cease carrying the weight of the others and to be in
equilibrium with those in the heavens and thereby cease receiving pressure vibrations according to the law, and there will no longer be any society among men;

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

719

there will no longer be that variety of colors that makes us discern objects. The
earth will no longer be cultivated, and though cultivated will produce nothing for
lack of the heat that results from light or the vibrations of its rays. Now, He who
said, "LA::t there be light," is the same one who formed the eyes of men and
animals. For all the parts of which the eye is composed are so exactly related and
so wisely suited to the action of light, as will be seen shortly, thai light and eyes
are clearly made for each other and proceed from the same hand, that of the
Almighty, whose wisdom and goodness has no limits. If you likewise reflect on
the utilities of the sun, of fire, of the weight of bodies, their different hardnesses
and fluidities, qualities necessary to the formation and generation of all things,
and if you reflect that all this depends on the motor force by which God, as it
were, animates matter in relation to an infinity of purposes He carries out by a
single law, you will easily understand that the wisdom of the Creator has no
limits. But in the following Elucidation, I shall see out in more detail the marvel
of Providence in the construction of the eye and in the use of the pans of which it
is composed.
If what I have just said in this addendum on the basis of the general principle of
physics is exactly uue, and is founded on a certain principle, a maner I leave for
discussion by anentive and enlightened readers, there will yet be some passages
to be corrected in the summary of Descartes's physics I gave in chapter four of
the second part of book six. But since my principal aim in this fourth chapter was
to illustrate the difference between his way of philosophizing and that of Aristotle, I did not feel I had to completely reform his system on the basis of the one I
just proposed, which does not entirely conform to his, although it basically
depends on it. It is up to the readers to produce this reform, if they have the
leisure to do so, and if the maner appears agreeable to them and to merit their
attention, and if they judge what I have just wrinen to be sufficiently demonslrated.

ELUCIDATION ON OPTICS
Last Elucidation

Containing the description of the parts of which the eye is composed and the
principal explanations of their construction as an aid to understanding what is
said in the first book concerning the errors of vision.
I had assumed in the first book that the reader would have at least a passing
knowledge of optics, or that he would wish to instruct himself in it by consulting
some book on the matter, such as the Dioptrics of Descartes that I had indicated
to him; for if authors were to pause to explain even the most general principles of
the sciences related to the subject they treat, and to assume nothing is known to
the readers, besides boring and offending even the learned they would be able to
treat nothing in depth without producing enormous works. Thus, I felt relieved of
repeating what so many others have said and what can be seen elsewhere concerning the construction and use of the parts of which the eye is composed.
Nevertheless, in order to satisfy those who know nothing of optics, without
boring those who are trained in it, I thought I should add what follows to the end
of this volume. For those who do not know optics will not have the bother of
changing books in order to understand what I say about the errors and natural
judgments of vision, a mild bother but one the negligent reader does not voluntarily undertake, and the others will not read what manifestly can teach them
nothing. Moreover, I feel I must warn that it is enough to fully know how we see
objects to be in a position to discover an infinity of truths, not only in physics,
but also in metaphysics concerning the nature of ideas, and the goodness, the
generality, the incomprehensible wisdom of divine Providence.
All the details of the eye's construction must be carefully8 noted in order to
understand the explanations of it that will be seen in what follows.

Three coverings that envelop the eye.
I. If an eye is cut in half flat across the middle of the pupil and the optic
nerve, without the humors flowing out, it would appear as presented in this
figure. ABCZ is a thick, hard covering that surrounds the whole eye. Its part
"See the first figure <p. 721 >.

720

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

721

H
~--~-~
•
A\

\. :/!\
\

\

.

;

:

ABC is called the cornea because it is hard and transparent like hom; this part is
much more convex than the other. The second covering, which ends at the
opening of the pupil TV, is finer; it is called the uvea or the choroid. It lines, as it
were, the inside of the first covering and is securely attached to it at A and C by a
membranous ligament called ciliary. The part of this covering that extends from
D to T and F to V, and whose convex surface seen though the cornea is black in
some, blue in others, or strewn with different colors, is called the iris. But the
concave surface of the iris and the entire choroid is completely black in man,
although not in some animals. The third covering. called the rt•tina. lines the
entire fundus of the eye and follows the choroid only from D to F.

Their origin.
2. The first covering of the eye originates at the first nwcring of the optic
nerve L Y. which originates at the first covering of the brain, called the dura

722

Nicolas Malehranche

mara. The second l'ovcring, or the clloroid, originates at the second covering of
the optil· nerve, whil·h originates at the second covering of the brain, called the
f'lll mara. And the n·tina, finally, originates at the medula of the optic nerve.
For it is only the fibrillation of the small threads of which the medula of this
nerve is l·omposed, which joined with some veins and some very fine arteries.
make the very delil·ate tissue called the retina. Now, these small threads contained under the coverings of the optic nerve originate at the part of the brain
l·alled the ml'dula ol>lon.~ata, and apparently are only the continuation of the
threads or small canals of which this medula is composed, and by which the
animal spirits are distributed. It should be noted that the retina is of a white color,
and that the optic nerve is extremely thil·k in relation to the motor nerves of the
l'ye, and as a result nmtains a great number of threads.
Ciliarv ligc1mt>n1J .

.'\. At the spot marked AD, there originates fmm the ciliary ligament, of
whil·h I have just spoken, a quantity of very black small threads that extend to the
crystalline lens RN and keep it in the position required to see objects distinctly.
i.e., so that the line BP passing thmugh the middle of the opening of the pupil is
perpendicular to the three convexities ABC, RON, RPN. and for other reasons of
which I shall speak.
The pupil.

4. It should be noted that the opening of the pupil does not have a determinate
size. It diminishes when objects that are too bright might harm the retina, or
when we fixedly look at a nearby object. Consequently, the iris produces the
effect of a remarkable small muscle in that by its movement it always preserves
the roundness of man's pupil. Let us now come to the transparent humors of the
eye.
Three humors in the eye.

5. There are three very clear or transparent humors in the eye: the aqueous.
the crystalline. and the vitreous. The aquc·cms fills the area ABCNOR. It is fluid
like water and consequently produces the same refraction. The crystalline, which
is surrounded by a very fine covering, fills the area RONP. It is slightly viscous
and tough. roughly like the white of a hardboiled egg, but transparent like
cr)'stal. The ,·irrc·ous occupies the rest of the eye, and its consistency is like that
of uncooked egg white. As refracrion 8 ordinarily increases with the density of
the transparent bodies through which the rays of light pass. the refraction the
aqueous humor causes in the rays is slightest, that of the crystalline is grt'atest.
and that of the vitreous is smaller than the latter and greater than the former.
If you now understand what the plane figure represents, excluding the optic
nerve and the opening through which it enters the eye and makes a half-tum on
the axis BE. you will have a clear and complete idea of the globe of the eye and
•:-~umber

13 below.

Elucidations of till Search after Truth

723

everything it contains necessary to my purpose. But to fix the idea of it, it would
be good to dissect the eye of some larger animal.

SiJc eye miUcks; four straiglu ones.
6. As regards the outside of the eye, there are strictly only the muscles that
move 1111d compress it, about which I must here say something. There are only six
of them in m1111, four called straight, and two oblique, which all attach at one end
to the bones of the fundus of the eye, and partly to the exterior covering of the
optic nerve, and at the other to the globe of the eye. The four straight ones,
making a large and tendinous stem, are attached straightaway to the exterior
covering of the globe of the eye, and there form another covering. They certainly
serve to draw the eye, one above, the other below, the thinl toward one comer of
the eye, and the last toward the other. I believe they might also serve other
purposes of which I shall speak.

Two oblique ones.
7. Of the two oblique muscles, the superior, which is longer and more narrow, originates near the muscle that draws the eye above and first goes toward
the inner comer of the eye, where it enters a cartilage attached to the jawbone by
a membranous ligament, which cartilage serves it as a leading block. From there
it returns toward the upper part of the eye, and passing under the same muscle
that draws the eye above, it finally attaches itself near the part of the eye where
the muscle that draws it toward the outer comer is attached. The inferior oblique
muscle opposite the other one is attached to the bone toward the inner comer of
the eye; from there it passes below the eye toward the outer comer, and rising
somewhat, it finally attaches itself to the globe of the eye, near the place where
the superior oblique muscle is attached. When both act simultaneously with the
four others, and especially with the one attached nearest to the place in the eye
where they are attached, they compress the globe of the eye and thereby remove
the crystalline lens from the retina as far as is necessary in order to see distinctly
something up close. For it is a geometrically demonstrated truth that we cannot
distinctly see something up close and at a distance without some change occurring in the eyes, as I shall show. It should be noted that these six muscles each
have a small nerve to move them, for any muscle without a nerve to distribute
animal spirits to it is inactive.
The construction of the eye is, I believe, sufficiently explained, but the properties of the parts composing it and the properties of light are not; nevertheless,
some knowledge of them must be had in order to know how we see objects, and
to have some slight idea of the infinite wisdom of the Creator in the formation of
our eyes.

The nature and properties of light. How the action of luminous bodies
is transmitted and produces in us till sensation oflight and whiteness.
8. When we light a torch in the darkness, we see its light instantaneously in all

Nicolas Malebranche

724

the places from which we look at it. From this it must be concluded that the flame
of this torch acts both on our eyes and all the spaces it illuminates. Now, it is
evident that it does not act immediately in all these spaces. For since the flame is
composed only of particles of wax set in motion, and since it dissipates and expels
at each instant only an infinitely small part of it, it is clear that this small part cannot
fill the whole illuminated space. It must be understood, then, that the particles of
wax, being aflame and consequently very agitated, press in every direction the
subtle air or ether immediately surrounding them, and this air other air, and so on
till it reaches us; and this occurs instantaneously because everything is a plenum
and there can be no vacuum naturally. Now, this pressure that the flame causes in
the subtle matter, or rather the combination of an almost infinite number of
disturbances or pressure vibrations caused in the air by the almost infinite number
of different parts of the flame, transmitted along to our eyes and through them to
our brain, excites in us the sensation of light and whiteness as a result of the laws
concerning the union of body and soul. For if in a dark place you press and disturb
your eye in the place where the retina lines it on the inside, you will not fail to see
light in the direction opposite the spot pressed, which sufficiently proves that some
new pressure, greater than the one compressing the retina at night or when the eyes
are closed, excites the sensation of light.

And that of colors.
9. I believe that the different pressure vibrations cause the diversity of colors,
and I have tried to prove so in this work; 8 and I say here that the combination of
vibrations that cause all the colors, such as it is found in the sun, excites the
sensation of whiteness.
For if after having gotb a multicolored image of the sun by means of a glass
prism we interpose a magnifying lens large enough to take it in, with all the colors
mixing at the focus of the lens, the image produced on a sheet of paper will appear
entirely white, however colored it was.

Light reflected by objects.
10. We see not only luminous bodies from every direction and in a straight line,
we likewise see all opaque bodies when they are illuminated. From which it
follows that the pressure of light on objects that do not dissipate it-which is what
black objects do -returns to the subtle air surrounding them and repels it in every
direction because everything is a plenum and filled with a fluid all of whose parts
are in motion. But this belongs to physics,< which it is not the time to discuss. I
call, then, a ray oflight, or simply a ray, the straight line drawn from the luminous
or illuminated object by which the action making it visible is transmitted. Now,
since we see objects from every direction, it follows that each part of objects
reflects rays circularly in every direction.
•see the Elucidation on light and colors.
hSec the ninth and tenth experiments ot' Newton's Optich. pp. 112. 117.

''See the preceding Elucidation.

Elucidations of the Search after Tl1llh

725

II. In order now to have some idea of the deterioration of light, or of the
diminution of its fon:e or pressure on the retina, it must be observed that the light
objects receive from each point of a luminous body decreases in ratio to the squares
of the distances of these objects from each point. The light received by a coin, for
example, when it is a foot from a candle stands to that it receives at adistanceof20
feet as one stands to 400, the squareof20. Fora coin placed afoot from aluminous
point makes a shadow 400 times larger than the coin on a wall placed at 20 feet
from it. Thus the light of this coin at 20 feet is but the 1/400 part of the fint light,
i.e., of the light intercepted by the coin one foot from the luminous point. Now, the
coin 20 feet from a candle can still be seen from all directions, which is possible
only through the action or pressure reflected by the four-hundredth part of the
initial light it received when it was only a foot from the candle. On the assumption,
therefore, that against a blaclt background it can still be seen at a distance of 20
feet, should the opening of the pupil become as large as the coin, md should the
subsequent light not spread in all directions, but only through the space roughly
determined by the size of a coin placed a foot away from the black background,
only the 1/160,000 part of the initial light would enter the eye. Now, if the diameter
of the coin is ten times greater than that of the opening of the pupil, only the
hundredth part of the l/160,000part willentertheeye, i.e., the 1/16,000,000 part
of the light falling on a coin a foot away from the candle. Finally, only the
two-hundredth part of the sixteen-millionth, if we exclude from it the light
reflected from the coin that spreads in all the other directions, assuming that it can
be seen at a distance of twenty feet. For half a spherical surface is equal to two
cin:lcs intenecting the sphere through its center. Thus, by assuming the ray of the
sphere to be a foot and that of the coin's circumference the tenth part of a foot, half
the spherical surface would contain two hundred times that of the coin, because the
circles stand to each other as do the squares of their rays. Yet this weak light is
capable of disturbing the very delicate fiben of the retina, assuming that the coin
can be seen from every direction atadistanceoftwenty feet by the light it reflects.

The delicacy of the fibers of the retina.
12. In order also to discover what the approximate delicacy of the retina's fiben
might be, we have only to place against a black background exposed to the sun a
piece of paper one ligne square, note the distance from which we can see it, and
then draw this proportion. As the distance from which we see it stands to the
diameter of one eye, which is aboutsix lignes, so one ligne stands to the side of the
paper's image in the fundus of the eye. And squaring this fourth term to obtain the
square of the image, we shall have its area, which we shall find to be several
hundred million times smaller than a square ligne. By the paper's image, I mean
the precise place when: the rays it reflects meet, for it can happen that the fiben of
the retina on which the rays meet somewhat disturb their neighboring fiben. Let us
now come to refractions of light.

Refraction of light.
13. When a ray passes from a ran: medium such as air to one less ran: or more

Nicoku Malebranche

726

dense such as glass or water, it is diverted or undergoes refraction upon entering it;
but having entered it, the ray travels in a straight line until leaving it. If, for
example, there were air above the line BCD- and glass below it, and if a ray
traveled from A to C (when I say traveled, let it be understood that I mean tended to
travel or pressed from A toward C), it would not travel toward K, but would be
diverted toward Fupon entering the glass from the air. The reason forth is is that all
moving bodies, or all bodies tending to move, always travel in a straight line when
they find equal resistance in all directions, and that they are always diverted in the
direction in which they find the least resistance. Now, the ray finds less resistance
in glass and denser bodies than in air and water; the explanation I give of this can be
seen in number 19 of the preceding Elucidation. When I say in glass, I mean in the
pores of glass through which the ray can pass or transmit its action, and not in the
solid part of the glass where disturbing them somewhat it is extinguished, as I have
explained elsewhere.
Thus, since the ray AC finds less resistance to the transmission of its action in
glass than in water, and less in the pores of water than in air, it must be refracted
toward the line CG, perpendicular to BD, and must make the angle GCF smaller
than the angle LCK.

The measllre of refraction.
14. The lines KL and FG, drawn from the points K and F perpendicularly on
PQ, which perpendicularly intersects the line BD separating the different media,
these lines, I say, KL and FG, are called the sines of the two angles LCK and CGF.
Now, as the angle LCK is equal to the angle HCA, which is called the angle of
incidence, its sine AH is equal to the sine LK. The refractions undergone by rays
passing from one medium to another are therefore expressed by the ratio between
the line AH and FG, which are the sines of the angles of incidence and refraction.
Since the refraction undergone by a ray, for example, passing from air to glass is
three to two, the ray AC will pass through the point F if the sine GF is two-thirds the
sine AH; and for the same reason, ifthe ray FC passes from glass to air at C, it will
be diverted toward A.
• See figure 2 [immedialely above).

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

727

Fundamental principle of dioptrics.
15. The main law on which dioptrics is based is that the sines of all angles of
incidence, whatever the obliqueness they might have, individually have the same
ratio to their sine of refraction. If, for example, a ray leaves whatever point you
wish, above or below the point A, and passes through the point C, such as the ray
OC for example, it will pass through the point R. And the sine OP of the angle of
incidence will stand to the sine QR of the angle of refraction in the ratio of3 to 2, as
does AHto GF. The same is trueofeveryotherray meeting the surface at point C.
Thus, when we know through exact experiment the amount of refraction of any
ray passing from one medium to another, we can geometrically determine the
angles that all the other rays must make with the line that perpendicularly intersects
the surface separating the two media. But for my purposes, it is enough to know in
general that since the humors of the eye are denser than air, rays undergo in the eye
a refraction that gathers them on the axis, and that the refraction of a ray passing
from air to the aqueous humor is roughly 4 to 3, to the crystalline 3 to 2, and to the
vitreous humor, 10 to 7, or thereabouts.

Difference in the refractions of rays falling on a convex lens.
16. When several rays leave a luminous or illuminated point and pass from air
into a dense body, a lens for example, whose surface is convex, the ray falling
perpendicularly on this surface, being equally pressed on all sides by the air
surrounding it as it enters the glass, undergoes no refraction; but all the others do
undergo refraction and all the more so as they enter the glass at a point farther from
the point A on the axis AH, because the more obliquely they fall on the surface or
the tangent that would pass through the point they enter the glass, the more they are
diverted, since the sines of the angles of incidence made by all these rays with the
perpendiculars to the surface always stand in the same ratio to the corresponding
sines of their angles of refraction.

Focus of these lenses.
I 7. For example, if the ray AH falls perpendicularly on a magnifying glass or
convex lens, it will continue its path in a straight line and pass through the center
of its convexity. If the ray closest to AH intersects it at d, the ray will be diverted
and will intersect the axis at C, and this point C will be what is called the point of
convergence of the rays close to the axis and the location of the image of the
object AP. The other rays Ae, Af, Ag will become ei,jk, g/, in such a way that
those entering the lens at the points farthest from point H will be the closest to it
when they intersect the axis. The line passing through point d, for example,
which is the closest to H, intersects the axis HC at point C, and this point is
farther from H than point x or point g of the lines that on entering the lens are
farthest from H. Now, these rays that do not enter the lens very close to H
confuse the image of objects depicted at the focus of the lens, and the more so as
they are farther from point H. although they make this image brighter and more
vivid. For if from the point P near A on the object AP a perpendicular were

728

Nicolas Malebranche

drawn to the lens between A and d, and from the same point P rays similar to
those drawn from point A, the ray closest to this new perpendicular would, after
refraction, intersect it near the point Con the other side of the axis AHC; and the
point where this ray would cut the new perpendicular would be the point of
convergence corresponding to point P. Now, the rays drawn from point A,
somewhat farther from the axis than the ray Ad, which intersects it at point C,
would also pass through this same point of convergence that corresponds to point
P, and which is near point C. Thus, several rays drawn from point A would mix
with those from point P and would disrupt their action. What I have just said of
the rays drawn from points A and P must be understood for all the other points of
the object whose rays being farther from their perpendiculars indeed make the
image brighter, but all the more confused as more of them enter the lens. On the
other hand, if we cover the lens and leave only a very small round opening in it in

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

729

order to exclude rays farther from the axis from entering, the small cones of light
that will pass through it, or the combination of all the rays impelled by each point
of the object, will not have enough intensity and brilliance to make the image
they form at the focus ofthe lens sufficiently perceptible. Consequently, in order
for the image of objects to appear as distinct as possible at the focus of the lens
and to be illuminated sufficiently to be perceptible, the opening of the lens must
stand in a determinate ratio to the amount of light illuminating the objects from
which the rays leave, and all this in relation to the delicacy of each person's
vision. For he whose vision is most delicate does not need so much light, and the
image will appear to him more distinct if the opening of the lens is smaller.

Experimental proof that the rays farther from the axis confuse
images.
18. I do not undertake to demonstrate geometrically the details of all this for
fear of fatiguing those who do not like geometry, and because of the distaste I
myself find in measuring lines forming triangles. Besides which, those who are
geometers know what I could say following several others, or can educate themselves in it in books dealing with dioptrics. But those who wish to assure themselves through experience and in concrete fashion of what I have just said, that
the rays farther from the axis HC 8 such as Ag and Am, after their refraction
intersect the axis at A closer to H than the others, have only to completely cover a
rather large lens with paper in which they have made with a pin four holes
arranged in a straight line, two of which are some equal distance from the axis
and correspond to the edges of the lens, and the two others rather near the axis.
For having exposed this lens to the sun in order to receive its light on a piece of
paper behind it, they will see that by gradually withdrawing the piece of paper
from the lens, the farther rays will approach each other more quickly and will
cross sooner than the others, and nearer point H.

Another experiment to prol'e the relation between the opening of
lenses and the amount of light.
19. To further assure yourself through experiment that in order for the images
convex lenses depict at their focus to be distinct and rather vivid there must be a
determinate relation between the opening of the lens and the amount of light by
which the objects represented by the image are illuminated, you have only to take
what is called an artilicial eye, i.e., a tube, blackened on the inside, about three
or four inches long, and at least one inch in diameter: place a lens at one end, and
at the other, the focus of the lens, a very thin piece of paper, or a flat piece of
glass worn by sand and made white and mat. For by giving very different
openings to the lens, which, so that the experiment might be more striking. is
turned toward objects illuminated by the sun, you will see that an opening that is
too large makes the image represented on the paper more brilliant but less
distinct; and a.o; conditions grow dark, the opening must be increased.
"Figure .1 •.p. 72K"•.

Nicolas Malebranche

730

The images recede from the lens when the objects approach it.
20. If the object AP, 8 whose image is at C where the rays near the axis
intersect it after their refraction, were withdrawn from the lens, the image of this
object could gradually advance somewhat toward H. And if the object approached the lens, its image would continuously recede a great deal from H.
There i~ quite a difference in the movement of the image, or in the point of the
rays' convergence, when the object approaches the lens and when it withdraws
from it. For by supposing that the object approaches and withdraws from the lens
with an equal and uniform motion, the movement of its image toward point H
will continuously diminish when the object withdraws from it, and will never
even pass point X, if this point is the focus of the lens, i.e., the point where all
the rays parallel to the axis converge. But on the contrary, when the object
approaches the lens, the movement of its image will, in order to withdraw from
it, continuously grow larger ad infinitum. Consequently, having approached as
near as the point called the negative focus of the lens, i.e., the focus taken from
the other side of the lens, the point of convergence of the nearerrays, such as Ad,
will have passed through an infinite space, and these rays, after their refraction,
will be parallel to the axis HC. It follows from this that the location of the image
of objects 100 fathoms away is not perceptibly different from the location of the
image of objects l ,000 fathoms away, or the latter from the location of the
images of the sun and the stars. And it likewise follows from this that the location
of the image of an object two feet from the lens is quite different from that only a
half-foot from it, and that if the lens had a focus of a half-foot, the image, after
having passed through an infinite space, would be dissipated.

How the 1•arious distances of images are determined when the
distances of objects are given.
21. But if you wish to know in particular how far the image of an object that is
but a half-foot from a lens is from that lens, and then how much this image
approaches the same lens when you move the object two feet from it (in order to
judge by this means how much the retina must approach the crystalline lens in
order to distinctly see objects a half-foot and two feet away), you must know the
following proposition demonstrated in dioptrics. b To determine the point of the
image that corresponds to the point of the object, the following proportion must
be constructed on the line joining these two points. As the distance of the object
from the lens, less the half-diameter of the convexity ofthe lens, stands to the full
distance of the object, so the half-diameter of the convexity of the lens stands to
the unknown distance of the image. Thus, on the assumption that the humors of
the eye produce the same refraction as a small lens equally convex on both sides,
the half-diameter of whose convexity is six lignes and where we ignore the
thickness of the lens, we can say that as 72 !ignes less 6, or 66 !ignes (which is
equivalent to a distance of a half-foot from the object, less the half-diameter of
•see figure 3 <p. 728>.
•The demonstration of it will be found at the end of this volume.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

731

the convexity of the lens, which is 6 lignes) stands to 72 Iignes (the full distance
from the object) so 6 lignes stands to the distance of the image, which consequently is (72 x 6)/66 or 72/11; you can then construct this proportion. As 288
!ignes less 6, or 282 (which is equivalent to 2 feet, the second distance from the
object, less the half-diameter) stands to 288 (the full distance) so 6 lignes stands
to the unknown distance, which consequently is (288 x 6)/282 or 288/47, and
subtracting 288/47 Iignes from 72/11, you will find that the image of an object
that is two feet away is closer to the lens by about 3/7 Iignes, and that according
to our assumption, therefore, which is hardly exact, the retina would have to be
3/7 lignes closer to the crystalline lens in order to distinctly see an object two feet
away than to see an object a half-foot away. And by the same operation you will
find that to see it from three inches away, the retina would have to be about a
ligne-and-a-quarter closer to the crystalline lens.
But if you wish to assure yourself in a concrete way that the image of objects
recedes from the lens when the objects approach it, and that it approaches the
lens when they recede from it, you can use the artificial eye, whose tube I assume
can, by being lengthened or shortened, approach or recede from the objective
lens, the mat glass, where the images of external objects are depicted; and the
change of location of these images will be all the more perceptible as the lens is
less convex. But it is enough that the lens should have a focus of three or four
inches in order to be assured through concrete experiments of what I have just
said. With these truths of dioptrics assumed, let us examine how we see objects
and the reasons for the admirable construction of the organ of sight.

The retina is the principal part of the eye, for through it light transmits its action to the brain. Objects must be depicted on the retina:
two objections.
22. It is clear from the construction of the eye and from the properties of light
that we see objects distinctly only when their images are distinct, i.e., only when
the various rays leaving each point of the object are exactly converged in the
fundus of the eye. But since the fundus of the eye is covered by the choroid as
well as by the retina, there are some people who believe that rays must converge
on the choroid rather than the retina, and that on it or through it vision occurs.
They adduce two main proofs for their view.
The first proof is based on this experiment. If on a black or dark background
we attach two pieces of white paper at the same height, two or three feet from
each other, and if we back up from them about three times the distance between
these two pieces of paper and close one eye, the left, for example, and if we
fixedly look at the paper to the left with the right eye, the paper to the right will
then disappear. Now, the reason why the paper to the right disappears, and would
appear if remaining in the same place we placed it elsewhere, is that its image
falls precisely on the choroid's opening through which the optic nerve winds
its way into the eye in order to form the retina. Therefore, they say. since the
rays forming the image that disappears do not meet the choroid and do meet the
retina, the choroid is used in vision and not the retina.

Nicolas Malebranche

732

The second proof is that black bodies receive rays and white ones reflect them.
Now, the choroid is black, and the retina is white; therefore ..

Reply to the first objection.
23. I reply to the first proof that the experiment is accurate, and that the image
of the paper that disappears falls precisely on the opening where the choroid
allows the optic nerve to enter. For certainly the anatomists who place the
opening of the optic nerve directly opposite the opening of the pupil are mistaken; the opening is somewhat closer to the inner comer of the eye. But as the
filaments of the optic nerve here spread out in all directions to cover the choroid,
they are arranged like a small curved funnel, with the result that since the rays of
the image fall obliquely on these filaments, they cannot communicate the necessary vibrations or disturbances to excite the sensation of it. For in order to see an
object distinctly, the principal rays of each point of the object must fall perpendicularly on the retina in order to firmly communicate their pressure vibrations to
it and to the spirits contained in the small filaments or canals of which it is
composed so that their motion can be communicated to the principal part of the
brain. Without this latter communication no sensation would occur in the soul,
because it is not the eye but the soul that sees, since one becomes blind when
some humor blocks the optic nerve, although there might not be any damage in
the eye, as happens in amaurosis.
I have assumed that the small filaments of the retina are hollow, filled with
animal spirits, and continuous from the fundus of the eye to the principal part of
the brain, i.e., the part whose various changes are followed by the soul's various
sensations. I have made this assumption, I say, because it seemed most suitable
to me for explaining how the vibrations of light on the filaments of the retina are
communicated to the brain. For it is certain that if one end of a tube exactly filled
with water were pressed several times with the finger, the same thing would
happen at the other end and the finger would be pushed back. But if you pressed
your finger against a soft, elongated body such as a gut, the finger would not be
pushed back after it had made its depression, and the motion of the finger would
not be communicated from one end to the other.

Reply to the second objection.
24. I reply to the second objection, first that it is precisely because the choroid
is black and deadens light vibrations that it cannot transmit them to the brain, and
on the contrary that since the retina is white and reflects the rays pressed against
it, the same vibration occurs in the spirits contained in its filaments as that which
occurs in the rays of light, as in the example I have just related about the gut
filled with water.
I reply, secondly, that since the choroid originates only at the pia mater, which
does not enter the brain as do the filaments of the optic nerve, there is no
likelihood that it can transmit vibrations of rays to the principal part of the brain,
even if it should not deaden them. It is therefore certain that it is the retina that
transmits to the brain the action of the rays of light reflected by objects and that

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

733

the choroid is black only in order to receive and deaden certain useless rays,
which having entered the retina would disturb its vibrations should they be
reflected and fall upon it. For it is clear that the bottom of the iris and the ciliary
ligaments are black only in order to deaden the rays that reflect from the retina,
and that would disturb vision if they should fall upon it confusedly.
With this truth assumed, let us try to discover in part the infinite wisdom of the
Creator in the means He has employed in executing the end He proposed for
Himself in giving eyes to man, and by continuously acting on him in a constant
and unifonn way, i.e., according to the general laws that are the order of nature.

The wisdom of God in the construction of the eyes. God alone can
give us perceptions of objects.
25. It is certain that the soul does not cause in itself all the perceptions it has of
the objects surrounding it as soon as it opens its eyes and looks around in the
middle ofthe countryside. For besides the fact that it sees them without willing to
do so, it has not the least knowledge of the construction of its eyes and brain, or
of anything happening in them. It is further certain that neither the bodies surrounding us nor even the brain acts on our soul. For besides the fact that matter,
itself a purely passive substance, cannot act on the mind, and that there is no
necessary relation between certain disturbances of the brain's fibers produced by
the light reflected by objects and the perceptions we have of them, the same
disturbances are followed by different perceptions, and different disturbances are
accompanied by the same perceptions, as we shall see in what follows. And all
this is governed by inferences that depend on so great a knowledge of optics and
everything happening in the body that there is no intelligence that can make them
at the very instant that we open our eyes and look around. Consequently, whatever power, and I do not say the brain, but even an intelligence might have over
the soul to modify it, it would not be able to give it all the perceptions it has the
instant its eyes are opened in the middle of the countryside. In a word, I assume
that it is God who gives us our sensations. But as God must always act in God,
and as His attributes demand that He ordinarily act in a unifonn way and according to general laws, without which there would be no regulated order in nature or
certainty in physics, He has established the general law concerning the union of
soul and body. That law, or general and efficacious will of the Creator is, in
general, that changes occurring in a certain part of the brain are accompanied
by sensations of the soul, and that certain desires of the soul are followed by the
flow of spirits that move certain parts of its body.

The general rule God follows in this.
26. But to speak only about what concerns vision, God through this general
law gives us precisely all those perceptions we would give ourselves a) if we had
an exact knowledge, not only of what takes place in our brain and in our eyes, but
also of the situation and movement of our bodies. b) if in addition we knew optics
and geometry perfectly, and c) if we could, on the basis of this actual knowledge
and not of other knowledge we might have drawn from elsewhere, instanta-

734

Nicolas Malebranche

neously produce an infinity of precise inferences, and at the same time act in
ourselves according to these precise inferences and give ourselves all the different perceptions, whether confused or distinct, that we have of objects we see at a
glance-perceptions of their size, figure, distance, motion or rest, and all their
various colors.

Our particular knowledge has no relation to His rule and in no way
changes it.
27. It should be noted that in the preceding assumption I excluded the knowledge we might hal'e drawn from elsewhere of what actually takes place in our
eyes because such knowledge really has no influence at all on our sensations if it
does not change anything in our brain. For example, although I certainly know
that the sun is several million times greater than the moon, I yet see it as roughly
the same size because its image on the retina is equal to that of the moon and
because, in addition, nothing takes place in my eyes that might allow me to
discover the difference in their distances. But though the image on my retina of a
child I see at ten feet from me is equal to the image I have of a giant thrity feet
away, I yet see the giant three times larger than the child, because there occurs in
my eye something that I can use to discover the difference in their distance, such
as the image of intervening bodies between me and these two people, or the
different disposition of my eyes when I fix them on each of them to see them
distinctly, or one of the other means that can serve to disclose the distance of
objects, of which I have spoken in the ninth chapter of the first book. Thus,
knowing the distance between the child and the giant, and having besides this,
according to the assumption, a perfect knowledge of optics, which teaches me
that the images of objects on the retina must diminish with their distance, I give
myself a perception of the giant three times the height of the child's. The reason
for all this is that since the eyes were made for seeing, there must be found in the
changes happening to them, and through them to the principal part of the brain,
and nowhere else, the occasional cause that determines the efficacy ofthe general
will of the Creator to act in our souls and make us see the objects surrounding us.
Let us now examine how God has disposed the eye in order to advise the soul,
which would have to be capable of everything I have just said in order for it to
assure itself of the presence and various qualities of objects in relation to the
needs of the body and the preservation of life.

The reason why the eye is filled with humors.
28. If you replaced the lens of the artificial eye by an opaque body with a small
hole in it, and if you turned it toward objects illuminated by the sun, you would
see them depicted on the mat glass whether we approached or backed up from the
small opening. But if you directed this eye toward poorly lighted objects, you
would not see them at all. Thus, assuming that objects were always equally and
very brightly illuminated, as brilliantly, whatever their color, as white objects
exposed to the sun appear, all the variation in the humors filling the globe of the
eye would be useless if the opening of the pupil were no larger than the point of a

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

735

needle; and we would even have this advantage, that we would be able to see
objects much closer. But since it is necessary for us to be able to see objects ten
thousand times less illuminated that those we could see if the opening of the pupil
were so small, God has filled the globe of the eye with various humors so situated
that a thousand rays like that which would pass through the hole finally converge
at one point on the retina, and consequently disturb it as much or about as much
as if the object were a thousand times more illuminated. For all8 the rays leaving
point G are diverted toward the axis GBE upon entering the aqueous humor, and
from there upon entering the crystalline lens, and again upon leaving the crystalline lens to enter the vitreous humor, and converge at point E; and they cause
there the same pressure vibrations as those at point G. As a result, the same color
we see at point G is seen on the image of the object at point E, as can be seen in
an artificial eye. Thus, all the rays leaving point G pass through the opening of
the pupil and, converging on the retina at pointE, make, as it were, two cones of
light whose vertexes are on the same axis GE. What I say about the rays leaving
point G must be understood not only for points H and I but also for all the points
of the object.

The reason for the mobility of the iris and the fluidity of the aqueous
humor.
29. But when the opening of the pupil is too large, the rays farther from the
axis GE, which can be useful in distinguishing objects, though confusedly, when
we are in a very dark place, render their image confused when they are well
illuminated, as I have proved. b As a result, for the perfection of the organ of
sight, the opening of the pupil must increase or diminish as objects are more or
less illuminated and even according to our desire to distinguish their parts by
looking at them more closely. For when they are well illuminated, the smaller the
opening of the pupil is, the more distinct the image of them depicted on the retina
is. This too was necessary to preserve sight. For if the opening of the pupil were
too large then when we had to look at overly brilliant objects, the rays of these
objects converged on the retina would soon dissipate its delicate fibers, as we see
the sun's rays converged by a magnifying glass bum what is exposed at their
focus, or at least they would diminish the delicacy of the fibers of the retina in
such a way that we would no longer see anything in a dark or badly lighted place.
Now, this change of the pupil's opening in the circumstances I have just mentioned is easily noticed, especially in children. Thus. God has placed in the
delicate covering of the iris mechanisms so dependent upon the action of light on
the optic nerve and upon the action following from our intention to distinctly see
the particles of an object close to us that they simultillieously act in nmformity
with them; but they act in such a way that this thin covering always preserves a
perfect roundness in man's eyes in its various openings. And because this skin of
the iris is too delicate to pass through a humor likl· the vitreous or nystalline
"Sec the first fi!!urc ' p. 721 · ·.

"Numho:r 17 ah<•vc

736

Nicolas Malebranche

humors, God immersed it in a humor as fluid as water that easily divides and
immediately reunites.

Reasons for the particular convexity ofthe cornea and for the different nature and disposition of the three humors.
30. As the eye must be very mobile in view of its uses, and must be able to tum
easily in every direction, God gave it a round shape. But assuming that it was of
an equal convexity throughout, or that the convexity of the cornea was hardly
different from that of the hard covering, if on this assumption the globe of the eye
were filled with only a single humor, be it as dense or of as great a refraction as
glass, the rays leaving the object would undergo only one refraction in it and
would not converge on the retina, but well beyond it. Besides which, even ifthey
could converge there when coming from distant objects, they could not do so
when coming from an object near us. Thus, to expedite the convergence of rays,
and to place the image of objects precisely on the retina, God first gave the
cornea, under which is the aqueous humor, a greater convexity than the rest of
the globe of the eye, because the most convex lenses converge rays passing
through them sooner than other lenses. Second, He placed under the aqueous
humor the crystalline lens, which He formed from a denser material and whose
refraction is greater than that of the other humors, and further, He made it much
more convex, especially under the point at which it touches the vitreous humor.
Third, to move the crystalline lens some distance from the retina and to provide
the necessary space for the converging rays leaving it to converge exactly on the
retina, He placed between it and the crystalline lens the vitreous humor, which is
in greater supply and occupies more space than the other two together. Thus, the
rays that leave each visible point of an object, in order to converge exactly at as
many points on the retina, undergo three refractions, which all tend toward the
axis BE: the first upon entering the aqueous humor, for the refraction they
undergo upon entering and leaving the cornea should not be counted; the second
upon entering the crystalline lens; and the third upon leaving the crystalline lens;
and this last refraction, it seems to me, must also be rather great due to the great
convexity of the crystalline lens on the side touching the vitreous humor.

Reasons for the disposition of the muscles and especially the oblique
ones.
31. But as it is necessary for the perfection of sight that we be able to see
objects nearby and at a distance, and as it is impossible for the rays leaving an
object at different distances to converge exactly on the retina, as I have proved, a
God placed the crystalline lens, whose refraction is greatest, between the other
two humors, and suspended it by the ciliary ligaments in such a way that it can
withdraw from the retina somewhat when objects are too near to be seen distinctly. And here is how it seems to me that this is brought about.
When the crystalline lens is at its normal distance from the retina and is
"Number 20 (above).

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

737

suitable for seeing objects at a medium distance, and the desire arises to look
closely at some very small object, a fly for instance, to distinguish its parts, the
four straight muscles, which are equally tensed, keep the eye in a fixed position,
and the two oblique muscles surrounding the eye, which are also tensed, compress it. For it should be remembered that they are both attached, one next to the
other, to the globe of the eye on one side and on the other to the inner comer of
the eye. It is true that the superior oblique muscle is attached to the bone some
distance from the inner comer, but since the leading block through which it
passes is attached to the inner comer of the eye by a membranous ligament, we
can regard this muscle as being attached to it. Since these two oblique muscles by
their opposite tensions compress the globe of the eye they surround, they press
the vitreous humor somewhat, which pushes the crystalline lens forward, and
perhaps even pushes the retina backward. When the crystalline lens advances,
the ciliary ligaments, which tend toward it in a straight line, curve somewhat in
the direction of the vitreous humor, for two reasons. First, because as the crystalline lens advances, it approaches a more narrow circumference of the globe ofthe
eye, which relaxes the ciliary ligaments; second, because as the crystalline lens
presses the aqueous humor, the latter presses in all directions to make room for
itself, and its action falls upon what resists it least, i.e., upon the relaxed ciliary
ligaments; thus, it curves them all around the crystalline lens and occupies the
spaces left to it by their curvature. It is also quite likely that the cornea is
stretched somewhat by the compression of the aqueous humor. The distance from
the crystalline lens to the retina is thus sufficiently increased to see distinctly an
object very closely as long as the muscles firmly compress the globe of the eye.
But as soon as they cease to compress it, it necessarily resumes its sphericity, and
consequently all the humors resume their normal position. This is the change, I
believe, that occurs in the eyes when we strain our vision and wish to see small
objects very closely.

The crystalline lens does not change shape for l'ision of near and
distant objects.
32. It is true that if the crystalline lens could change its shape through the
contraction and relaxation of the ciliary ligaments, if it could increase its convexity when objects approach and decrease it as they withdraw, this would be
another means of causing the image of objects to fall precisely on the retina. But
this second means does not seem practicable to me. because the crystalline lens is
rather tough and viscous, and has no fluidity. As a result. it cannot keep changing
its shape. Thus, it is impossible for it to increase its convexity through the
relaxation of the ciliary ligaments, <md to decrease it through their contraction.
These ligaments serve only to keep it in such a position between the other humors
that the axis of the two convexities of whit·h it is composed always passes
through tht• middle of the pupil. Now. since it is necessary. in nrdcr fnr the
images of ncar or distant objects to fall pn.·t·iscly on the retina. either that the
crystalline lens change its convexity while remaining in the same place nr that it
change its place. appmaching or withdrawing from thl' retina. whilc its convc\ ity

Nicolas Malebranche

738

remains the same, it follows that the first means I have explained is the true one
and the one that is used. Indeed, when we strain our vision to see a small object
very close-by, we feel the effort of the muscles that compress the eyes, and that
even cause pain, particularly in those who have not acquired the habit of looking
at small objects close-by. It even seems to me certain that the leading block was
made and placed where it is only to assist the muscle in the precise or constantly
equal compression it must maintain in order for us to distinctly see a very close
object for a long time -which is necessary for the greatest perfection of sight.

The main use of the leading block.
33. To understand this well, you must know (a) that the quantity of rays
entering the eye increases in inverse proportion to the squares of its different
distances, and that if an object is two inches from the eye, for example, nine
times more rays will enter it than if it were six inches from it; (b) that as a
determinate quantity of rays is necessary to disturb the retina sufficiently and to
make us see objects, the opening of the pupil would have to diminish as the rays
increase; (c) that the smaller the opening is, the more distinct the image is,
because fewer of those rays farther from the axis that confuse it enter the eye.
From this it must be concluded that in order to properly distinguish the particles
of objects, we must look at them as closely as possible. But we can see them
from very close-by only by straining our vision, and by moving the crystalline
lens away from the retina through the compression of the globe of the eye. Now,
since its covering is tough and elastic, it constantly resists the muscle compressing it; and if ever this muscle were not equally tensed at the spot where it is
attached to this covering, inequality would occur in the distance between the
crystalline lens and the retina, and consequently in the clarity of the image and
the perception of the object. How then to make vision as perfect as it must be
with regard to our needs. This is how. Since it is difficult for a very tensed
muscle to maintain a precisely equal tension for a long time, God, in order to
assist the muscle compressing the eye and to make the slight inequalities in its
tension imperceptible, made it pass through the cartilage called the pulley so that
the friction of the muscle against the cartilage might partially resist the elastic
action of the envelope of the eye. For example, if I had a very heavy body
attached to the end of a rope, and if I wanted to hold it above the ground for a
long time, and always at precisely the same height by a constantly equal tension
of my arm muscles, I would certainly give way very soon, and I would not
succeed in holding it at precisely the same height. But I would easily succeed and
would give way much less if I passed the rope through a ring securely attached
somewhere, and if I then pulled the rope downward, for its friction against the
ring would assist me in keeping this heavy body still and at the same height. It
seems to me certain, then, that the main use for the pulley is to assist the superior
oblique muscle in its action against against the elasticity of the tough covering of
the eye that it compresses, and that it must always equally compress so that we
might see objects nearby equally well and without interruption.
Furthermore, it seems to me certain that the main use of the oblique muscles is

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

739

not to tum the eye in the way we see that it turns, for the globe of the eye does not
tum at all on its own axis. For if that were so, the oblique muscles could tum it
alone; but this is not so, is impossible, and would even be useless. Now, this
turning ofthe eyes that we see can easily happen through the successive action of
the straight muscles. Indeed, when you roll your eyes, you clearly feel that this
turning is not uniform, as it would be if it were the effect uniquely of the oblique
muscles surrounding them, but that it occurs through slight jerks, indicating the
successive action of different muscles.

An objection against the use I attribute to the oblique muscles. and
the reply.
34. You will perhaps tell me that the eye's covering is too tough to respond to
the stress of the eye's muscles; but the reply is easy. For when it is too tough, you
cannot see anything close-by very distinctly, and this is what happens to old
people whose covering has been made too tough by age. But these same old
people when young saw equally well things at a distance and close-by, but since
the covering of their eyes has become inflexible, the muscles can no longer make
any change in them. Thus, old people must have recourse to the second method,
and since they cannot increase the convexity of the crystalline lens, in order to
see up close they use convex spectacles that facilitate the convergence of rays and
make the convergence fall exactly on the retina. Furthermore, should the vitreous
humor be at all compressed, it must, because it is in plentiful supply, noticeably
remove the crystalline lens from the retina given where the crystalline lens is,
suspended in equilibrium between the two other humors. When I say that the
compression of the vitreous humor must noticeably remove the crystalline lens
from the retina, I mean in relation to the very slight change in the covering of the
eye. I mean that this compression removes the crystalline lens sufficiently for the
rays leaving an object, for example, a half-foot away, to converge exactly on the
retina. Now, the difference between the distance the crystalline lens must be
from the retina in order to gather there the rays leaving infinitely distant objects.
the stars, for example, and the distance necessary to gather there the rays leaving
an object only a half-foot from the eyes, is very slight. It comes to only about
six-elevenths of a ligne according to the comparison I made 3 between the crystalline lens and a magnifying glass of a six-ligne focus. And it comes to only about
one-fifth of a Iigne if you compare the refraction of the eye's humors to that of a
magnifying lens of a four-ligne focus. Thus, should the muscles compressing the
eye act on the vitreous humor at all. they can sufticiently remove the crystalline
lens from the retina to make the rays of objects at a distance from a half-f(Xlt to
infinity able to converge there.
A re.fkction em the• infinitt' wisdom o.f God. which appears not only in
the• c·xcd/ence of' /lis ll'orks. hut much more in the simJ>Iicit\' o( rhc·
ways through which He constructs thnn.
"Numhcr 21 (ahovc).

740

Nicolas Malebranche

35. There you have the main reasons for the composition of the eyes and for
the disposition of the transparent humors they contain. Now, if we reflect on this
at all, we clearly see that God formed them in relation to the properties of light,
or in relation to the action of ethereal matter, of which He is also the creator and
mover, so that, with God always acting in the world in a uniform and constant
manner through the general law of the communication of motion (for the transmission of rays and their different refractions is a consequence of it) and in our
souls through the general law of their union with the body, i.e., according to
what reaches our brain through our eyes, we might be sufficiently advised for the
good of society and preservation of life, of the presence of, and the differences
in, all the objects surrounding us. We see that He who made the eyes made
everything else, that He who found the secret of transmitting instantaneously in
all directions in a straight line the rays produced or reflected by luminous or
illuminated objects, rays, I say, of different kinds, and yet that constantly intersect and never confuse each other, intended to form the eyes so that by means of
these rays He could, by acting in a uniform manner in us as in everything
surrounding us, join us to His other works and make us admire their order,
beauty, and grandeur. In a word, we see that it is the same Wisdom that ordered
everything, the same Power that has produced everything, the same Providence
that conserves everything.
36. But if the Wisdom of God that appears in the little we know of the
construction of the eyes surprises us, how astonished would we be if we could
follow the tiny filaments of the optic nerve right up to the brain and see what
takes place in its principal part? These filaments of a hardly imaginable delicacy,
very slightly disturbed by the light reflected from objects, undoubtedly cannot by
themselves produce in our body all the motion they excite in it; but what are the
mechanisms they release in the brain, or rather how can they direct the spirits
contained in it to disperse throughout the body to produce in it the different
motions required by different objects? These tiny disturbed filaments control the
flow of animal spirits in our members, for we are well aware that this occurs in us
independently of us; how then are they made to flow into one member rather than
another, sometimes slowly and in small amounts, sometimes quickly and in
abundance, and generally in relation to the good of the body.
When a stone, for example, is thrown toward me in a straight line, the image
of the stone on my retina quickly increases with its speed and changes place not
at all or very little. How can the filaments of this image that continue to the brain
impel or direct the spirits quickly and plentifully enough to make me instantaneously turn and incline my head? It is not exactly the image of a stone that makes
me turn my head, nor is it the rapid growth of its image if it changes place in my
eyes as when the stone is not coming directly toward me. It is therefore the rapid
growth of its image together with the disturbance of the same fibers of my retina
that makes me mechanically incline and tum my head to avoid the blow; but what
are the mechanisms by which this and an infinity of similar effects arc brought
about? This men will never understand.
37. If instead of following the optic nerve as far as the principal part of the

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

741

brain, to which all the parts of our body are related, we retrace our steps and try
to discover something of God's means of forming, nourishing, and conserving
the parts of which our eyes are composed, will we not perceive in all this the
profundity of the Creator's wisdom? How are those tiny tubes constructed that
choose among the various parts of which the blood is composed those suitable for
allowing light to pass, in order then to distribute them in the transparent humors;
and how are those constructed that separate the black humor suited for deadening
rays of light and that finally attach it to the ciliary ligaments and to the bottom of
the iris in such a way that the humors touching the iris can neither separate it from
them nor dissolve it? How do the tiny tubes choose in the blood liquids of
different consistencies, very fluid for the aqueous humor, those suited for becoming firm for the crystalline lens, and finally others of a medium consistency for
the vitreous humor? How do they distribute them equally in each eye, and make
the crystalline lens equally convex? For when one of them happens to be more
convex than the other, we see objects smaller and nearer with this eye than with
the other. How is all this and an infinity of similar effects brought about?
Certainly the mind senses, as it were, the infinite in the immutable art of the
Creator, but it can understand of it only what is in its own scope.
38. It is true that there are few people, and perhaps no one, without some slight
defect in their eyes; but it is very rare to find anyone with any considerable defect
and lacking some part essential to vision. Now, when we know the true cause of
these defects, so far is this from diminishing the lofty idea we should have of the
wisdom of the Creator that the mind thereby assumes a perspective whence it
discovers it to be without limits. For a proper understanding of this, it must be
realized that it is impossible for bodies organized in a thousand ways in relation
to particular ends to be constructed by the general laws of the communication of
motion, which depend on this law, that every body is moved in proportion to the
force impelling it, and in the direction in which the force impels it, and that the
entire utility to be drawn from these laws with respect to organized bodies is to
develop and enlarge the parts of which the embryos or seeds of animals or plants
are composed. All those who have some knowledge of anatomy, and who have
noted the prodigious number of an animal's parts, the connections between these
parts and the various uses to which they are destined, will undoubtedly judge that
the collision of bodies might well destroy living bodies. but that it is not suited
for constructing their various organs. From this it is easy to conclude that God,
who through His ordinary Providence governs material beings according to the
laws of motion. at the beginning of the world formed in our first parents all the
men who were to be born of them, that He did the same thing in animals and
plants, and that He thereby gave them the fecundity and power of producing their
kinds. Nonetheless. it should not be concluded from what I have just said that the
men of today had at the time of Adam. in their indefinite smallness, the same
proportion of their members that they now have. but only that they then were
such that as a result of the laws of motion they could gradually gmw during six
thousand years to become today such as we see them. For if these tiny embryos.
or rather these embryos of embryos of embryos. and so on. did not have a

742

Nicolas Malebranche

crystalline lens, for example, or optic nerve, or the leading block I discussed, or
the first rudiments of all those parts destined to the same end, it is clear that the
general laws of motion would never have been able to construct them.
39. It appears to me certain, then, that God through particular volitions initially formed man and all the different natures of animals and plants and at the
same time something in each of them to preserve their kind, and also at the same
time through particular volitions (for it could not be otherwise before the collision of bodies) so regulated the first motions of matter that by subsequently
following this simple and general law. that every body is moved to the extent and
in the direction it is most impelled, the tiny embryos gradually grow and develop.
Indeed, we do not see that God now makes animals and plants of a new species,
and we daily see that the last are born of the first; for we are today disabused of
that bizarre thought that insects are born of rot, insects in which there are often
more organic parts and in which there appears more art than in larger animals.
God now rests. as Scripture teaches us [Gen. 2:2]-not that He ceases to act, for
the same Scripture teaches us that He acts constantly. but that all He does is to
follow the general laws He has established. Now, it is a result of the laws of
motion, laws according to which God in His ordinary Providence acts and must
act on matter. that the tiny embryos, which can be only material, should grow
and develop for six thousand years; and consequently it is a result of these laws
that someone should be shortsighted, or have the crystalline lens too convex to
see distant objects. Leaving aside, then, those with good vision, why does this
one have his crystalline lens too convex? Because God did not form his eyes as
they are today by a particular volition. Because they were made six thousand
years ago, and because He has gradually led them to their present state through
the efficacy of law or a general volition so simple that it seems more suited for
destroying than forming an organ as marvelous as that of vision. For indeed it is
through this general law that our eyes and even our bodies are destroyed, as it is
also through it that they grow and develop, though after God created them and
prepared them to receive their growth through it. But had God formed the eyes of
this man through a particular volition so that he might see well at a distance,
certainly he would be without this defect, he would be perfect like everything
God created at the beginning of the world, for all His works were then in a state
of utmost perfection, as Scripture as well as reason teach us. "Viditque Deus
cuncta quae fecerat & erant valde bona. " 8
40. Knowledge of the cause of the defect I have just spoken of raises the mind
and gives it a point of view, as it were, whence the wisdom of the Creator
appears so brilliant and profound that it dazzles us and we are lost in it. For in the
end it is impossible to imagine the frightening smallness of the primitive parts of
our eyes at the time of their creation, still less their configuration and arrangement, still much less how their growth and developement took place in the
following years through the efficacy of such a simple law. that everybody is
"Gen. ch. I [v.31].

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

743

moved to the extent and in the direction in which it is most impelled. The
crystalline lens of a given man has become too convex; this is a defect, I agree.
But general laws in different circumstances cannot produce the same effects.
These laws are established as wisely as possible when their fecundity corresponds to their simplicity, i.e., when the relation between their simplicity and the
excellence of the work they bring about express as perfectly as possible the
attributes of the Creator. For God wills to honor Himself not only through the
excellence of His work, but also through the wisdom of His ways. If He had in
view only the excellence of the work, to which work would He determine Himself
in order to honor Himself perfectly, He who can produce an infinity of works one
more perfect than the next? But He acts as wisely as possible, or in the way
worthiest of His attributes, in the order of which He found His law and all His
motives, attributes He cannot contradict or ignore; for He loves them invincibly
since His will is but the love He bears for them-He acts, I say, in the best way
possible when from all possible works He determines Himself to produce, not the
one most perfect in all its parts, but the one that together with the ways by which
it was produced most perfectly expresses His attributes. Thus, while some defects may be found in the eyes of some individuals, God alone is the author of
them. And resorting to a blind nature, plastic forms, the soul of the mother or of
those who have these defects in order to explain them is of good intention, but it
is to form chimeras. It would be better to believe either that these defects in
individuals contribute to the perfection of the entire work, or that God always
makes use of them for the good of those who have them.
41. When we very attentively consult the idea of the infinitely perfect being,
we clearly see that His conduct, as well as His essence, must be infmitely
different from ours. But when these moments of serious attention have passed,
we make Him create and think and act as we feel we would think and act
ourselves; for since the idea of the divinity does not make itself perceptible, it
easily grows dim and darkens, but the soul is always present to itself and always
perceives itself. This is why it is led to humanize all things, even the Divinity.
This is why some imagine that God creates everything through particular volitions, others that He made either the angels or some imaginary beings responsible
for the government of the world. These would have it that God initially gave each
creature a real power and, in addition, to certain of them knowledge they call
instinctive in order to depreciate it (which nonetheless is often such that no one
can attain any knowledge similar to it), and that with that done God remains at
rest and no longer interferes with anything. And those more religious, but of
about the same opinion, rightly maintain that God acts continuously, but that all
His action in ordinary Providence is only the simultaneous cooperation without
which secondary causes can do nothing. I say this only to convince you that in
order not to humanize divine Providence -a capital error and the source of an
infinity of other very dangerous errors-you must consult the idea of the infinitely perfect being with all the attention of which you are capable and attribute
to it that Providence which bears the mark of an infinite wisdom, and so that you

744

Nicolas Malebranche

might each thereby be able to answer yourself about the difficulties that might be
generated against my views by the inclination we naturally have to humanize all
things.
42. I admit that the imagination is terrified by what at the time of Adam must
have been the indefinite smallness of not only our bodies but also the organic
parts of our bodies, parts some of which even today when they are fully developed are so small that they surpass vision. And since there are seeds and insects
that can be seen only with good microscopes, the imagination rebels even more;
and reason itself is astonished when we take a pen and calculate what they were
six thousand years ago, or how they contain those which will be born of them
until the end of the ages. But reason is reassured when on the one side we are
convinced by geometry that matter is infmitely divisible, and on the other
through faith and even reason that the wisdom of God has no limits. Indeed, I am
convinced that God, who undoubtedly was able to create an infmity of substances
of a different nature, since His essence, being infinite, can be participated in in an
infinity of ways, chose (in addition to the minds He created to be possessed of
Him) matter, because He wanted an infmitely divisible subject to correspond to
His inexhaustible wisdom, a subject that by its essence could set no limits at all
on the exercise of His art and power; I am also convinced that if matter were
reduced to nothing through the division of its parts, or to an indivisible part, and
if it were thus capable of arresting the simple course and fecundity of Providence,
He would never have drawn it out of nonbeing. However that might be, it seems
clear to me that the abridged• idea I have just given of God's conduct bears more
of the mark of an infinite wisdom than that ordinarily formed of it, and if that is
so, it certainly approaches the truth more than the others do, for God acts always
in God, always according to the immutable order of His attributes, which are His
law and motive, because He is pleased in them and can neither contradict nor
ignore them. I hope I shall be forgiven this digression into which my topic has led
me.
43. I believe I have given above the main reasons for the composition of the
eye and the disposition of its parts, the end of which remains to be noted, viz.,
that since God acts in our soul in a way that agrees with His attributes, i.e.,
always in a constant and uniform way according to what reaches our brain
through our eyes, we might be sufficiently advised in relation to society and the
preservation of life of the presence of and differences in all the objects surrounding us. For God alone acts in us and advises us of all these things; but as He does
so for us in our stead due to our ignorance and impotence, He does so only as we
ourselves would do if we could act in ourselves according to the knowledge we
would have of what is occurring in our eyes and our brain upon the presence of
objects. Assuming, then, that our soul had all knowledge and power, and the rest
of what I have noted in number 26b above, let us see how it would discover what
is occurring in the bodies surrounding us.
I open my eyes in the middle of the countryside and I instantaneously see an
"A more exact and more extensive explanation of Providence will be found in the Dialogut•s on
Metaphysics and Religion. dialogues 9, 10, II, 12, 13.
bSee this number 26, above.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

745

infinity of objects, some more distinctly than others, and all differing among
themselves either by their figures, or by their colors, or in their distances, or in
their motion, and so on. Among other things I see at about a hundred steps from
me a large white horse running toward the right at a full gallop. How can I see it
thus according to the assumption I have made; this is how.
I know according to the assumption of number 26 that all rays of light travel in
a straight line and that those reflected from above the unknown object, i.e., from
the horse, upon entering my eyes converge on the retina, and that the principal
ray, the one that is the common axis of the two small cones explained above 8
disturbs it the most. I must therefore judge that this ray falls on it perpendicularly
and that therefore this horse is somewhere on this perpendicular line; but I do not
yet know its distance.
Second. I know that it is standing with its head turned to the right, although its
image is reversed on my retina. For since I know that my retina is not flat but
concave, geometry teaches me that perpendicular lines on a concave surface
necessarily cross and that they can be parallel to each other only when they fall
on a plane surface, and that therefore I must judge that its situation is opposite to
that of its image.
Third. I know also that it is about a hundred steps away, because I simultaneously have on my retina its image and that of the ground which it is on, by which
I know roughly its distance; I judge its distance in this way and by other means as
well that need not be explained here.
Fourth. I know it is a large horse, for since I know its distance, the size of its
image, and the diameter of my eyes, I construct this proportion: as the diameter
of my eyes stands to its image, so the distance of the horse stands to its size; and
comparing its size with that of other horses I have seen, I judge that it is one of
the large horses.
Fifth. I know that it is running because its image changes place in my eyes,
and that it is running at full gallop because I know the space its image quickly
traverses on my retina; from this I conclude, by constructing the same proportion
I just did, that it traverses a large space in a short time.
Sixth. I know that it is white, because I know what kind of disturbance the rays
it reflects produce on my retina, and since I can act on myself, I give myself,
without ever erring, a given sensation when there is a given disturbance on my
retina, and through it, in my brain.
Seventh. Finally, if I incline my head or lie down on the grass while looking at
the horse, its image will change place on my retina and no longer disturb precisely the same fibers in it; yet I shall always see it the same. Or assuming that it
stops and I begin to run while steadily looking at it, its image will change place in
the fundus of my eyes, and yet I shall see it immobile. This is because I at the
same time know (a) that I have my head inclined and (b) what the situation of my
eyes is, or the precise amount of motion I am giving myself by running, and
because rea.o;oning properly, I discover that the motion belongs only to me.
Eighth. If I approach the horse while looking at it, I shall see it as having the
•Number 28.

746

Nicolas Malebranche

same size although its image continuously increases on my retina, and the height
of this image is ten times greater when I am not more than ten steps from it than
when I was a hundred. This is because optics teaches me that the various heights
of the images of an object stand to each other as the inverse of the distances from
the object, and because knowing that at each step I take this proportion remains
the same, I continue to give myself the same sensation.
These are some of the judgments and inferences the soul would have to make
according to the assumption I made 8 in order to see only one object; and it would
have to make similar ones with respect to all the objects it sees with a glance of
the eye, and it would have to make them instantaneously and always repeat them
upon the least movement of the eyes, and finally, duplicate them without ever
erring when the eyes are in the same situation. Therefore, it is not we who make
them but God alone who makes them for us. This is why I called these judgments
and inferences naturaJb when, to speak as do others, I attributed them to the soul
in order to make it understood by this word that it is not really it which makes
them, but the Author of nature in it and for it. It was necessary to speak of these
judgments because without them our various sensations cannot be explained,
since they presuppose them and necessarily depend on them.
Many consequences can be drawn from what I have just said that are all of
very great importance.
First. That God alone can give us the various perceptions we have of objects
upon each movement of our eyes. This is too evident, after what has just been
said, to pause here to prove it. It suffices to say that neither our soul nor even any
finite spirit can instantaneously make an infmity of inferences, and that no
created and particular being can be a general cause acting at each moment in all
men generally.
Second. From this it follows that there is here no simultaneous cooperation,
for such cooperation presupposes an efficacious cause ready to act to which God
joins His cooperation. Now, no cause, whatever power might generously be
attributed to it, can make use of it here, because its use depends on instantaneous
inferences it is incapable of making.
Third, That God acts through laws or general volitions and always in the same
way in the same circumstances, and that the occasional causes that here determine the efficacy of these laws to produce their effects are the changes that occur
in the brain through the mediation of the eyes compared with those that accompany the ordinary motion and situation of the body. And it is necessary for God
to act through general laws in the ordinary course of His Providence not only
because this way of acting bears the malk of wisdom and immutable divinity but
also because without it there would be no order in nature, no principles of
physics, no sure rules of conduct.
Fourth. That these general laws are determined, as far as possible, according
to the immutable and invariable truths of geometry. If, for example, having
•Number 26, above.
"Ch. 7 of book I.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

747

closed one eye you look at a small object suspended on a string three or four feet
from you, the perception of its distance is not as exact as it would be if you
looked at it with both eyes open, because a triangle is not determined when there
is but one angle and one side given or known. See chapter 9 of book 1, number 3,
where this is explained.
Fifth. Finally, it follows that we do not see bodies in themselves, and that if,
through the flow of animal spirits or otherwise, there were excited in the brain
disturbances like those we now have with open eyes, and should all external
bodies be annihilated and hence be absolutely invisible in themselves, we would
still see what we now see, as a result of the general laws concerning the union of
soul and body; and this is what happens during sleep, in those in a high fever, and
in madmen. But what is it that we see immediately and directly, what is the
immediate object acting on the soul and modifying it with all the perceptions we
have of objects? This is undoubtedly the most important question. I have tried to
resolve it in the third book of this work where I discuss the nature of ideas, and I
hope you will find it elucidated and even demonstrated, especially if you join to
what I have said about it in this work my Reponses M. Arnauld, or only that
reply I made to a third Lettre of this celebrated author, which is printed in the
fourth volume of the Recueil des mes Reponses.
In order to finish this last addendum in a useful way, I beg the reader to review
in his mind what I have said of the admirable art that appears in the construction
of the eyes, of the relation they have to the properties of light, of their connection
with the brain and through the brain with the rest of the body, ofthe simplicity of
the general law that developed them and gradually led them to their present state,
and finally, of the use that God according to the laws concerning the union of the
soul and body makes of them, at each moment and in all men. Let him pass from
the sense of sight to that of hearing, which seems to me more admirable for its
construction, although much less necessary in relation to the present life, and
from this sense to a third. From man let him descend from the elephant to the
gnat, apparently richer in organs than the elephant and perhaps even man. Man
has only one crystalline lens in each eye and the gnat has several thousand of
them, which are easily distinguished with a microscope. From there let him carry
on through the plants, which are infinitely more prolific than the animals. For
everyone knows that a pruned tree is reborn. as it were, and that for each branch
cut back several others grow that bear everything, both flowers and fruit, of
which a single seed would with time produce entire forests. If in addition to all
this one reflects as I have on the development of our eyes over six thousand
years. the idea one must have of the divine Wisdom 8 will undoubtedly be greatly
augmented. But I feel I must say that should one have traversed the entire
universe and have discovered all the marvelous arrangments of matter including
the animals of which one sees an infinity hundreds of millions of times smaller
than a fly. one would still have seen. to speak as does Scripture.~> only what the

a

"Sec the letters of de Pugct and L.cl·uwenhock.
"Pruv. d1. H. (vv ..10 Jl).

Nicolas Malebranche

748

wisdom of God delights in doing, only a work that must perish, only the shadow
and figure of the future world that will subsist eternally, because it is the eternal
"object of God's indulgence, the end and masterpiece of His works.
Beati qui habitant in domo tua Domine in saecula saeculorum
laudabunt te.
Addendum
For the very end of the work.
It was found desirable for me to produce here two demonstrations that I had
assumed as known so that those who did not know them or perhaps did not know
where to fmd them could read them. Here is the first.
The centrifugal force of bodies is equal to the square of their speeds divided by
the diameter of the circle they describe with their uniform motion.

f
A body A attached to the end of string AC secured at C rotating around point C
will strain against the string because it tends to recede along the tangent AT. This
is agreed upon in physics, and the strain is called centrifugal force.

Demonstration.
On the circle ARF, take an arc such as AE, which arc I assume to be infinitely
small and consequently equal to its chord by conceiving the circle as a polygon
with an infinity of sides. And imagine the tiny parallelogram ABED. In the
infinitely short time the body A describes the arc or chord AE, it is impelled by
two forces, one along the tangent AT and the other along the line AC. The line
AB or DE expresses its speed and AD or BE the centrifugal force by which it
stretches the string. For in this case the differential BN over AB, i.e., the amount

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

749

by which the chord AE surpasses AB, should not be considered, nor the amount
by which AF surpasses FD, which is a differential of the second order, because
ED is assumed to be infinitely small in relation to FA. Thus, we can suppose BE
to be equal and parallel to AD, and through the property of the circle draw this
geometric proportion: FA:DE::DE:AD or BE, which is equal to DE 2 /FA.
Therefore, the centrifugal force BE is equal to the square of the speed of the body
A divided by the diameter, i.e., the force that acts at each instant or infinitely
short time and that is expressed by BE stands to the force or the speed of the body
A, which acts at the same instant and which is expressed by the line DE, as this
speed stands to the speed or force that in the same infinitely short time would
make it travel the diameter AF. For the lines AD, DE, and AF express forces or
speeds. Thus, given our assumption that DE is infinitely small, AD is an infinitesimal of the second order, and the excess of BN over BA or ED of the third.
And by supposing that AD, which expresses the centrifugal force, is an infmitesimal, AF will be an infinitely great quantity of the second order, and will express
an infinite force of the second order with respect to the centrifugal force.

Explanation of what I said on p. 730. The general proposition of
dioptrics of which that assumed in article 21 of the last Elucidation is
only a corollary.
Given a lens of the same or different spherical concavities or convexities,
either concave on one side and convex on the other, or, finally, flat on one side
and concave or convex on the other, find on the axis of the lens the point of
convergence or union of the rays that leaving a point of a luminous or illuminated
object finally meet after having undergone two different refractions, one upon
entering the glass, the other upon leaving it; in a word, fmd the location of the
image representing the object. And since only the rays near the axis render the
image distinct, and since those distant from it render it confused, the only
question here concerns the point of convergence of the rays near it. We assume
that the refraction of glass is roughly three to two (this is known from various
experiments), that is, that the sine of the angle of incidence stands to the sine of
the angle of refraction as three stands to two when from air it enters glass, and
consequently, as two stands to three when it leaves glass to enter air.

Preparation for the demonstration.
Let A be the point of the object from which the rays leave. BK the arc of the
circle of convexity of the lens would form with its ray BC. AIM is one of the rays
leaving point A that I assume enter the glass, very close to point B. so that the
three lines AI, AD, AB. and the two short lines Dl and BI, are considered e4ual
to each other. From point C, the centerofthc convexity BIK, let a perpendicular
CM be drawn to the ray AIM. and another CN to the refracted ray If. These two
short lines will be the sines of the angles of incidence and refral'tion. and sinn·
the right angles at M and at N have the same hypotenuse IC. which is the ray of
the lens' convexity. CM will be the sine of the angle of inl·idenl·e ;md CN that of

Nicolas Malebranche

750

A

,
refraction, and consequently, CM will stand to CN as 3 stands to 2. Now, let the
short line HG* be drawn from point Hand the line fiP from the point fwhere the
refracted ray If meets the axis Af, and from the center c of the other convexity of
the lens EHK, the perpendiculars cP to the extension of the ray refracted in the
first instance, and cQ to FQ which should be the ray refracted in the second
instance upon leaving the lens at point H to enter the air. cP will therefore stand
to cQ as 3 stands to 2, for reasons similar to those I gave for the first refraction.
With this assumed and sufficiently proved by what I said about refractions in the
last Elucidation, it is a question of finding the point of convergence F, on the axis
•The letter H, which is missing in the figure. should be where the line FQ cuts the arc EK.

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

751

Af, of the rays leaving point A of the object, i.e., the distance EF, after having
found the distance Bf.
To do this, let the indeterminates be named as follows: the distance of the
object AB = d , the ray of the circle BIK, viz, BC, = r , the sine of the angle of
incidence, or CM,=s, and CN=2s/3, and the unknown Bf=x. I shall name
the other lines when I have point f; this is to avoid confusing the letters.

To find the unknown Bf=x.
With the ray AI very close to the axis, we shall have: AC(d+r) stands to AD or
AB(d) as CM(s) stands to Dl=sd/(d+r). And Bf(x) stands to IC(x-r) as Dl(sd/
(d+r)) stands to CN(2s/3) . From which we draw the equation 2sx/
3=(sdx-sdr)/(d+r), which reduces to this one, Bf or x=3dr/(d-2r). By this
value of x we see that if d equaled 2r, the rays would be parallel, that if it were
greater than 2r, the rays would intersect below the lens as in the figure, and that if
it were smaller, point f would be found beyond point A and that the rays would
still be divergent after refraction, because in this case the value of x would be
negative. We see that if D were infinite, the focus of the first convexity would be
three times the distance of the ray, 2r becoming zero in relation to d; that if r were
infinite, i.e., if the lens were flat, the point of convergence f would be found
above point A and 3d/2 from it, the value of x becoming negative. We see,
finally, that with two of these three magnitudes x, d, and r given, we easily have
the third through the equation x=3dr/(d-2r). Assuming, for example, that the
ray r of the lens' convexity and the distance Bf of the image are given, we shall
easily find the distance d of the object AB: first, by multiplying each member of
the equation by d-2r; second, by substracting from both parts 3dr and adding I
2rx; third, by dividing by x- 3r; and we shall find d = 2rx/(x- 3r), from which we
can draw the same results as from the first. I say this only to illustrate the
fruitfulness and utility of the general solutions of algebra. Now it is a question of
examining the second refractions undergone by the rays upon leaving the lens,
which refractions give the point F of convergence after the two refractions.

To find the unknown EF=z.
To do this, let the thickness of the lens BE be named e; Ef or Gf or Hf=y; the
ray of the convexity EHK, which is Ec, =a ; the sine of the angle of incidence of
the ray refracted in the first instance leaving the lens at point H is cP = t • and
consequently, the sine of the second angle of refraction cQ = 3t/2 ; and finally,
FG or FH or FE=z.
With the ray fH very close to the axis, we shall have these proportions:
fc(y+a) stands to fE(y) as cP(t) stands to GH=ty/(y+a), and cQ(3t/2) stands to
GH(ty/(y +a)) as Fc(z+a) stands to FE(z).
Multiplying the extremes and the means of this proposition, we shall have the
equation 3/2(tz) = (tzy +aty)/(y +a) , each member of which being divided by t
and multiplied by 2 and by y+a , we shall have 3yz+3az = 2yz+2ay ; subtracting
3yz from both parts ofthis, we shall have 3az = 2ay-yz ; and finally dividing it by
2a-z , we shall have y = 3azi(2a-z). Now y or Ef is equal to x-e . or Bf- BE .

752

Nicolas Malebranche

We shall therefore have the equation x-e=3az/(2a-z); replacing x by its value
3dr/(d-2r) in this, we shall have 3dr/(d-2r)-e or 3dr-(ed+2er)/(d-2r)=
3al/(2a-z). And multiplying each member by d-2r, and by 2a-z, we shall
have this: 6ard-2aed+4aer-3drz-2erz+edz=Eadz-6arz; changing to one
side the three terms with the unknown z, we shall have 3adz+3rdz-edz-6arz+
2erz=6ard-2aed+4are, and consequently we shall have the unknown
6ard- 2aed + 4are
(I)
z=
EF.
3ad+3rd-ed+2er-6ar
If we ignore the thickness of the lens, we erase all the terms withe= o, and we
shall have
2ard
(2)
z=
.
ad+rd-2ar
If the distance of the object is infinite, or if the rays falling on the retina are
considered parallel, as when objects are at a distance, erasing all the terms in
which d does not occur will reduce the second value of z to z=2ar/(a+r) ; and if
the two convexities are equal, we shall have z=r. And if the distanced is not
great enough to make the rays parallel, we shall have z=rd/(d-r), which is the
proposition I assumed in article 21 of the last Elucidation.
In the figure and in the inferences we made to solve the problem, we assumed
that the lens was convex on both sides; but the formulas still give its general
solution merely by carefully changing certain signs and subtracting certain terms
as determined by each particular case.
If we assume, for example, that the lens is concave on the side of the object
and convex on the other, and if we wish to make use of the second value for z, we
have only to change the sign of the terms in which r occurs, because in this case
the ray of the convexity BIK is negative, or is taken in a sense contrary to that on
the basis of which we made the calculations that yielded the formula, and we
shall have z= -2ard/(ad-rd+2ar) or 2ard/(rd-ad-2ar) .
But if we reverse this same lens, the sign of the terms in which the ray a occurs
will need to be changed in the formula. Finally, if the lens is concave on both
sides, we shall need to change the signs where rays rand a occur together, for the
product of-rand -a yields +ar. Thus we shall have z=2ard/(-ad -rd -2ar).
And this value will always be negative and the point of convergence F will
always be on the same side as the rays falling on the lens.
If we suppose that the lens is flat on the side turned toward the object and
convex on the other, the ray r will then become infinite and it will be necessary to
subtract, as nought, the term ad in which r does not occur from the second value
for z, and for the same reason the term rd if we reverse the lens.
We see well enough what would have to be done if the lens were flat on one
side and concave on the other.
Finally, if we assume that the rays falling on the lens converge, i.e., approach
each other, the distance AB(d) will then be negative, and point A, toward which
the rays tend in this case, will be on the same side as point F. Thus, by changing

Elucidations of the Search after Truth

753

the sign of the terms in which d occurs, in the second value for z or in those of the
particular cases just noted, we shall have the value we seek.
It is clear that if z is given with one of the two others, these equations will
make the third known by isolating it from the others, as we have already done.
We clearly see, then, that the first two formulas or values for z give the general
solution for all the different cases possible of the problem, assuming that the
refraction of light entering glass from air has a ratio of 3 to 2. But if we want a
formula whose refraction itself is indeterminate, such as m to n, so that m and n
can be taken for any number we wish, we have only to name the sines CN and cQ
of the angles of refraction (n/m)s instead of (2/3)s, and (m/n)t instead of (3/2)t in
the proportions we formed to solve the problem; and by carrying out the calculation, we shall find by replacing m-n by p
mnard-npaed +mnare
EF or z=
mpad+mprd-pped +npre-mnar
or ignoring the thickness e of the lens
nard
z=
pad+ prd- nar
It is evident that solved generally this problem alone contains, as it were, the
whole science of dioptrics, which consists in determining the figure of lenses in
order to converge the rays leaving objects and make them parallel, converging,
and diverging, and, by making them pass through several lenses, enlarge or
diminish their images as we wish. For regarding point F where the image of the
object A is as the point A itself, and placing a convex lens below point F, or a
concave lens above it so that the focus of the convex and the negative focus of the
concave are at the same point F, the rays leaving these second lenses will be
parallel, which is necessary for those with good vision to see objects distinctly.
But because the object appears inverted when the rays have passed through the
two lenses, the rays will converge on the axis if we add a third convex lens; and
again regarding this new focus as point A of the object, its rays will be parallel
leaving it, and the object will be righted and much larger if we add a fourth of the
same convexity as the third so that the point A is at the focus of these latter two
lenses.
I do not enter into the details of all this, and I have indeed given only some of
the general corollaries that can be derived from the second formula in order to
form others suited to different problems. My goal was only to illustrate the truth
of what I said toward the end of the fifth chapter on method concerning the utility
of algebra and analysis. A more detailed account of the corollaries derived from
the general solution of the problem given by Guisnee, can be seen in the
Memoires of the Academie for the year 1704, where this learned geometer is not
content to solve it only on the assumption that the lenses are cut by flat surfaces
or circular arcs, but in general by any two curves of the same or different natures.
THE END

Translations of Latin and Greek passages
None of the Latin or Greek in The Search After Truth has Malebranche for its
author. These texts, most from the Bible and, especially, from St. Augustine, are
used entirely as aphoristic (not to say, cryptic) appeals to authority. While they
usually add very little of substance to Malebranche's own text, it should be
nonetheless reassuring to have their translations available here.
The translations are new, based on Malebranche's actual citations, for he sometimes corrupts the text, in various ways, and it is important to know how he understood what he was citing. References, on the other hand, are corrected: they
are also completed, as necessary; they are not repeated below except to avoid
ambiguity. G. Rodis-Lewis's edition of the Recherche in Malebranche's fEuvres
(Paris, Gallimard, 1979), vol. 1, was of great help. A translation is not provided if
it is given by Malebranche himself in an immediately adjacent location.
Abbreviations of Augustine's works:
GSJ Treatise on the Gospel ofSt. John
IS On the /mmortali~y ofthe Soul
LCG Literal Commentary on Genesis (incomplete)
TR On the True Religion
XIX

Nothing is more powerful than that creature that is called a rational mind,
nothing is more sublime.
Only the creator is above it. GSJ 23, 6.
Everyone agrees that only God is superior to the rational soul. Augustine, IS
13, 22.
h Not all things were made for this likeness, but only the rational substance,
which is why all things were made through it, but the rational substance
alone for it. Thus the rational substance was made both through and for
it, without any nature coming between. /,GG 16, 59-flO.
Most rightly it is said that it is made in the image and likeness of God, fi1r
it would otherwise be unable to perceive mentally the immutable truth.
Augustine, TR 44, 82.
•

754

Latin and Greek translations

755

xx

a

The mind, because it feels something only when purest and most blessed,
adheres only to that truth which is called the image and likeness of the
father and wisdom. LCG, 16, 60.

xx1

a

It is not an insignificant part of man, but the substance of the complete
human whole. Ambrose, He:xameron, 6, 7.

xxii • Truth, you are everywhere present to those who consult you, and at the
same time you respond to the questions of all who consult you. You
respond clearly, but not all listen clearly. Everyone consults about what
they want, but not all hear what they want.
c Internally, within thought's abode, the truth is neither in Hebrew, nor
Greek, nor Latin, nor in any foreign language; it is without mouth or
tongue, and without pronunciation of syllables.
d It seems as if he recedes from you when you recede from him. Augustine,
On the Psalms, 25, 2, 3.
c For even the sun illumines the face both of the sighted and the blind; the
sun is present for both, but with the sun present, one is absent. Likewise,
the wisdom of God, the Lord jesus Christ, is everywhere present, because
everywhere there is truth, there is that wisdom. Augustine, GSJ 35, 4.
xxiii a For who, upon proper reflection, has not seen that he had better understood
something the more he had been able to withdraw and lead the mind's
attention from the body's senses? Augustine, IS IO, I7.
h The principle of intelligent creatures is eternal wisdom, because this principle, always immutable in belief, never ceases to speak with a secret
summons to the creature of which it is the principle in order that the creature might turn to that from which it is; otherwise, it cannot reach its
perfection or form. LCG I, 5.
c We know that when He appears, we shall be like Him because we shall see
Him as He is. Treatise on the Epistle ofSt. John 3, 2.
xxiv • Because it is corrupted, the body weighs down the soul.
h Its terrestrial abode burdens it with many thoughts, and with difficulty do
we judge those about the earth or come upon those related to us.
"God, the intelligible light, in whom and by whom and through whom shines
the intelligible light that intelligibly enlightens all things. Augustine,
Soliloquies, I, I, 3.
Christ implied to us that the human soul and mtional mind han: neither life,
nor illumination, nor happiness except from the substance itself of <.iod.
Augustine, GSJ 23, 5. No nature comes between. :\ugustinl', 83 l'ariom
Qut·stions, 51.
,. This authority must he said to bl· divine, hectusc not only dol'S it transrl'ltd
every human fitculty in terms of sensible signs, hut acting in nun it hoth
shows him how it !nought itself down bl·cause ofhim, and without .ttli.·l'l

756

Latin and Greek translations

ing the senses by which miracles are seen, it bids the intellect to emerge,
showing at the same time how great its power is, why it acts in this way
and how little it is esteemed. Augustine, Concerning Order, 2, 9.
r And if we knew Christ according to the flesh, now we do not know Him
according to the flesh.
xxvii

Do not think that one man learns from another. We are able to admonish through the sound of our voice; if there were not an inner teacher,
that sound would be in vain. Augustine, GSJ3, 13.
Hearing is through me, understanding is through whom? Someone also
spoke to your heart, but you do not see him. If you have understood,
brothers, it is because your heart has also been spoken to. Understanding
is the gift of God. Augustine, GSJ 40, 5.

a

xxviii • Do not think that you are your own light. Augustine, On the Psalms, 25, 11.
Not from me is there light, but in you and not otherwise. Augustine,

Sermons, 67, 5, 8.
b I judge according to what I hear, and my judgment is just because I do not
seek my will.
xx1x The senses are utterly irresistible; any discipline is most sacred if through
the senses we take pleasure in the infliction of wounds on us. Letter to

Nebridium, 7, 3, 7.
Pray and act as he may in order to be worthy, whoever does not see this
should turn, not to disputatious man in order to ordain what he does not
ordain, but to God the Savior in order that he who is not saved may be
saved. Letter, 147, 12, 129.
bAnd in supplication let him pay attention to him who kindles the light of
the mind so that it may understand. Against the Letter ofFoundations, 38.

a

21 b God in the beginning set up man and left him in the hands of His counsel,
gave him His laws and commands, etc.

81

92
93

For the stupid love and admire everything they see hidden under distorted
words and regard as true all that is able to please the ears and that is tinged
with fine sound. Lucretius, De rerum natura, 1, 5, 641-4.
a

Wine is a cunning wrestler. The Imposter, 5, I, 5-6.
What might drink not produce? It discloses secrets, it promises to fulfil
hopes, it pushes the coward into battle, relieves the burden from anxious
souls, and teaches the arts. The flowing cup--whom docs it not make eloquent? Whom has it not freed even in paralysing poverty? Horace,

Epistles, I, 5, 16--20.
95

In Athens the air is light, from which the Athenians arc thought to he acute,
while in Thebes it is heavy. Cicero, De Fato, 4, 7.

Latin and Greek translations

757

You have the hearts of an Abderan plebian. Martial, Epigrams, 10, 25, 4.
You would have sworn he was born in the heavy air of Boetia. Horace,
Epistles, 2, I, 244.
a Is there no more wisdom in Ternan?
99

Do not suppose that the clear lights of the eyes were made in order for us
to see, or that the ends of the calves and thighs were placed on the feet in
order to be bent and enable us to walk with long steps, that the forearms
were then adapted to the strong upper arms and endowed each with a
hand in order for us to do what is necessary for life. All and every such
thing advanced of this kind is based on inverted reasoning, because nothing is born in the body in order for us to make use of it, but that which is
born creates the use. Lucretius, De rerum natura, 4, 824-35.

123

Our parents' age, worse than our grandparents', has produced us who are
less worthy and whose lot is soon to produce an even more wicked offspring. Horace, Odes, 3, 6, 46--8.

128 By giving heavenly delight to the mind by which every terrestrial delight is
surpassed. Augustine, Sermons, 42, 3, 3.
129

He who spares the rod hates his son.

136 All perceptions, as well of the sense as of the mind, are according to the
measure of the individual, and not according to the measure of the
universe. And the human understanding is like a false mirror, which
receiving rays irregularly, distorts, and disorders the nature of things by
mingling its own nature with it. Bacon, New organon, 1, 41.
138

a

Illustrious because ofhis obscure speech. Lucretius, De rennn natura, 1, 639.

139 a Truth is the daughter of time, not of authority. Bacon, .Yew orga111m, 2, !H.
141

Knowledge puffeth up.

144 This question is contested in the schools with good conjectures on hoth
sides, namely, whether Aristotle took the soul to he immortal or not. :\nd,
indeed, philosophers, and not the least of them, han assntcd that
Aristotle postulated that our souls arc immune to death. These arl", amon!(
the I .atin .md Greek commentators, hoth of the Anmnius, Olvmpiodorus.
and must importantly, thl· disl·iplt..·of Aristotle, Tlll'ophrastus, '' ho was
in a position tu undnstand thorou!(hly till' mind of his mastlT, hoth fwm
his mouth and fi·mn his pen.
A!(ainst these arc opposed not a few Fathns and not thl· kast of phil
osophers ... :\lost ofthl'SC haw hl'l'll kd to till' intnprctation th.ll .\n~totk
thou~ht uur soul pl'l'ishahlc h~ his studl·nt :\ll'\andn of :\phrodi~i.ts. '' ho
was accustomed 111 intcrpn·lin~ :\ ristol k 's 1houp:hl, ah hou~h he 1\ a~

758

Latin and Greek translations

excused by Eugubinus. And, indeed, where Alexander seems to have
inferred mortality, from book twelve of the Metaphysics, St. Thomas and
Theodore Metochyte of course inferred immortality.
Furthermore, I think that Tertullian was of two minds on this matter and
thought that Aristotle was ambiguous. Thus he cites him in support of
both views. For, although he here ascribes to Aristotle the mortality of
the soul, nevertheless he cites book one of De anima for the opposite view
of immortality. Plutarch was of the same opinion, invoking the same
philosopher for either opinion in book five of De Placitis Philosophis ...
Among the scholastics, who judge that Aristotle took a neutral stance and
was doubtful and of two minds, there are Scotus ... and other recent interpreters. This intermediary assessment I take to be the truer one, but the
law of the school forbids saying so lest the recommended view not be
based on the balanced weight of authorities.
148 He brought them to completion, because none of those who have followed
him up to our own time, a period of fifteen hundred years, has added anything; nor will you find in his words the least error, and that such a virtue
should be found in a single individual is strange and miraculous; when
such a description is true of one man, he is worthy to be divine rather
than human.
On the generation ofanimals: We praise God who distinguished this man in
perfection from all others and gave him the greatest human dignity, which
no man in any age is able to attain ... Aristotle's doctrine is the highest
truth, because his understanding was at the human limit of understanding-which is why it is said of him that he was created and given to us
by divine providence in order that we might not be ignorant of whatever
it is possible to know.
148-9 Aristotle was the prince to whom all the learned who followed him owe their
accomplishments; they were permitted to differ among themselves in the
interpretation of his words and in the inferences they drew from them.
149 My aim, readers, is, if health and strength suffice, to explain the definitions,
postulates, common notions and first eight propositions of the first book
of[Euclid's] Elements and to leave the rest to my successors. Through the
grace of God, I have kept my promise ... H. Savile.
!62

174

The sad despise those who laugh, and the merry despise him who is sad.
The lively despise the inactive, and the mediocre despise the skilled and
adroit. Horace, Epistles, I, 18, 89-90.
b

I have even seen many who, after having greatly yearned to follow him, abandoned their reading of him, with nothing gained beyond sweat and usc-

Latin and Greek translations

759

less fatigue of the soul. Thus, he who wished to be called "the obscure"
and to appear worthy of the name, got what he wanted so effectively
through his own efforts and was able to achieve his objective, that I would
venture to swear frankly that, until now, there has never been anyone able
to swear to having completely read, much less understood, this little book
from beginning to end. Claude Saumaise, Commentary on Tertullian 's De
Pallio, unpaginated dedicatory epistle.

177 It does not matter how many spears are thrown against him, for he is penetrable to none. In the way that the hardness of certain stones is impregnable to iron, as diamond cannot be divided, cut or worn away but instead
deflects what comes up against it, as rocks break the high seas without
showing any signs of the storms endured over the centuries, so the soul
of the wise man is firm and has gathered such strength that it is as secure
from harm as the things I have listed. Seneca, ch. 5.

180 You shall be as gods. Genesis 3:5
hThe wisdom of this world is foolishness before God.

182 Pride is the beginning of sin. Ecclesiastes 10:15.
Little in philosophy is precise.
h You would like him to have spoken with his own intelligence and the judgment of another.
"If he had rejected some things, he would be confirmed by the agreement of
the learned rather than by the love of the young.
a

186 a I am your fellow servant ... worship God. Revelation 19:10.
208 The reason why men especially and horses occasionally are heteroglaucous
is the same as the reason why man alone grows gray and the horse is the
only other animal whose hairs whiten visibly in old age. Aristotle, Degeneratione animalium, 5, I, 78063-5 (trans. J. A. Smith and W. 0. Ross).
See also translation of p. 148 above.

208---9 The learner should take things on trust. Aristotle, De Sophisti<"is elent'his, 2,
165 b3.
214 Jeremiah 12:11.
224 a I judge better the things that I sec with my eyes to the extent that tht·y arc
doscr in nature to those I understand with my soul. TR 31, 57. St·t· translation p. xxiii aho\'C.

229 h Since the esscm·c of (iml has in it whate\'er there is of pnfl'l'tion in e\l'I'Y
ot hl'T thinv;, ami more hcsidt·s, (iod is ahk lw llimsclfto I.. now nny indi
\'idual thing in I lis own thought. For tht· imJi,·idtul natun· of a thmg <·on
sists in the t;u:t that to some extl'tlt it participates in till' nature of (iml
Thomas Aquinas, .'iumma tht'ologl<'tl, I, H, h.

760

Latin and Greek translations

231 • We are unable to think something by ourselves, as if from ourselves, but our
ability is from God. 2 Corinthians 3:5.
showed it to them. Romans I: 19.
c The Father oflights. James 1:17.
dWho teaches men wisdom. Psalms 93:10.
c The true light which illumines every man coming into this world. John 1:9.

b God

232-3 See translation p. xxiv, noted above.
233 Even while turned from it, the impious are to some extent touched by the
light of unchangeable truth. This is how even the impious think of eternity and correctly praise and blame many things in human morality. But
by what rules do they judge these things, may I ask, if not by those in
which they see how everyone should live, even if they themselves do not
live in this way? Where do they see these rules? Not in their own nature,
for while they are seen by the mind itself, their minds are unstable, and
the immutability of the rules is seen by anyone with the power to see it
in them ... where are they written, then, if not in the book of that light
which is called truth, where every just law is described .. .in which is seen
what should be done even by him who does what is wrong and turns away
from this light by which he is nonetheless touched.

237 • He governs human minds with no nature in between. TR 55, 113.
246 He who is the examiner of His majesty will be overwhelmed by His glory.
Proverbs 25:27.
266 You love all things that are and despised nothing you have made; for you
did not make and set up what you despised. How, moreover, could something endure unless you wished it, or be conserved unless called into
being by you. Wisdom II :25-6.
309

319

If our hope in Christ is for this life alone, we are the most miserable of men.
I Corinthians 15:19.
For all the saints and the righteous, supported by divine help in constant
torments, are said to be blessed in the hope of that end by which they in
the end will be blessed. For if with all their virtues they were always in
these torments and terrible pains, no sane reason would doubt that they
were unhappy.
h God

knows perfectly His own essence. From this it follows that He knows
it in every way that it is knowable. Moreover, it can he known, not only as
it is in itself, but as it can be participated in according to some mode of
resemblance to creatures. Each creature has its own species according to
its participation, in some way, in the resemblance of the divine essence.
Thus, insofar as God knows His own essence as allowing imitation by a

Latin and Greek translations

761

creature of a certain sort, He knows it as the nature and idea proper to that
creature, and similarly for all others. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica,
1, 15, 2.
323

Under a just God, no one can be unhappy unless he deserves to be.
Augustine, Incomplete [sic] work, Against the Second Reply ofJulian.

341 a Judge yourself blessed when all your joy springs from you, since in those
that men clutch at, or seek, or care for, you will not find-1 do not say
what you prefer-but what you wish. Seneca, Letter to Lucilius. 124, 24.
447

Honor and glory to God alone. 1 Timothy 1:17.
• For I do not think that this body is animated by the soul except by the intention of its maker and I judge that it undergoes anything only according
to Him, and that it acts on and in the body as if divinely subjected to its
domination. De Musica, 6, 5.

452
a

He always brings about what he has once decreed. Seneca, On Providence, 5, 8.
This is the Christian religion, my brothers, which is preached throughout
the whole world to the horror of its enemies who complain of their lack
of hegemony-this is the Christian religion that adores one God, not
many, because only one God makes the soul happy. GSJ. 23, 5.

555

In these ways, therefore, when God acts in the rational soul, in order that it
might believe in Him-for it cannot believe in just anything by means of
its free will unless some calling or conviction gives it belief-God works
in man His will to believe and His mercy precedes us in all things; but to
accede to God's call, or to reject it, is as I have said a matter of the will.

561

Lest we be entirely silent when asked, why three? we say that they are three.
When it is asked, why three? human speech is absolutely overcome. It is
said, nevertheless, that there are three persons, not in order to say it, but
not to be silent.
Most assuredly, he left him to do what he wished. De correpttone et gratia,
12, 38.

563

a

591

Whatever Adam called each living thing, that was the name thereof. Genesis
2:19.
h He gave names to all things.

596

h

You have made me serve with your sins.

599 • Just as sin was introduced into this world hy one man.
"I was conceived in indi!,'ltity and my mothn nmn~iveJ me in sin. The lw~in­
ning of sin was with woman and throu~h her shall Wl' all die.
6119 • Afterwards, having lapsed into the dogma oft he Montanists, he r~:called the

762

Latin and Greek translations

new prophecy in many books, because of the envy and insults of the
clerics of the Roman church. St. Jerome.
613

a If we

both see the truth of what you say and we both see the truth of what
I say, where do we see it? I ask. I do not see it in you nor do you see it in
me, but we both see it in that immutable truth that is above our minds.

617 • Nature cannot separate the just from the iniquitous. Horace, Satires 1, 3, 113.
c

Now, therefore, inhabitants of]erusalem and men of Judea, judge between
me and my vine.

628 The darkness of our corruption obscures from us the incorruptible light with
the result that it can be seen to a certain extent, but not as it is in itself,
thus showing how distant it is. If the mind did not see it, the mind would
not see that it is distant. If the mind saw it perfectly, moreover, it would
not see it as if through this darkness. Therefore, because the mind does
not entirely see or fail to see, it is right to say that God is seen from a distance. St Gregory.

630 • He said that it is inaccessible to every man of human sensibility. Sacred
Scripture typically calls by the name ofhumanity all partisans of the flesh.
is not found in the land of those living with pleasure.

d Wisdom

631 d The natural man does not perceive the things of the spirit of God, for they
are foolishness to him. 1 Corinthians 2:14. It was said to Moses, man cannot see me and live, which is to say, no one can ever see God spiritually
who lives carnally in the world. St Gregory.

637 b But I do not judge myself. For I know nothing by myself, but I am not
thereby justified, but he who judges me is the Lord.

650 • You will love the Lord your God with your whole heart, and your whole
soul, and with your whole strength.
669
672

a

No one has from himself anything but sin and lies. 2 Council of Orange,
Canon 22.
Let the earth produce living grass; let the waters produce living animals that
fly and that crawl. Genesis 1:11, 20-1. Increase and multiply, and fill the
waters of the earth, and let the birds multiply on the earth. Genesis 1:22.
I am the Lord who does all, who alone extends the heavens, and supports
the earth, with no one with me. Isaiah 44:24. Your hands have made me
and completely fashioned me in all my parts. Job 10:8. I do not know how
you have appeared in my womb .. .I myself have not made your limbs, but
it is the creator of the world who controls the birth of man, etc. Machabees
1:2, 7:22-3. Since it is God Himself who gives life, breath, and everything to all. Acts 17:25. Producing grass for the beast and plants for the

Latin and Greek translations

763

use of men so that you should bring forth bread from the earth. Psalms
103.
d For he forgot his own strength. Wisdom 16:23.
675

God tailored the Scriptures to the level of children and babes at the breast.
Augustine, Commentaries on the Psalms, 8, 8.
b We say that all miracles are against nature, but they are not. For how is what
is done by the will of God against nature, since the will of so great a creator is the nature of each thing? A miracle, therefore, is not against nature,
but against what is known of nature. Augustine, Ci~y of God.

677 c The sun and man generate man.
d Neither he who has intercourse nor he who sows his seed is anything, but only
God who gives form ... For it is He through His operation which continues
to the present who brings it about that the seeds unfold in their number,
and from their invisible folds into the visible forms of this beauty that we
see.
See also translations for p. 672.
681

You will love the Lord your God with your whole heart, and with your
whole soul, and with your whole strength. You will fear the Lord your
God and serve Him alone. Deuteronomy 6:5.
c Therefore, you do nothing, most ungrateful of mortals, who claim not to
owe anything to God but only to nature, because nature is not without
God, nor God without nature, for they are the same; they are together,
without difference. If you say that you owe the benefit you have received
from Seneca to Annaeus or Lucius, you change not the creditor but the
name.

682

a

I am the Lord, and there is no other; I fashion the light and the dark; I make
peace and create evil; I am the Lord who does all.

684 a The Egyptians themselves, whom we laugh at, consecrated no beast unless
for some utility they derived from it.
685

Slaves, obey your masters according to the flesh with fear and trembling in
the simplicity of your hearts as if it were Christ, not to be pleasing in the
eyes of men, but as servants of Christ, to do the will of God with your soul
in serving with good will as if for God and not for men. Ephesians 6:5-6.
c If we call a man father, we honor his age, but do not indicate him as the
author of our life. St. Jerome, Commentary on the Gospel ofSt ..tfatthell'.

742

And God saw all the things that He had made, and they were very good.
Genesis I :J l.
Tl\tl.

References by Malebranche to other authors
Ailly, P. d', QUtJestiones sup<r /ibros srntmtiarum,
680
Aristotle, lk anima 473--4, 477; lk caelo 467-71,
471-2; [k grn<ratione animalium 208; lk
gm<ratione <1 corruptio"' 473-4;Physics 467-8;
Rhetoric 344; lk Sophisticis elrnchis 208, 209;
Topics 669; uller to Alerander (pseudoAristotle) 144
Arnauld, A., Art de pens.r 205; Nouveau i/em.nts de
giom.trie 483; lk vraies <1 fousm idies 228
Aquinus, Noctae allicae 139
Aulus Gellius, Noctae allicae 139
A,·erroes, Op<ra Aristou/is . .. cum Av.rois . ..
commmtariis 148; In Metaph. Arist. 660; In libr.
lkstruct. (pseudo-Averoes) 148, 149, 208
Bacon, F., Op<ra omnia, Novum organum 136, 277,
147, 159; Book of Common Prayer .. . 16S-69
Brebeuf, G. de, La Pharsale de LllCain 101

Carre, L., Methode pour Ia m.sur< des surfous 483
Cicero, Academica 189-90; lk Fato 95
Conimbricenses, Commmtarii in physicam
Aristottlis 658
Cordemoy, G. de, Dise<,em<nt de /'ame et du corps
49
Descanes, R. Dioptrique 28,691, 720; Giometrie
483; Dr'/'homme 93, 108, 117, 201; 1-ellm 126;
Meditations 49, 86, 573, 587,618, 633, 635;
Passions 108; Princip.s 13-14, 101, 276,463-5,
484-5, 501, 514-15, 519-20, 524, 529, 677,694,
696,699
Digby, K., Discours touchantla gu<rison des plaits ..
. 119,122
Diodorus of Sicily, Bibliothtquehutorique 170
I >uns Scotus, {bla.stio"'s super IV libros
Smtrntiarum 407-H
I )urand de Saim-Pour<;ain,l >.• In Smtmtias
comm<nlart~rium /ibn I~· 407·~
Ferne!, u,vrrsa mtdiclfla 89

Fonesca, Commmtarii in metaphysicam Aristottlis
659, 661, 671
Guericke, 0. von, Erptrimrnta nova 520
Guisnee, Mimoim de I'Acadimie des Scienm 753
Hobbes, T., lk principiis tl ratiocination•
Geom<trarum ... 278
Horace, Arspo.tica 207; Carmina 123; Epistolae 14,
89-90,93,95, 121, 162, 259; Satires 384
Huygens, C., Cosmothtoros 459; Traitide Ia lumitr<,
690--1
Javelle, G., {hla.stion.s in Arist. Mttaph. 659
Journal des Savants 25, 28, 256
La Cerda, J. L. de., Tertul/iani op<ra, 144-5
La Hire, P. de, Nouv.aur ilim.nts des stctions
coniquts 403-15
La Rochefoucauld, Rijlerions moral.s 290
Leeuwenhoek, A. van, Arcana naturae deucta,

747
Le Boe, Fr. de (or Deleboe), called Silvius or
Sylvius, Disputationum m.dicarum decas 95
L'Hospital, G. de, Traiti ana/ytique d.s s.ctiom
coniqu.s 483
Lucretius, lk rerum natura 81, 99, 138
Maimonides, M., lk ido/o/atria lib.r 683
Malezieu, R. de, Eliments de giom<tric de Mgr. It
Due de Bourgogne 483
Malpighi, M., lk formationt pu/li in ovo 27
Manial, Epigrammts 95
Manin, A. (Ambrosius Victor), Philosophia
christiana 629, 676
Montaigne, M., Essais, 186--90
Newton, 1., Optiu 689, 707,710, 716, 724
Patritius, Fr. (Patri1.zi). Discussionum
ptripatetuorum 479-529

764

References to Malebranche to other authors

Pererius (Pereyra B.), Dt rerum naturalium

765

principiis 658
Plautus, Pstudolus 92; Curculio 277
Plutarch, Oeuvres morales 169
Pompanazzi, P., Tractatus de immortalitate animat

Schooten, Fr. van, Geometria 483
Seneca, De constantia 176--9; Epistolae 341; De
providentia 451
Sextus Empirucus, Adt·trsus mathematicos 684
Soncinas (Benoit de Soncino), Propositiones ex

145
Prestet, J., Elements des mathimatiqurs 483
Puget, L., Obstn:ations sur Ia structure des yeu•· des
divers insects 698, 747

Suarez, Disputationes metaphysicae 65S-9, 661
Swammerdam, J., Miraculum naturae 27
Sylvius, Fr., see Le Boe

Quintilian, De imtitutione oratoria 610

Tacquet, A., Elementa geometriat planae ac solidae,

Re)neau, Ch., Science du calcul des grandeurs 483
Riccioli, J.B., Almagestum novum 255
Rohault,J., Traiti de physique 66
Rubio, A. (Ruvio), Commentarii . .. de physico
659

Thomas Aquinas, St., Summa theologica 229, 319

Saumaise, Cl., Commentator on Tertullian 174
Sa,·ile, H. (or Sa,·ille), Praei<Ctiones ... in
principium eltmentorum Euclidis 149-30

Willis, Th., Cerebri anatome 89, 97, 98
Win,]. de (or de Vuith), Dttlementis curvarum
linearum 483

omnibus Aristotelis libris 659

483

Villemot, Nouveau systime 703
Voet, G., Dtsp<ratissima causa Papatus 29J-4
Vossius, 1., De theologia gentili 683

General index
Academic"!< H6, 1H9
accident ,._ cause, schol. 0511--'1
act-potency (actt-puiuancr) 241, 245, +43, 473; stt
al.<o cause, scholastic
action (moral) 2.1-4, 65!1--9, 678, 679
action-reaction 692
Adam, before and after the fa1119-23, 120, 339,
.148, 451, 4364--5, 556-7, 563-5, 579413. 590-4;
su also Original Sin
adulthood, and the brain fibers 110-11; and the
imagination 131-3
aged, the 92, 108, 11{}-11, 132, 133, 149, 403, 477;
and image of God 123
ages of man: and the brain fibers 11{}..-11; and the
imagination 131-3
air: elasticity and weight of91-2, 690
Alben the Great I, 1+4, 291
Alexander of Aphrodisias 1, 291
:\lexander the Great xl,.ii-h·iii, 169, 177
algebra 104-5, 209, 314-15, 345, 430, 433, 435~.
509,753
Ammonius 1+4
amputees, illusion of pain of SO, 481, 570
analo~n· 135~

analysis 209, 435~, 483, 753
anatomy: utility of 296-7
Anaxagoras 188
Anaximander 188
ancients (and modems) 91, 138-9, 14~, 215,
382-3.608
angels II, 172, 194, 19741, 218, 223, 239-40, 254,
373-4, 45{}-1, 59741, 667. 743
angle, ex. of definition 101, 429-30
animal machines 30, 98, 114, 230, 279, 323-5, 328,
351-3, 673-4; discussions about their
intelligence, 189-90, 353, 661; innocence and
absence of pain 323; souls of 23{}-1, 492,
676

animal soul, stt animal machines
animal spirits 17,49-50,117-101, 102, 106-8,
11{}-11, 134, 203, 338, 34!1--9, 35{}-2, 35~.

.l74, 37!1--9, 381, 386, 387-9, 502-4. 5011--9,661,
67{}-1, 723, 740
animals: biblical names of 591-2; and expression of
passions 352-77; memory and bodily habits of
106, 108-9, 121; microscopic 25-6,698,747
(cold-blooded, 505); and their young 26-7, 121
Anne of Austria 115
annihilation (and creation tr nihilo) 222-3, 273-4,
316, 45{}-1, 517, 595, 661
Anselme, xv-x,·i
Anthropomorphites 25{}..-1
Apollodorus 188
Apollonius 409
Aquinas, St. Thomas, stt Thomas Aquinas, St.
archetypes and eternal models, 228-9, 230,
319-20,626
Archimedes 409
Areopagus, the 81
Aristotle 9, 13, 14, 47, 139, 140, 143-7, 148, 15{}-1,
207-9, 215, 28{}.-2, 303, 371,382-3,409, 44{}.-1,
+42-4, 463, 465, 467-9, 485-8, 528, 542, 623,
648ff., 668, 675, 676-7, 681,719
arithmetic 430, 433-5
Arnauld, A.: X\'i-xx
aneries 94-5, 97, 354; auxilliary 97; great artery
(aona) 9741; ,·enous anery 94, 96-7
association, principle of set connection
Astrology 225, 382, +41, 539
Astronomical tables 29~
astronomy: reputation of295-7, 331
atheists 86, 293-4, 466
atoms of animals, 25-6
attention (application of the mind) 13, 79-81, 84,
101, 132-3, 14{}.-1, 212-13, 252-3, 270, 274,
41{}-19, 428,429-30,431-2,481-2, 491; its
difficulties xxi,·, xxi,·, 138, 252-3, 27{}.-2, 275~.
277, 305-6, 412, 513-14, 527-8, 543, 612, 630,
671
attraction (Scholastic) 30, 242, 455, 500
Augustine, St. x-xi, xlv, il-li, h·, 48-49,57, 1116-7,
145, 158, 218-29, 2.l2-4, 246-7, 282, 309, 323,

766

General index

446--7,449,493,555,561,567,569,601,606,
626, 628--9, 655---t>, 667, 675---t>, 680
authority 138--9, 141, 157-8, 171, 182; of the
church in matters of faith 14, 205---t>, 247,
279-80, 482, 609-10; in philosophy xxv, 12-14,
208--9, 215, 280--82, 285,293-4, 302-3, 382-3,
408--9,462-3,517, 528-9,541-2,633,656,677
aversion 113, 119-20, 126, 370, 390-2, 404,407,
654-5, 677; set also hatred
Averroes 148--9, 208--9, 463, 660
A vicebron 659
Avicenna 144,206.
axioms 149,315-17,323,484,491
baptism 123, 584---t>, 605---t>
Bayle, P. xvi, xix
being (indeterminate, universal) 227, 229. 236-7,
241-3,250-1, 174; see also God
beings, imaginary 744
beings other than bodies or minds 239, 249-51,
252
Berkeley, G.: xxi
Bernard, St. 659
blindness: and colors 199, 238; parable of the
blindman
body: corruptibility of 255---t>, 73; differentiation of
2-3, 74-5, ZOO, 718--19; organization of 117-19,
465---t>, 602, 741-2; as prison 51-2, 218; Ste also

existence, extension~ machines, matter, and
union
brain 88--9, 93; dura mater, first envelope 721-2;
pia mater, second envelope 88--9, 722, 732;
pineal gland 89, 571
Caesar,Julius, xx, 184,298
Cajetan, Th., 144
calculus 436, 483
Calvin,]. 139, 199
Calvinists 205
capacity of the understanding: growth of through
use 209-10; and infinity of the will 212, 269-70,
284, 550; its constancy, 322, 531-3; limitedness
ofZI-2, 29, 80, 128--9, 140-1, 152-3, 199-200,
203, 207, 209-10, 213, ZH-16, 249, 295, 305,
.lZZ, 325,412-13,438,511.548,580-1,594
Canesians, 320, 492-4, 622, 633-5, 638-9, 659,
661,673-4
Cato, 176-81
cause: and effect, search for 488; Scholastic 241-2
(equivocal and unimcal 277, 443; by itself and
hy accident 446); secondary 589-'10, 657-85;
true, and necessary connection of, with effect
449-51
cerebral traces 100-7, 115-16. 118--23. I.H, l.ll>,
140-1, lSI, 156-7, 11>2, 11>4, 2114, .127, .H5, .17!,
.lll8, 402, 598-'1,1>07--8
l·hanL-.:, '19, 667

767

charity, set love
chemistry: acid and alkali 503, 699; and
differentiation of lxJdics 460-1
chemists (alchemists) xxiv, 132, 159, 242, .11111
chicken egg: and formation of the chicken 27 • .124.
464-5,602
child 108, 110-11, 125-7, 131; education of, and
sensible punishments and rewards I 26, I 29, 192,
542; and mother 112-l.l, 115-24 passim, 5111-.l,
601fT., 646; and parents 122, 167-~. 171, 192,
195; and shock of birth 125-6, 192-.l.
Chinese 101, 374, 382,484, 542, 61.l, 615
chyle 91-2, 94-5, 97-M
circle, squaring of I 2
circulation ofhi<K>d, 90-2, 139, 505
climate, influence of 95
clock (watch): as example of machine 99, 244 • .U4,
332,494. 6111, 661
collectors 139, 382, 40 I
colors: Canesian explanation of 691; explained hy
frequency of vibrations 689ff., 696, 715-16; and
modification of the soul54-71; passim, 71, 79.
634-35; primitive, simple, homogenous, 688-9,
715-17; su also qualities, sensible
comet: as illustration of prejudice 224-5
comets 42, 458--9
commentators xlv, 140, 143-51, 280-1, 303,440-1
compassion 113-15, 162,351
concourse or cooperation, di,·ine 231-2, 663-4,
676-80, 684, 743, 746
concupiscence 120,123-4, 129, 179, 184, 195,213,
408,555-7,566,581-5, 596---t>OI, 606,619,631,
642,669
conic sections 209, 506
connection between thoughts and cerebral traces:
accidental, by temporal identity 65---t>, 101, 103,
389; institutionaiiOI--tl, 121, 662-3, su also
language; natural, 101; 102-3
connection, reciprocal, of the traces 99-100, 101,
lOS-t>
consciousness (inner sensation) 133, 198,202,
236-9. 326. 374, 625, 633. 635, 638. 670
consent 8--11, 85, .157, 409, 555; its suspension 268,
481, 549, 574, 641-Z
contagion of the emotions and imagination 161,
172, 348--51, 377
contiguity and continuity 510, 523, 692, 744
contiguity, continuity of bodies 221
contingent truth, ser truth, contin~rent
costumes and style 16 7-~. 170-1
creation, 211-4,173, Zi5--t>, 450-1,67-1-5, 1>77.
744; su 11lso annihilation, dependence of
creatures, and God
cross: as illusion 1.16
cube, duplication of 11--1.1
curiosity 271\-9 . .lM5-7, 401; saal.<o wondrr
Cn>rian, St. 609- .JO

768

General index

damned, the 578, 596, 619-7; see also eternity of
pains or pleasures
death 326-7, 360, 630, 632
definitions 101, 104-5, 149-50
Deleuze, G. vii
Democritus 188, 259
demon 180, 194,211,239,292,374,450,685
demonstration (and proof) 48, 63, 204, 206, 219,
293-4, 322-3, 427~. 432, 568, 572, 574, 719
dependence of creatures 222, 231-2, 234-5, 290,
677
Descartes, R., viii-x,xii, xvi, xvii, 15, 57, 139, 328,
367, 40'1; accused of atheism by Voet, 293-4, 383;
and doubt 316-18; on eternal verities 587, 618;
on existence of bodies, 572--4; on ideas 622-24;
on knowledge of the soul633-8; life of 126; on
mathematics 100-5, 209, 215, 509; on metaphysics
86, 315-18; method of 13-14, 15, 215, 439,441,
443,453, 467, 488; on physics 1-12,453-66,
501-2, 507, 513--26,602, 659, 687, 689,691-5,
719, 720; on pineal gland, 89, 324,492-5
Desgabets, R., X\'
desire 212; as general or primitive passion 374-5,
392, 395-6, 399-400, 401-3
Diogenes the Cynic 617
Dionysius, Tyrant of Syracuse 169
disorder 22-3, 339, 365, 580, 582, 586, 588-90; set
also evil, order, Original Sin, effects of
disposition; ste habits, spirirual
distance, perception of 34-5, 40-6
dissections 56-7, I 07
diversion xviii, xix, xxiv, 155, 213, 650
di>·isibility; set Extension: as essence of matter
doubt 11, 12-13, 85-6, 153-4, 204,274, 637
dreams 48, 50, 135, 192--4, 217, 229, 481
Du Perron, Cardinal 30 I
Duns Scotus 435, 658
Durand 680
duration (relative) 38-9, 45, 755; and multiplicity
of thoughts 138-9
earth; diameter of 459; distance from sun 69, 698,
703; motion of 328-9, 371-2; and speed of
surrounding subtle matter 704-5
elect, the 326, 66 7
elements, Scholastic, 131-2, 254, 469-76, passim,
479, 662; of Descartes: first 455-7, 460--1, 526,
694-5; second 456-7, 526, 687, 693fT.; third 458,
526,694
entities, Scholastic 242-3, 244-6, 444-6, 499
Epicureans 7, 359, 361
equation solving 488-9, 506-7, 611
error: general cause ofl-li,liv, 7-11, 16, 23--4,
54-6, 69-70, 73, HZ, 248, 411; particular errors,
passim and esp. 12, 16-18, ZH, 82, 126--7, 1.14,
197, 229, 248-9, 369--71, 377, 527; and sin I,
1169

erudition xix, 13, 132, 138-9, 141, 144-5, 174, 185,
292, 295-9, 302-3, 400--2, 527, 529
essence: definition of 242-3; and existence 229;
indivisible 254; vague idea of 512
eternity of pains or pleasures 32~. 358, 388-9,
529, 666; ofthe world according to Aristotle 471
ether 691, 695fT., 708, 717-18
Eucharist xvi, 139, 205-6, 246-7
Euclid 148-51; criticism of 278-9
evidence, rule of 10, 13-14, 85-6,409,437, 484,
572-74, 637; and attention, freedom, suspension
ofjudgment288, 290-4, 529, 569; in general,
153--4, 176, 206, 209, 215, 279-80, 367,455,
463, 481' 483--4
evidence, sensible 61-2, 559-60
evil4, 766-7; and privation of Good 347~, 391-2,
556; real347~. 391; worse than nothingness
595
exact sciences: related to geometry 427-9; inexact
in their application (astronomy) 254-7, 295-6,
428-9; and mechanics: 428-9; and music; 428;
see also motion, physics, stars, etc.
existence: of bodies 48-9, 217-18, 229, 237,283,
481-2, 568fT., 621-2,624, 626; of the soul xix,
237~. 480; set also God, as Infinite Being
experience, ste inner sensation
explosions (mines, gunpowder) 276, 503, 522,
694fT.
extension: as essence of matter 198, 230, 243--5,
484, 560 infinite and infinitely divisible 25-9,
204, 247, 274, 693, 697, 744; idea of 49, 244;
intelligible 320, 624fT; modes of (figure and
motion) 2-3,48-9, 223, 230-1, 247,254, 462;
relath·e 28-30, 31, 37~
eye: accommodation of723, 736, 742; choroid or
u>·ea 71, 721, 731-2; ciliary ligaments 43, 722,
733, 736-7, 741; cornea 721, 736; crystalline lens
28, 43, 71,722-3, 735fT.; general description of
43, 56-7,71-2, 720ff.; humours (aqueous,
crystalline, vitreous) 28, 43, 722, 734-6, 739; iris
and pupil43, 71-2, 721-2, 733--5, 741; muscles
of 43, 723, 736-9; optic nerve 43, 46, 56,71-2,
689, 693, 716, 723,731-2, 740-1; retina 28, 43,
71-2, 721-6, 731-3, 736, 738, 745; retinal image
34, 43-5, 46, 56-7, 71-2, 732-3, 735, 738, 745
faculties of the soul 2, 560, 622; imaginary
(Scholastic) 30, 75, 220, 230, 242, 275, 443, 449,
455, 466, 589-90, 622, 642-3, 657~. 669-70
faith and reason 14, 139, 158, 205, 245-6, 279-80,
329, 367, 529, 573, 575;
set also authority
fermentation: of animal spirits 502--4, 508---9, 661;
of blood 91,94-5, 97 (and air .153-4, 503, 505,
521-2, 661); of humors, 35.l-4; ofliquors, 205,
506-7, 69'!
fevers 50.l; fourth fever and quinquina 455

General index

fibers of the brain 88, II a-ll, 114--15, 13a-3
figure: mode of extension 2-3, 33-5, 59, 74, 75,
19a-200, 203, 207, 218, 273, 432 and
configuration 2-3; and motion 567, 593,653
figures: examples of ideas 59, 104,217-18,223-7,
231, 232, 614, 625, 633,638
fine minds 155~. 163, 190; superficiall56-7, 277
fire: generation of 694ff.; Scholastic example of
242, 276, 316, 443-4, 497
flatterers 305~. 335~
fluidity, see matter
Fonesca, P., 659, 661
Fontenelle, B., xix, xxi
food 645-6
force: centrifugal698--9, 703-4, 706, 710, 712-13,
717, 748; composition of; see motion
form of the body. See soul, form of the body
form, substantial (Scholastic) 74--5, 230, 242, 275,
279, 353, 371,443-4, 449, 511, 514, 643,658,
661
Foucher, S., xiv-xv
freedom: definition of 5, 9; consciousness of 238,
552, 554, 669, 762ff; of indifference 553, and
free will 557, 563
freedom of Adam: complete, 21-2, 563-4;
corrupted by sin 23, see also Original Sin, effects
of; and grace, set grace, image of the balance of
Jesus Christ
freedom, use of human and God 205, and Grace,
55; and morals 554--5, 668--9; pedagogy for
"setting free" 249, 312, 344--5, 357, 548--9, 572,
582, 597; Su also consent, its suspension;
evidence, rule of and judgment, suspension of
frequency of vibrations, 689-91, 693, 696, 716
friendship 33a-1, 33~, 651
Galileo 139, 328--9
Gassendists 659
generalizations, abusive 13a-3, 157, 253, 258--9
geometry: fecundity of271; as model of knowledge
12,209, 271, 278, 560; its pedagogy 104--5,
149-51, 209, 427-30; utility of 419-30
geometry, natural41-2, 733-4, 746-7
Gilbert, W. 136
gnat: as illustration of smallness 26-8, 250
God
--acts only tor Himself nii-niii, 211, 2H, 26t.-7,
271, 293-4, 570--l!O, 589-90, 649
--alone adorable lllh, 213, 311, 327--S, 379,447
-as author of nature, stt JudltfllCnts, natural
--as creator .11>7, 41>3--4, 466, 471, 574, 620
- -as cfli<·adous .-ausc 415, 101, 211, 22h, 2.1+--5,
.l07, .l!0-11, 441>-52, 515,547,551--2,555,565,
h574>1,hh2-.l,hh9-7.1,bHI, 7.1.1-4, 739-40,
744, 746; and 1>reserntinn and <'otUimtc<l
•·reatiou 21>1>, 5 H>- 27, 551, 554, 51>9, bl.l
-as infinite Hcing (lie Whnls) 229, l.ll, 237,

769

25a-1, 317-18,618, 623-4; infinite and
infinitely perfect 241-2, 25a-1; proofs of
existence of, 232-3,270,293,294,316-23,
481-2, 568, 621-2
--as Father of Light 68, 222, 231-2
-humanized 250-1,743--4
-idea of232, 236-7,317-18,322-3,481-2,568,
616, 621-2, 640, 743; su also Knowledge, of
God
-incomprehensible 98, 204--5, 231
-infallible 482, 572-3, 575
-love of, for Himself266-7, 330, 364, 620
--as mind 250-1
-perfect simplicity of231-2, 235,618
--as place of minds, 230, 235; stt also Union and
Vision in God
-power of 205, 222, 230-1, 235, 245, 447-52, 465,
580, 640, 657, 740
-will of229, 231,234,291,338--40,587,615,666
-wisdom of, and Pro,·idence 47,98--9, 113, 119,
230, 235, 307, 353, 457,465, 586-7, 660, 666-7,
718--20, 733ff.
-Su also Good; Being; Holy Spirit; Jesus Christ;
PrO\·idence; Reason and faith, universal;
Simplicity of divine ways; Trinity; Union; and
Vision in God
gods, pagan 588
good~. 21, 76-7, 211-12, 267-S, 287, 363,499,
547-51, 545-5; general (sovereign, uni,·ersal),
see God, will of
goodness 8--10
goods, particular (honors, riches, health) xix, 5,
19--21, 76-7, 128--9, 139, 168, 213-14, 261-2,
266-7,270,278,284, 29a-1, 30~. 310-11,
381, 391, 448--9,450, 547-55, 682, 649-50
Gospel: its teaching 23, 101, 128, 145, 171, 181,
262, 297, 308, 361, 485~. 667
grace: general laws, order of grace 14, 66tt-7; image
of the balance 21, 23,310,386, 567; its efficacy
641--42; ofJesus Christ, prevenient pleasure 21,
23, 77, 123, 128, 178--9,183,206, 213-H, 310,
342,356,360,361-2,366,551,555, 56t.-7, 581,
641, 655, 66t.-7; and nature 340; sufficient for
light 213-14,551. 581. 58+-5
Guericke, 0. von, 520
habits: bodily 10!>-9, 121, 132,3, 389,5011, 578;
spiritual 54CJ, 577- -S, 51!4, 5Hb, 597, bOb, 6.12-7
hair: whitening of 2011; inscnsibilitv of 36ti
happiness: as !(Oal nf all niii -xix, i, 212, 27CJ, 21!/,
.174; mmcs from Gnd 179, 2.15, .11>.1-5, 1>82 -3
hardnl'SS :~tt matter
harmnm· oft he sphcm; 2 55

Hann, W IJ9
hatred .l70 -I, 397, 405- b, 551>, h 19, h55, ''''"
il\crstun

hcahh 26.1, 1>44 S,

.'<''

,,/soprcscnatinn nt'litc

770

General index

heart 96--7; first living (scholastic) 465; formation
of~; and internal dispositions 213, 597;
heat of 106, 505; and internal dispositions 213,
597; as seat of the passions 97; structure of 505
heat: 710, 719; and cold, as modifications of the
soul 54--5, 56, 58--9, 65
heredity of acquired dispositions 117,121, 167,
121-2, 601-3
heresies 205-41, 281
Hevelius, J. 135
Hippocrates 285
history: and contingent truth I 5; uselessness of
140, 184, 188, 209, 292, 297-8, 388,409,
462-3
Holy Spirit 235, 246, 298, 361, 620
Hume, D. xix, xxii,
hypocrites 258, 292-3
idea
-in broad sense, representation of modalities xvi,
xix, 2-3,48--9, 102-4, 105, 239-40, 561
-dear and distinct, rule of truth 79--80, 83, 246,
315-17, 324--5, 395, 437-8, 440,453, 455, 479,
482-3,489, SOl, 528,461, 610,612,621,626
.-.,!istinguished from modification of the soul
228--9. 238, 624
-efficacious 232-3, 322-3; effects of, on the soul,
so, 55, 80, 82,213, 217-18, 242, 560
-111td eternal models 228--30
---general, 223-4, 226--7, 232, 241-2, 244--6,444,
639
-immutable 320, 613ff.
-innate 226--7, 627...,<!
-of numbers and extension 237...,<!, 482-3, 633ff;
su also figures, examples of ideas
-particular 226--7, 627...,<!
-produced by the sou1222-5
-received by the understanding 2-4
-seen in God 229-31, 233-4, 237, 624-41
-of species (scholastic) 68
-and spiritual beings 218, 222-3,482,618--19
-in technical sense, 14, 59, 63, 102, 217-19,
222-7, 232-9 passim, 262-3, 624--5
-uncreated 227
-see also Archetypes and eternal models; God,
idea of; Infinity; soul, absence of clear idea of;
and vision in God
idolatry 154-41, 159-411
ignorance 13, 153-4, 189,212,275,378,591
illness 135-36, 546-8
image: distinct from idea 227; regulated by idea
224
image of God, man created in x,·ii, 180, 222, 235,
250
imagination il, .l, 16-17, 26, 65, 79, 87-195 passim.
esp. 87-9; contagion of 191!-9, 22J-4, 261-2,
29t,, 32~>- 1•.m. 344, 349-50, .171, 3711, 3711,

401-2,415-16, 575-41, 607...,<!, 610; definition of
99, 134, I61-2
imitation 113, 116--I7, I61-2, I67-7I, I95
impenetrability 220-2I, 243,455, 500
impulse of the soul: constancy of 549-50; in order
to go farther 4-41, 233, 266--7, 390-I, 548--50,
560; its determination 5, 265-7, 347-8, 350,
392-3,448--50, 504, 548, 550-I, 668--71,678--9
imputation 586, 597, 605-41
Incarnation 205, 235, 367, 4I7-I8, 485-41, 564,
575, 583, 598, 824
inconstancy 90, 2II, 2I 5
inclinations xiv, 2, 4--5,9, II, I7, 64, I20-9, I62,
I99, 2II, 265-336 passim, esp. 266--8; definition
and classification of336-8, 373-4,527,647,649
inclination of bodies (Scholastic) 511
incorruptible hea,·ens (Scholastic) 256--7, 469-71,
676
indiscernibles, denied 13I, I 59,253-4
individual differences: and age 255; and climate
I3I, I34; of constitution 64, 89-90,92, 95;
among countries 95, 6IO, in social conditions
and life style 134, 136--7, 344; of temperament
373-5, 403-30
infinity 25, 28--9, 203-4,207, 211-I2, 22I, 226--7,
229, 23I-2, 237, 269-70, 323,433, 454, 470,
481, 6I4-I6, 624, HI, 743; calculable relations
of28--9, 226--7, 32I-2.
inner sensation 49, 58, 63, 77, I98, 202, 2I8, 228,
236--9, 265-41, 307, 397...,<!, 480-I, 547, 550,
552-4, 579, 58 I, 587, 62I, 625, 633, 637,654,
669, 67I, 742; see also consciousness
insects 25-41, 30-I, 296--7, 744, 747
institution of nature 580, 645; see also Judgments,
natural and Preservation of life
intellect, active and passive (Scholastic) 220
Intellection, pure I6--I7, 59, 79-80, I27, 203, 224,
322, 337...,<!; stt also understanding
intelligences, pure, set angels
intelligible bodies, 572-3; set also world, intelligble
intelligible figures 625ff.
intelligible particulars 626ff.
intention (Scholastic) 322; see also intentional species
intentional species (Scholastic) 3I, 68, 220-I, 225;
impressed 220
internal master IO, 13, 237, 262, 379, 485-41,
528--9, 543, 575-41, 623-4, 639, 649-52
Israelites in the desert 447, 45I
James I oft:ngland 119, I20, I22
Jansenism xvi-xvii, xx
Jerome, St. 609
jesuits viii,

X\'i

Jesus Christ 23, 179, 1113, I94, 235, 247, 2511, 272,
.llfl, 5114, SHI>, 595- 7, 616,624, 6.10, 640, 651~ I,
6117- II, 1>114; '" <ll<o Gospel, its tea<·hing; Grace,
of jesus Christ; and Incarnation

General index

Joshua, 328-9
joy of the mind and the senses 355-6,361-2, 387,
407, 564-5, 581, 654--5; and passion 374--5, 391,
393,396
judgement: false, and passion 416; false, and
sensation 35-6, 52, 54-60 passim, 63, 66-70;
suspension of70, 83, 247, 388; and will, xii, 7-8,
200-48, 347, 394, 396-7, 398-9, 401-2; su also
consent, its suspension and prejudice
judgements, natural xxiii, 34-6,41-2,44--7, 52-3,
55, 58-9, 66-9, 574--5, 647, 745-6
Jupiter 382, 489; diameter and revolution of, 459,
705; satellites of459, 691,703
just, 214, 618, 637, 650
justice 262, 617
Kepler,]. 459, 704--5
knowledge: of bodies, 220-9, 234--7, 620-1; four
modes of236-8; of God 218-19, 232-3, 236-7,
291, 296-7; of other minds 218-19, 236-7,
239-40; ofself89-90, 147, 199,200-2,228,
237-9, 291-2, 297, 352, 373, 480-1, 621, 743; see
also God, idea of; soul, absence of clear idea of;
and vision in God
Koran, 182-3
La Cerda,]. L. de 144--5
La Forge, L. de ix
Lamy, B. xx
Lamy, F., xix, 391
language: different 62, 101-3, 149-50, 285, 295,
297-8, 302-4, 591, 672fT; and equi,·ocation of
words 238, 395-6, 489-94, 639fT., 656, 678; as
habitual mechanism 108, 595-6; and learning
127-238-9, 542, 639; and sensible signs, 80, 218,
344-6, 394--5, 416-17; and signs of institution
62, 101-5, 218; as social bond 540-1
La Ville, L. de ni
laws (general) of determination and communication
4, 224--5, .m. 391,425-7,448.451,465,499,
515-20,524-6,550,571,580-1,589,594,612,
623, 659-65, 669-70, 677-9, 718, 7.l9-43
learned, the 9, 12-13, U!>-9, 143, 151, 152-4,
207-10,2%-304, 381~81. 402,454, 462-.l, 542,
1>35
I.eeuwenhnc:k, A. ,·an 747
l.eihniz, G. vii, xi, x,·iii·-xix
I.elevcl, II. xx-xxi
I .cu<·it>pus I 88
l.ihertinc:s (Free: Thinkers) 259, 27'1
lile (dclinitinn), 465, 4'14 ·5; .<a 11111• J>rcS<natinn nf
tile
li!(ht: ;maln~v nf, with snund hH'I, 716; Cartesian
t.·xplan;ltiun nf 457, 5lh; aml•.:rnssintt ofr01~·s
1>'11, b'15, 715; rcctilitll'ar propa(l:atinn nf7111,
72-J, 740, 745; rdlertinn nf b115, 70S, 7tlbll';
rcfra.·tinn nf 45, 11151f, 7l2. 7ll>ll., 74'1 5.1;

771

speed of457, 488, 690; and ,·ision, 723-5,731,
739-40; whiteness of 689, 724; stt also colors,
explained by frequency of vibrations
Light ofthe Truth 68, 229, 23!, 235, 272, 357,
363-6, 369-70, 406, 409,448-9, 485-{), 528-9,
547, 563,611,621, 629-90
liver97, 107,353
Locke, ]. xxii
logic, Scholastic, 242-7, 250, 437, 440, 443, 453,
467,479, 512, 514, 639-40, 670
love: commanded by charity 161-2,281, 331,
561>-7, 586,650, 655, 680; of God 8-9, 21,
Zll-12, 232-3, 266-8, 271, 287, 311,345, 348,
359-60, 364--7, 391,446-7,452, 549-50, 580,
582, 584--5, 616,649, 680-2; habitual, 214, 567,
655; instinctive, and by choice 21, 123, 213-14,
580, 584--5, 654--5; and knowledge 200-2, 567,
654; in man 5-{), 9-10
machine, the body as ix, 98, ZOO, 332-3, 351-2,
357, 376-7, 465, 646, 652; set also Animal
machines
madness 48, 70,115,125-7,134, 163-5, 180, 191,
194, 217, 399,481, 570-Z; and illness 134; and
incoherence 162-3; and visionaries of
imagination (sorcerers) 164--5, 191, 193-4; and
visionaries of sense 70, 164--5, 570-1
magnet, 136, 462, 498-502
Mairan, Dourtous de xix-xx
man: composed of mind and body 244; greater or
smaller (hypothesis) 29-30; one body of, 359,
368; as rational animal613; vocation of, to God
336; Set also adult; Image of God; Individual
differences
manners sensible 80-1, 141-2, 166, 168, 171-Z,
184--5
Manin, A. (pseud. Ambrosius Victor) 62'1, 676
mathematics 483-4; leading to God 292, 367
matter 2-4, 82-3, 243-7, 718; of the henens
(Scholastic) 83, 255-7; pure and impure, 82-3;
set also body; extension~ and matter, subtle or tine
matter extension, di,·isihility: hardness 523, 525,
691-2, 697, 710, 719; liquid and solidilicatinn
276,443-4
matter, subtle or line, .10, Z7b, 315, 499, 522- 5,
059, bbl. 663, 687-'10, 6'14- 705,717
medicine 15. 207~. 215,242,263,285-6..1M3,
443, 454-5, b+41T., 1>52
menmry, IOb-9, l.ll-!, l.l/. H, Hil-l, 14'1 -~0.
17.1, IH7-X, 261, 40'1, 481~-1. ~Ti-H, ~MS. h.17
mctaphvsi<'S IS, 15~ -hO, ! l.l, .ll5, .lh7, 7!tl
microst.'OJlil· tlhscnatitms 2h .J. 3~ -<1, 22.1, h<IN,

744,747
mimi: l"tltnp;trcd \\ith moltter 2. S. ·BI-2.. ~47. f,21.
65.1~ hl'lWl't:n (Jc)(l omd hndies xh \hi .U7; in
itsdfl~! N; ns \\l'otknl·ss Hh, l.l'l; nut muH·c.l h~
hud~ 4.. H; sa til~, ;lllt!d!rro ;~nd snul

772

General index

miracle 31,272,329,585,603,663,666,668,673,
676
mite 25--8
modifications (modes) of mind 2-3, 198,202,218,
238-9, 413; see also idea, distinguished from
modifications of the soul
monsters 115-19, 568, 588-90, 665
Montaigne, M. 173-4, 184--90, 607-8
moon: relief of 135, 570--1; lunar year 39;
magnification of, at the horizon 3~. 44--5, 68-9;
selonography 296; sensible appearance of 135
morals 10--11, 15, 23,76-77, 101, 121-2, 128-9,
151, 179, 182,207,213--15,258-9,270--1,285,
289, 295, 297, 308, 311-12, 369, 391, 554, 574,
586, 607, 649-50, 680--1
Moses 463, 6.l0
mother, .<u child and pregnancy
motion: and intelligble extension 627; mode of
extension 2, 4, .l7-8, 198-9,246,257, 640; nonnecessary mode 198, 265,653, 660--1, 718;
relative 37-9; voluntary, 595--{); without efficacy
or motor forc-e 448-0,473,515-16,677
--<1f members, 502, 508-9; determination by soul
and its limits 107, 224, 449-50, 669-71;
involuntary 96, 596; voluntary, natural, or
convulsive 502, 504-5, 507--8
-natural, violent (Scholastic) 74-5, 467-71,
472-3, 642-3
-rectilinear 4, 456-9, 460--2, 457--{)8, 665;
acceleration 421-4; collision and communication
of 424--7 (of two balls 225); compounded
419-27; and rebound 702, 714-5; uniform 421
-relati,·e 640; as principle of all change 660--1,
718; ship as example of 39
muscles 107--8, 502-3
music 64, 76, 108, 427-9
mysteries of the faith 14, 205--{), 245-7, 561; set
also Eucharist Incarnation and Trinity
natural and supernatural 667--8
natural prayer 529, 559
nature (Scholastic) 37, 46-7, 443-5,459, 512, 589,
622-3,642-3,657, 659, 662, 667--8, 673, 675--{),
681,743
nenes 49-50; of the face 98, .l54-5; of the heart
96-X, 354; principal 96-9; structure of H7-8
1\ewton, 1., 689, 707, 710, 716, 724
nobility, people of 1611-70, .H3, .U!O, 417

Nurris, J. xxii
1\ostradamus, \1. lH2
nothin~ness: not intended by God 517; object of
a\ersinn 390 ·I; unintelli~ihle, 21H, 24H--IJ, 315,
.l20-l, .126, 4HI, 557; .w aim annihilation anJ
e\iJ
novelty: deSire fi>r, in mathematics 415; in
philosophy and thenlo!{y IW. 145-6, ISJ 4,
162,246, 27H -11, 28.l 5, 2'1'1, .lH.l- 4. 527

obscurity and confusion 203-4, 223, 227, 232,
453-5, 486, 640
occasional causes ix, xix; and bodies among
themseh·es 223-5, 447-9, 451; of error 16, 248;
and soul and body 3-4, 20, 59, 64, 76-7, 101-2,
112-13, 118-19,235, 338-9,449-50, 621-2,
669-70, 734; and soul and ideas 7--8, 224-5, 227,
234-6, 409-10, 448-50, 559--{)0, 669, 671; see
also motion
Oratory viii, x, xx
order 77, 234-5, 557, 577, 579-83, 586ff., 593ff.,
598, 601, 603, 616ff., 637, 649-51, 666-7; and
eternal law of hierarchy of perfections 5, 262,
287,308,314,613-14, 617-19; of nature 733,
742-3
organs of sense, 49-50, 87-8
Original Sin: effects of xi\·, xlvi, I, 62-3, 77, 120,
18.l, 241-9,266-7,308,314,339-42,349,356,
360, 365, 485--{), 556-7, 580, 584ff., 596-9, 657;
explanation of302-7, 327,342,581-2, 593, 595;
transmission of 120, 122-3, 195, 582-3,
599--{)01, 606
pagan 598, 617, 684
pain: as modification of the soul 3, 49-52, 54-5,
57-9, 61-2, 72, 76-7, 128, 200--2, 213, 570, 595,
689; as natural character of evil 20--1, 23, 201,
307, 309, 326, 341, 343, 347--8, 359-0, 391,

592
painter and portrait 223-4, 383
pancreas 97, 354
passion: as cause of error xi,·, 17, 163, 165, 184-5,
214, 259, 276, 345, 357, 362, 367, 369-72,
378-84, 387-8, 399-400, 404--7; classification of
86, 374-75, 391, 393, 395-7; as contrary to Stoic
impassivity 179,341-3,358-9, 360--1; definition
of 347-52, 354-6; expression o£98-9, 350--2,
376-S;function of 19, 101, 117, 338-40, 343--5,
350--1,362,376-8,406-7, 412; ,.s. judgment
200--2
passions, particular 374-5, 394-7; ambition 391;
astonishment, terror 112. 386; courage,
emulation, irresolution, cowardly fear, gladness,
glory, fnor, recognition, laughter, disgust,
boredom, indignation 395--{); este-em,
,·eneration,rontempt, disdain, pride (q.v.),
haughtiness 375-8; ~enerosity and boldness 371>,
3HO-I, J94-l>; hope, fear, shame, impudence,
anger, pity, mockery, regret 394-7, 402--.l;
humilitv, sclf-cnntemJ>t, respect lor others,
b;lSeness, timiditv .l76 -7; jealousy .l70, W7;
physioln~i,·al rh;nges "ruught hy 'II>- '1.
1111-2, 112 .IJ, 117-1'1, Ill 2•.HH 51, 40.l; .
rt.·vcni!C .l 11h- 7; \·icinu~ humilily. mcoumcs!\ uf
spirit .l7H
I'Cl"lJUet, J. '12
pedantry I HS IJ

General index

penance 308-10, 313-14, 342, 485, 631
perception: in broad sense 7~. 16-17, 274, 411;
compound 733-34; nonrepresentative 320-1
perfections (intelligible) 229-30, 617-18, 625, 627
Peripatetics 132, 220-1, 256,492-3,673-4, 677; see
also Scholastics
persuasion 171-3, 176
philosophers 12-15, 57,1!0--1, 86, 132, 140, 143,
173-4, 188-90, 206-9, 232, 240-1, 246-7, 250,
253-4, 259-60, 277-8, 280-2, 292, 366, 379,
446,454--5, 486-7, 529, 657fT., 665, 673; see also
Academics, Canesians, Peripatetics and
Scholastics
philosophy: new, true 86, 308, 342, 451-2, 681-2;
pagan 356, 446-52, 466, 657, 662, 676
physics: its cenainty 718, 732; its errors 82-3, 215,
242-3, 252, 257, 285, 483-4, 677
physics in general, method for: definition of terms
159-60; experiments 159,484,491,517-21,
689fT., 706, 709, 712, 716-19, 729; and geometry
12; instruments for 503-4, 520-1, 602;
microscope 26, 38, 221, 694, 698, 744, 747;
principles and verification of proofs 695-6;
probability 689; reasoning and verification 517,
704ff., 718: telescope 135,221,460, 470, 704-6,
711
planets: apparent diameter of 45, 710-11; in center
of a mnex 458-9, 700ff.; enumeration of 462;
false explanations of motions of 255; and
Kepler's rule 459, 703-5; nature and
equilibrium of 462; relativity of reciprocal
motion of 39; their diameter and period 459
plants: growth of, as mark of intelligence 353-4,
494--5
Plato 139-40, 1~. 169-70, 188,215,280,282,
383,409
pleasure: comes from God 76-7,359-60,375,
446-7,451-2, 684; as distinct from love, 567,
593, 653-5; as modification of the soul, 3-4,
51-2, 64--5,201-2, 213, 288, 581 opposed to
pain 200-2, 382, 689; sensible, and solid
happiness 77-8,269--70, 2M, 288,.113-14,
359-62, 558; as sign of corporeal good 19-23,
52,310,341-2, .159, 419, 654; as sign of wellbeing 269, 288-9, 307-11, .158-60, 365, 588
Plutarch 144--5, 169-70
poetry 262, 292, 297, 298, .188
pnlitil·al authority; sa politics
pol it it·s: as probable science I 5, I Oh; and the l'rince
11>11-71, B 1-4, ·H7, 588
Pmnpon;~ui, 1'. 145
putcnl·}': as t•lJUin>ealtcrm b.. I. -l
powers (Srholastic) 5'10, hh7, 1>71~ I, h78 -'1
pn·ripitation 12 1.1, 2~'1- Sll. !Sl, 52'1
pn·gn;~rwy,si~nsofll2, 111>-17, 11 11
pn·judin·14,.11,h7,84.81>, l2i, 1.11, I.U, 15114,
~'l.l -1, S.l'llf, 5X7, f~li, l>t~l. f>71ltf., h8~

773

preservation oflife 19-20, 21-5,29--30, 32, 46,
50-2, 55, 59,65-9, 75, 77, 85, 106, 112, 200,
261-3, 288-9, 339-40, 344--5, 348, 352, 359,
569, 593, 599, 644-8, 660, 689, 740
pressure (ex. of balloon) 687-9
pressure vibrations 689--90, 708-11
Prestet,). xviii
prevenient pleasure and pre\"enient delight 20-3,
128-9,213-14,313-15,360-2,366-7, 555; of
the elect, 288, 326; su also grace
pride 11!0--1, 183, 187~. 205-6,222, 228, 376,
378-9,415, 597-9
probability (or plausibility) 10-12, 15, 1.18, 152,
209, 235, 387~. 453, 486, 573-4
problems, kinds of 488-90, 496-7, 505-6
prompters 623, 65 I
proof of religion 586; sensible 324, 342-3, 365,
572, 651, 673-74; oftheoloto. 578; su also
demonstration God, as infinite Being
Pro,·idence xi, xix, xx, 98-9, 205, 579, 718, 720,
740fT.
Pyrrhonians 189
qualitati,·e differences: honey and salt as examples
73-5
qualities: elementary 132, 242, 285,472, 473-9;
impressed, 37; magnetic 136, 499--500;
Scholastic, real, occult (in general) 30-1,74--5,
242,275-6,446,449,514,590,642-3,658, 661;
secondary 242; sensible, modifications of the
soul, relatin 48-49, 52, 5-1-66, 69-70, 73-4, 79,
228, 441-4, 475-6, 569-70
rabbis 139, 151,292,295,298
ray, luminious 724--5, 739, 745
reason and faith lh·, 23, 145; and conscience I 0-11,
215, 357, 361-2,409, 480, 548-9, 652; and
education 128-9; uni,·ersal613-15
reasoning 7~. 733-4, 74~
Regis, P.S. X\·ii-niii, xxi
relations constituting truth, as object of judgntcnt
and reasoning7-9, 32, 16-1,212-13,234,252-.1,
.l64, 411, 427, 4.l.l-5, 438-9,455, 488-9.-196-8.
617-18, 63h
religious orders 258-9, 281l-l, .171
Republic of Letters, 302
resemblance 252-5, 258; .<c'r al.<n !(cneralizations
rcspc'<.·t 68-l- 5
respiration '14-5
rest 514,520,51-1-6,549,551, 1>'12, h'lh
restlessness uf will 269- -7 2, "!.15. 3h2, ~Z"i
rhetoric asartnfpcrsua.lin~ 171-7, ~'14, .\Ill.
.112 .1 ..1.11>..H-1 ..l'15, hiO; clnqucnn· in Kll I,
155,417 IX. ~17. hill. ti~un·s ;111<1 ,r,·k in Xll I.
Ill+ 5, 157.172 ..(., 141l.41M) 1,417,hllX Ill
Rin·ioli,J.II. 1.15
Ruhio (Rm·in). :\. 1>5'1

774

General index

Sacred Scripture: account of Genesis in 463-5,
742; its study 297~. 545; its teaching I, 157~.
194, 232-3, 250, 575, 780--1; its vocabulary,
672-5, 678; Joshua and mo,·ement of the earth
in 329; See also Gospel and Holy Spirit
sadness 201, 355--{), 376, 387, 407, 655; as passion
374-75, 391-3, 396
salvation 486--7, 666
Saturn: diameter and revolution of 459; rings or
satellites of 296, 459
Sa vile, H. 148--50
Scaligcr,]. 301
Scholastics 73-5, 102, 132, 205--{), 242, 444, 678;
su also Aristotle; commentators; faculties of the
soul, imaginary; form, substantial; peripatetics;
philosophers; and <!Ualities, Scholastic
Sl·icnces: true, 481, 48.1-4; imaginary or false 15,
73, 127-8. 141, 147-51, 207~. 215, 291-2; ·'"
also geometry
seeds; encapsulated to infinity 26--7, 118, 353, 741tf.
self-love 147~. 161, 287-89, 391. 619, 667
Seneca 17~3. 356,451,486--7.553,607-8
sensation: as element of passion 348--50, 355--{); as
e<lui,·ocal term 493; mechanisms of 51}- I, 56--7.
62-3, 65--{); pre\·enient 580, 592-4
sensation as modification of soul and not object
2-4, 17, 73, 75, 83-4, 201-2, 213, 228, 234,626,
63+-5, 689
sensation, false localization of 54-7; its degrees
57~. 200--1; its four elements 52-3; and organs
of sense 28, 50--2, 62-3, 65--{), 69, 239, 441-2;
sources of error in 52-72, 239
sense, common (Scholastic) 89. 220. 571
sense: as distinct from the imagination 16--17,
79-80, 87~; mistaken 12, 17-18, 19-86 passim,
261-2. 324-5, 569; as passive faculty of soul3-4,
17, 79-80, 337, 416--17; as positive function 19,
2.1-4, 52, 80, 261-2, 644, 646
sensible vision: and consecutive colors 59--{)0, 72;
errors of 25-47, 67--{)8, 774ff.; mechanism for
56--7,689-90,714, 731-3; and visual angles
·H-2.45
sentiment: synonymus with sensation 17
serpent, philosophy of 451
signs, su connection between thoughts and
cerebral traces; language, and sensible signs, and
lan~tuage, and signs of institution
simple to complex, as method 4.17-8, 453-4,
463-4, 528
simplicity of dh·ine ways .11, II 8--19, 227, 230--1,
456. 458-9, 46.1-5. 568-9, 585, 587, 589-91>,
M.lff, 718, 7W-40, 742 3, 741>
'implicity (Scholastic) of body, nf motion
468 ·72
Simplicius 9, 144, 171! ·'1, 44'1, 547, SKS, 59h, I• I K.
1169; .<a ulm Ori~inal Sin
'in, original, .~a ()riginal Sin

sinner, 650, 666--7
size, relati,·e 28--32, 34-5, 37-8
sloth, 138,414-15
society, see politics, and the Prince and Union,
with others
Sorbonne viii
sorcerers 191-4
soul; always thinks 203, 241, 431; absence of clear
idea of 58, 62-3, 199-202, 237-9, 319-32, 550,
554, 561, 577-8, 621,633-8, 653-4; as distinct
from body Iii, 2, 48--9, 57, 101-2, 202, 219, 237,
238-40,249-50,253,272-4,364-6,480--1,
491-2, 547, 633-4, 669; error about bodily soul
57, 62-3, 202, 253, 480, 492; errors about
functions of 494--{); and eternal model 626; and
form of the body xlv, 50--1,67-8,88--9,217,
219,324, 582; immortal2, 143-5, 172, 189,200,
201-2, 206, 218--19, 238--9, 247, 272-4, 293-4,
308, 491-2, 636--7; ser also existence, of the soul;
mind; and thought, as essence of mind
sound: and exact relations 636; frequency of
,·ibrations and tones 690,693, 716; speed of
690
species, continuity of 117-18, 601-2, 741-2
speed, relative 37-8; see also motion
Spelman, C. 371
Spinoza, B. xix-xx
spleen 97, 354
square, decomposition of, into figures 273-4
star: as example of an object immediately joined to
the soul67-8, 217
stars: apparent distance of, 42-4, 255; apparent size
of710--ll; new stars 460; parallax of 460;
relative motion of 38-9; transformation of, into
planets 458; twinkling 711
stoics, 77, 176--83 passim, 307,310,341-3,359,
.161, 571
Suarez, Fr., 658--9, 661, 679
substance: and accident (Scholastic) 659; and
matter (Scholastic) 82; and mode 513,549, 551,
distinguished from being, 223; destruction of
273-4
sun: apparent diameter of 32; apparent distance of
42; in center of !(Teat mrtex 457-9, 696, 6911,
7112; as example of object united to soul, 69,217,
(125; immobility of 329; magnification of~ at
horizun, 69; solar year .l9; as source of light 716;
sunspots, 257; vi,·ifyin~t 447, 6I1X
superstition 191-2, 292 -.l, .121>--8, .145, f>X4
sympathy and antipathy 4117; tK"cult <!Uality nf
514
sysrem (~cnerally pejorative) 152 ..1, 411>, 4ll,
t.7X
la"ilc: ;as moc.lifiL";IIion of tlu· !<.mil 64
Tcrtullian 57, 144 5, 17.1 4, 1107 II
theater 1'17.llll

General index

Theresa of Avila, St. 651
theology, 145--6, 205--6, 245-7, 668, 676,678-80
Thomas Aquinas, St. 144, 158-9,229,319,371,
625,677
thoracic canal 92
thought: as essence of mind 198, 201-2; 431,
481}-.1, 560, 622; see also soul, always thinks
Thucydides 200, 382
tickling: as modification of the soul 51-2, 57
time (relative) 38-9; see also duration (relative)
tracheal artery 94
transparence 707-8, 714
Trinity 205--{), 234-5, 245--{), 561, 574, 620, 629
truth Iii, 12-13, 35--{), 263,291,363,539-41, 632;
its lo•·e, 133, 306, 639
truth, etemal233-4, 239,433-4, 481}-.1, 569, 586,
613fT; necessary and contingent 15; relativity of
371-2; uncreated 586, 615, 617-18
truths, necessary 15
understanding xiii-xiv, 2-4, 7-9, 16--17, 198,236,
559--60, 762
union: of bodies among themselves 511}-.14, 520--1,
523--6; of minds among themselves 218-19; 564;
of the soul to God 5, 23, 195,218,230,232,
234-s. 236. 241,261, 313-14,337, 363-8.
417-IH, 448, 529, 548-9, 559, 569, 571, 575--{),
587, 597, 604, 613fT., 624, 649; of soul and body
20, 2.l, S{}-.3, 56--7, 59, 62, 64, 101-2, 182, .1,
200, 2.15, 238-9,241-2, 274, 337, 338-9, .HI-3,
345, 348, 360, 363-8, 482, 495--{), 548-9, 569,
580, 582; with others; 112-14, 161-2, 167,
182-3, 187, 195,330-1, 343--5, 352, 377-8, 541,
594-5, 98, 740; .<te also child, and mother and
vision in God
unity 234-5
universe: admirable 256, 273-4, 292,665, 739-40;
age of 146, 270,271--2,742, 747; infinite .l3{}-1;
its creation and presen·ation 463-5

-m.

vanity 143-51, 181, 185-8,207-10,222,228--9,
299, .102, 414-15, 454
•·apours 30, 455; and refraction 45
•·cins: arterial 94, 96--7; axilh1ry 92; <·a•·a 112;
emulgent 97; hll'teal 'n; mesaraic 92

775

Viete, Fr., 209
,-irtue, 77, 129, 290-1, 363, 365
,-irtues, impressed 446, 466, 589-90, 642-3, 658,
674, 676; see also faculties, imaginary
(Scholastic)

Yision, sensible, see sensible vision
Visionaries 70, 164--{), 171,180, 191,301,613
vision in God 68-9, 195,219,230-2,234-5,313.
318,363-4,366--7, 622fT.; see also idea, seen in
God and union, of the soul to God
vision of God, 230-1, 233-4, 236--7
\ital spirits (Scholastic) 285
Voet, G. 293-4
,·oid: denied 457,692,711, horror of 30, 559;
illusion of82-3, 382; relati.-e absence of air,
517-18, 520-1, 694-5, 709
mrtexes 456--62. 465--{), 488, 690, 692, 694fT.,
709fT., 717-19
Walton, C. ,-ii
wax: as illustration of extension 2, 4, 199, 203, 207,
432,640
weight 30,461-2, 471}-.1, 472-3,642-3, 699ff.,
709,711-18
wheat, growth of 353, 494
whole and parts 316, 488-9
will: blind 5 (without efficacy 225, 448, 449-50,
669fT.); in God 741ft.. ; in man xii-n, xxiii, 2,
4-5,7-11,88, 198-9; not essential to the mind
211-12,233,236,261,265,266--7,269-70.
337-8, 350, 548, 551, 554-5, 559--{)0
Willis Th. 88, 97, 98
wine 92-3, Ill, 192, 448, 505
wisdom, see God and pro,·idence
women 130-1, 179,344,454, 542,599--601,6.15
wonder 347, 376, 377, 381-4, 385-8, 454, 607
word 2.H-5, 2i2, 587, 649; .w 11l.<o God, internal
master, and Trinity
work of God: compared to methods IIX--19. 743
world 29-.10; according to Aristotle 467--71;
intelligihle 222,228, 2.15, 2.17, 364, 57!-.1, 621>

Zeno .159
Zenuphon 382

Cambridge texts in the history of philosophy

Titles published in the series thus far
Antoine Arnauld and Pierre Nicole Logic or the .4rt of Thinking {edited by Jill Vance
Buroker)
Boyle A Free Enquiry into the Vulgarly Received Notion ofNature {edited by Edward B.
Davis and Michael Hunter)
Conway The Principles of the Most Ancient and Modern Philosophy {edited by Allison P.
Coudert and Taylor Corse)
Cudworth. 4 Treatise Concerning Eternal and Immutable Morali~v with A Treatise of Freewill
{edited by Sarah Hutton)
Descartes Meditations on First Philosophy, with selections from the Objections and Replies
{edited with an introduction by John Cottingham)
Kant The Metaphysics ofMorals {edited by Mary Gregor with an introduction by Roger
Sullivan)
Kant Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics {edited by Gary Hatfield)
La Mettrie Machine Man and Other Writings {edited by Ann Thomson)
Leibniz New Essays on Human Understanding (edited by Peter Remnant and Jonathan
Bennett)
Malebranche Dialogues on Metaphysics and on Religion {edited by Nicholas Jolley and
David Scott)
Malebranche The Search after Truth (edited by Thomas M. Lennon and Paul J.
Olscamp)
Mendelssohn Philosophical Writings (edited and translated by Daniel 0. Dahlstrom)
Nietzsche Human, All Too Human (translated by R. J. Hollingdale with an introduction
by Richard Schacht)
Schleiermacher On Religion: Speeches to its Cultured Despisers (edited by Richard
Crouter)

