KARL MARX
FREDERICK
ENGELS

MANIFESTO
OF THE
COMMUNIST
PARTY
FOREIGN LANGUAGES PRESS
PEKING 1970
First Edition 1965
Second Printing 1968
Third Printing 1970
Prepared © for the Internet by David J. Romagnolo, djr@cruzio.com (November 1997)

PUBLISHER'S NOTE
The present English edition of the Manifesto of tbe Communist Party is a reproduction of the translation made by
Samuel Moore in 1888 from the original German text of 1848 and edited by Frederick Engels. Included in the
present text are Engels's annotations for the English edition of 1888 and the German edition of 1890 as well as all
the authors' prefaces to the various editions.
The notes at the end of the book are based on those given in the Chinese edition of the Manifesto of the
Communist Party, published by the People's Publishing House, Peking, in September 1964.

CONTENTS

PREFACE TO THE GERMAN EDITION OF 1872
PREFACE TO THE RUSSIAN EDITION OF 1882
PREFACE TO THE GERMAN EDITION 0F 1883
PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION OF 1888
PREFACE TO THE GERMAN EDITION OF 1890
PREFACE TO THE POLISH EDITION OF 1892
PREFACE TO THE ITALIAN EDITION OF 1893
I. BOURGEOIS AND PROLETARIANS

1
4
7
9
16
23
26
30

II. PROLETARIANS AND COMMUNISTS
III. SOCIALIST AND COMMUNIST LITERATURE

47
60

1. Reactionary Socialism
a. Feudal Socialism
b. Petty-Bourgeois Socialism
c. German, or "True," Socialism

60
60
62
64

2. Conservative, or Bourgeois, Socialism
3. Critical-Utopian Socialism and Communism

68
69

IV. POSITION OF THE COMMUNISTS IN RELATION TO
74
THE VARIOUS EXISTING OPPOSITION PARTIES
NOTES
74
KARL MARX
FREDERICK ENGELS

MANIFESTO OF
THE COMMUNIST PARTY[1]

Writen between December 1847
and January 1848

Original in German

First published as a pamphlet
in London in February 1848

page 1

PREFACE TO THE GERMAN
EDITION OF 1872[2]

The Communist League, an international association of workers, which could of course be only
a secret one under the conditions obtaining at the time, commissioned the undersigned, at the
Congress held in London in November 1847, to draw up for publication a detailed theoretical and

practical program of the Party. Such was the origin of the following Manifesto, the manuscript of
which travelled to London, to be printed, a few weeks before the February Revolution.[3] First
published in German, it has been republished in that language in at least twelve different editions
in Germany, England and America. It was published in English for the first time in 1850 in the
Red Republican,[4] London, translated by Miss Helen Macfarlane, and in I871 in at least three
different translations in America. A French version first appeared in Paris shortly before the June
insurrection of 1848 and recently in Le Socialiste [5] of New York. A new translation is in the
course of preparation. A Polish version appeared in London shortly after it was first published in
German. A Russian translation was published in Geneva in
page 2

the sixties. Into Danish, too, it was translated shortly after its first appearance.
However much the state of things may have altered during the last twenty-five years, the general
principles laid down in this Manifesto are, on the whole, as correct today as ever. Here and there
some detail might be improved. The practical application of the principles will depend, as the
Manifesto itself states, everywhere and at all times, on the historical conditions for the time being
existing, and, for that reason, no special stress is laid on the revolutionary measures proposed at
the end of Section II. That passage would, in many respects, be very differently worded today. In
view of the gigantic strides of Modern Industry in the last twenty-five years, and of the
accompanying improved and extended party organisation of the working class, in view of the
practical experience gained, first in the February Revolution, and then, still more, in the Paris
Commune, where the proletariat for the first time held political power for two whole months, this
program has in some details become antiquated. One thing especially was proved by the
Commune, viz., that "the working class cannot simply lay hold of the ready-made state machinery,
and wield it for its own purposes." (See The Civil War in France ; Address of the General Council
of the International Working Men's Association, London, Truelove, 1871, p. 15, where this point is
further developed.) Further, it is self-evident that the criticism of socialist literature is deficient in
relation to the present time, because it comes down only to 1847; also, that the remarks on the
relation of the Communists to the various opposition parties (Section IV), although in principle
still correct, yet in practice are antiquated, because the political situation has been entirely
changed, and the progress of history has swept from off the
page 3

earth the greater portion of the political parties there enumerated.
But, then, the Manifesto has become a historical document which we have no longer any right to
alter. A subsequent edition may perhaps appear with an introduction bridging the gap from 1847 to
the present day; this reprint was too unexpected to leave us time for that.
Karl Marx Frederick Engels
London, June 24,1872

page 4

PREFACE TO THE RUSSIAN
EDITION OF 1882[6]

The first Russian edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party, translated by Bakunin, was
published early in the sixties[7] by the printing office of the Kolokol.[8] Then the West could see in
it (the Russian edition of the Manifesto) only a literary curiosity. Such a view would be impossible
today.
What a limited field the proletarian movement still occupied at that time (December 1847) is
most clearly shown by the last section of the Manifesto: the position of the Communists in relation
to the various opposition parties in the various countries. Precisely Russia and the United States
are missing here. It was the time when Russia constituted the last great reserve of all European
reaction, when the United States absorbed the surplus proletarian forces of Europe through
immigration. Both countries provided Europe with raw materials and were at the same time
markets for the sale of its industrial products. At that time both were, therefore, in one way or
another, pillars of the existing European order.
page 5

How very different today! Precisely European immigration fitted North America for a gigantic
agricultural production, whose competition is shaking the very foundations of European landed
property -- large and small. In addition it enabled the United States to exploit its tremendous
industrial resources with an energy and on a scale that must shortly break the industrial monopoly
of Western Europe, and especially of England, existing up to now. Both circumstances react in
revolutionary manner upon America itself. Step by step the small and middle land ownership of
the farmers, the basis of the whole political constitution, is succumbing to the competition of giant
farms; simultaneously, a mass proletariat and a fabulous concentration of capital are developing
for the first time in the industrial regions.
And now Russia! During the Revolution of 1848-49 not only the European princes, but the
European bourgeois as well, found their only salvation from the proletariat, just beginning to
awaken, in Russian intervention. The tsar was proclaimed the chief of European reaction. Today
he is a prisoner of war of the revolution, in Gatchina,[9] and Russia forms the vanguard of
revolutionary action in Europe.
The Communist Manifesto had as its object the proclamation of the inevitably impending
dissolution of modern bourgeois property. But in Russia we find, face to face with the rapidly
developing capitalist swindle and bourgeois landed property, just beginning to develop, more than
half the land owned in common by the peasants. Now the question is: can the Russian
obshchina,[10] though greatly undermined, yet a form of the primeval common ownership of land,
pass directly to the higher form of communist common ownership? Or on the contrary, must it first

pass through the
page 6

same process of dissolution as constitutes the historical evolution of the West?
The only answer to that possible today is this: If the Russian Revolution becomes the signal for
a proletarian revolution in the West, so that both complement each other, the present Russian
common ownership of land may serve as the starting point for a communist development.
Karl Marx F. Engels
London, January 21,1882

page 7

PREFACE TO THE GERMAN
EDITION OF 1883[11]

The preface to the present edition I must, alas, sign alone. Marx, the man to whom the whole
working class of Europe and America owes more than to anyone else, rests at Highgate Cemetery
and over his grave the first grass is already growing. Since his death, there can be even less
thought of revising or supplementing the Manifesto. All the more do I consider it necessary again
to state here the following expressly:
The basic thought running through the Manifesto -- that economic production and the structure
of society of every historical epoch necessarily arising therefrom constitute the foundation for the
political and intellectual history of that epoch; that consequently (ever since the dissolution of the
primeval communal ownership of land) all history has been a history of class struggles, of
struggles between exploited and exploiting, between dominated and dominating classes at various
stages of social development; that this struggle, however, has now reached a stage where the
exploited and oppressed class (the proletariat) can no longer emancipate itself from the class which
exploits and oppresses it (the bourpage 8

geoisie), without at the same time forever freeing the whole of society from exploitation,
oppression and class struggles -- this basic thought belongs solely and exclusively to Marx.[*]
I have already stated this many times; but precisely now it is necessary that it also stands in
front of the Manifesto itself.

F. Engels
London, June 28,1883

* "This proposition," I wrote in the preface to the English translation, "which, in my opinion, is destined to do
for history what Darwin's theory has done for biology, we, both of us, had been gradually approaching for some
years before 1845. How far I had independently progressed towards it, is best shown by my 'Condition of the
Working Class in England.' But when I again met Marx at Brussels, in spring, 1845, he had it ready worked out,
and put it before me, in terms almost as clear as those in which I have stated it here." [Note by Engels to the
German edition of 1890.]
page 7

PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH
EDITION OF 1888

The "Manifesto" was published as the platform of the "Communist League," a working men's
association, first exclusively German, later on international, and, under the political conditions of
the Continent before 1848, unavoidably a secret society. At a Congress of the League, held in
London in November, 1847, Marx and Engels were commissioned to prepare for publication a
complete theoretical and practical party programme. Drawn up in German, in January, 1848, the
manuscript was sent to the printer in London a few weeks before the French revolution of February
24th. A French translation was brought out in Paris, shortly before the insurrection of June, 1848.
The first English translation, by Miss Helen Macfarlane, appeared in George Julian Harney's "Red
Republican," London, I850. A Danish and a Polish edition had also been published.
The defeat of the Parisian insurrection of June, 1848 -- the first great battle between Proletariat
and Bourgeoisie -- drove again into the background, for a time, the social and political aspirations
of the European working class. Thenceforth, the struggle for supremacy was again, as it had been
before the
page 10

revolution of February, solely between different sections of the propertied class; the working class
was reduced to a fight for political elbow-room, and to the position of extreme wing of the
middle-class Radicals. Wherever independent proletarian movements continued to show signs of
life, they were ruthlessly hunted down. Thus the Prussian police hunted out the Central Board of
the Communist League, then located in Cologne. The members were arrested, and, after eighteen
months' imprisonment, they were tried in October, 1852. This celebrated "Cologne Communist
trial"[12] lasted from October 4th till November 12th; seven of the prisoners were sentenced to

terms of imprisonment in a fortress, varying from three to six years. Immediately after the
sentence, the League was formally dissolved by the remaining members. As to the "Manifesto," it
seemed thenceforth to be doomed to oblivion.
When the European working class had recovered sufficient strength for another attack on the
ruling classes, the International Working Men's Association sprang up. But this association,
formed with the express aim of welding into one body the whole militant proletariat of Europe and
America, could not at once proclaim the principles laid down in the "Manifesto." The International
was bound to have a programme broad enough to be acceptable to the English Trades' Unions, to
the followers of Proudhon in France, Belgium, Italy, and Spain, and to the Lassalleans* in
Germany. Marx, who drew up this programme to the satisfaction of all parties,
* Lassalle personally, to us, always acknowledged himself to be a disciple of Marx, and, as such, stood on the
ground of the "Manifesto." But in his public agitation, 1862-64, he did not go beyond demanding co-operative
workshops supported by State credit. [Note by Engels.]
page 11

entirely trusted to the intellectual development of the working class, which was sure to result from
combined action and mutual discussion. The very events and vicissitudes of the struggle against
Capital, the defeats even more than the victories, could not help bringing home to men's minds the
insufficiency of their various favourite nostrums, and preparing the way for a more complete
insight into the true conditions of working-class emancipation. And Marx was right. The
International, on its breaking up in 1874, left the workers quite different men from what it had
found them in 1864. Proudhonism in France, Lassalleanism in Germany were dying out, and even
the Conservative English Trades' Unions, though most of them had long since severed their
connexion with the International, were gradually advancing towards that point at which, last year
at Swansea, their President could say in their name, "Continental Socialism has lost its terrors for
us"[13] In fact, the principles of the "Manifesto" had made considerable headway among the
working men of all countries.
The "Manifesto" itself thus came to the front again. The German text had been, since 1850,
reprinted several times in Switzerland, England, and America. In 1872, it was translated into
English in New York, where the translation was published in "Woodhull and Claflin's Weekly."[14]
From this English version, a French one was made in "Le Socialiste " of New York. Since then at
least two more English translations, more or less mutilated, have been brought out in America, and
one of them has been reprinted in England. The first Russian translation, made by Bakounine, was
published at Herzen's "Kolokol" office in Geneva, about 1863; a second one, by the heroic Vera
Zasulich,[15] also in Geneva, 1882. A new Danish edition[16] is to be found in "Socialpage 12

demokratisk Bibliothek," Copenhagen, 1885; a fresh French translation in "Le Socialiste," Paris,
1886.[17] From this latter a Spanish version was prepared and published in Madrid, 1886.[18] The
German reprints are not to be counted there have been twelve altogether at the least. An Armenian
translation, which was to be published in Constantinople some months ago, did not see the light, I
am told, because the publisher was afraid of bringing out a book with the name of Marx on it,
while the translator declined to call it his own production. Of further translations into other
languages I have heard, but have not seen them. Thus the history of the "Manifesto" reflects, to a

great extent, the history of the modern working-class movement; at present it is undoubtedly the
most widespread, the most international production of all Socialist literature, the common platform
acknowledged by millions of working men from Siberia to California.
Yet, when it was written, we could not have called it a Socialist Manifesto. By Socialists, in
1847, were understood, on the one hand, the adherents of the various Utopian systems: Owenites
in England, Fourierists in France, both of them already reduced to the position of mere sects, and
gradually dying out; on the other hand, the most multifarious social quacks, who, by all manners of
tinkering, professed to redress, without any danger to capital and profit, all sorts of social
grievances, in both cases men outside the working-class movement, and looking rather to the
"educated" classes for support. Whatever portion of the working class had become convinced of
the insufficiency of mere political revolutions, and had proclaimed the necessity of a total social
change, that portion then called itself Communist. It was a crude, rough-hewn, purely instinctive
sort of Communism; still, it touched the cardinal point and was powerful enough
page 13

amongst the working class to produce the Utopian Communism, in France, of Cabet, and in
Germany, of Weitling. Thus, Socialism was, in 1847, a middle-class movement, Communism a
working-class movement. Socialism was, on the Continent at least, "respectable"; Communism
was the very opposite. And as our notion, from the very beginning, was that "the emancipation of
the working class must be the act of the working class itself,"[19] there could be no doubt as to
which of the two names we must take. Moreover, we have, ever since, been far from repudiating it.
The "Manifesto" being our joint production, I consider myself bound to state that the
fundamental proposition, which forms its nucleus, belongs to Marx. That proposition is: that in
every historical epoch, the prevailing mode of economic production and exchange, and the social
organization necessarily following from it, form the basis upon which is built up, and from which
alone can be explained, the political and intellectual history of that epoch; that consequently the
whole history of mankind (since the dissolution of primitive tribal society, holding land in
common ownership) has been a history of class struggles, contests between exploiting and
exploited, ruling and oppressed classes; that the history of these class struggles forms a series of
evolutions in which, now-a-days, a stage has been reached where the exploited and oppressed class
-- the proletariat -- cannot attain its emancipation from the sway of the exploiting and ruling class
-- the bourgeoisie -- without, at the same time, and once and for all, emancipating society at large
from all exploitation, oppression, class distinctions and class struggles.
This proposition which, in my opinion, is destined to do for history what Darwin's theory has
done for biology, we, both of us, had been gradually approaching for some years
page 14

before 1845. How far I had independently progressed towards it, is best shown by my "Condition
of the Working Class in England."[*] But when I again met Marx at Brussels, in spring, 1845, he
had it ready worked out, and put it before me, in terms almost as clear as those in which I have
stated it here.
From our joint preface to the German edition of 1872, I quote the following:

"However much the state of things may have altered during the last twenty-five years, the
general principles laid down in this Manifesto are, on the whole, as correct to-day as ever. Here
and there some detail might be improved. The practical application of the principles will depend,
as the Manifesto itself states, everywhere and at all times, on the historical conditions for the time
being existing, and, for that reason, no special stress is laid on the revolutionary measures
proposed at the end of Section II. That passage would, in many respects, be very differently
worded to-day. In view of the gigantic strides of Modern Industry since 1848, and of the
accompanying improved and extended organization of the working class,[20] in view of the
practical experience gained, first in the February Revolution, and then, still more, in the Paris
Commune, where the proletariat for the first time held political power for two whole months, this
programme has in some details become antiquated. One thing especially was proved by the
Commune, viz., that 'the working class cannot simply lay hold of the ready-made State machinery,
and wield it for its own purposes.' (See "The Civil War in
* "The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844." By Frederick Engels. Translated by Florence K.
Wischnewetzky, New York. Lovell -- London. W. Reeves, 1888. [Note by Engels.]
page 15

France; Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association," London,
Truelove, 1871, p. 15, where this point is further developed.) Further, it is self evident, that the
criticism of Socialist literature is deficient in relation to the present time, because it comes down
only to 1847; also, that the remarks on the relation of the Communists to the various opposition
parties (Section IV), although in principle still correct, yet in practice are antiquated, because the
political situation has been entirely changed, and the progress of history has swept from off the
earth the greater portion of the political parties there enumerated.
"But then, the Manifesto has become a historical document which we have no longer any right
to alter."
The present translation is by Mr. Samuel Moore, the translator of the greater portion of Marx's
"Capital." We have revised it in common, and I have added a few notes explanatory of historical
allusions.
F. Engels
London, 30th January 1888

page 16

PREFACE TO THE GERMAN
EDITION OF 1890[21]

Since the above was written,[22] a new German edition of the Manifesto has again become
necessary, and much has also happened to the Manifesto which should be recorded here.
A second Russian translation -- by Vera Zasulich -- appeared at Geneva in 1882; the preface to
that edition was written by Marx and myself. Unfortunately, the original German manuscript has
gone astray; I must therefore retranslate from the Russian, which will in no way improve the
text.[23] It reads:
"The first Russian edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party, translated by Bakunin, was
published early in the sixties by the printing office of the Kolokol. Then the West could see in it
(the Russian edition of the Manifesto) only a literary curiosity. Such a view would be impossible
today.
"What a limited field the proletarian movement still occupied at that time (December 1847) is
most clearly shown by the last section of the Manifesto: the position of the Communists in relation
to the various opposition parties in the various countries. Precisely Russia and the United States
are
page 17

missing here. It was the time when Russia constituted the last great reserve of all European
reaction, when the United States absorbed the surplus proletarian forces of Europe through
immigration. Both countries provided Europe with raw materials and were at the same time
markets for the sale of its industrial products. At that time both were, there fore, in one way or
another, pillars of the existing European order.
"How very different today! Precisely European immigration fitted North America for a gigantic
agricultural production, whose competition is shaking the very foundations of European landed
property -- large and small. In addition it enabled the United States to exploit its tremendous
industrial resources with an energy and on a scale that must shortly break the industrial monopoly
of Western Europe, and especially of England, existing up to now. Both circumstances react in
revolutionary manner upon America itself. Step by step the small and middle land ownership of
the farmers, the basis of the whole political constitution, is succumbing to the competition of giant
farms; simultaneously, a mass proletariat and a fabulous concentration of capital are developing
for the first time in the industrial regions.
"And now Russia! During the Revolution of 1848-49 not only the European princes, but the
European bourgeois as well, found their only salvation from the proletariat, just be ginning to
awaken, in Russian intervention. The tsar was proclaimed the chief of European reaction. Today
he is a prisoner of war of the revolution, in Gatchina, and Russia forms the vanguard of
revolutionary action in Europe.
"The Communist Manifesto had as its object the proclamation of the inevitably impending
dissolution of modern bourgeois property. But in Russia we find, face to face with
page 18

the rapidly developing capitalist swindle and bourgeois landed property, just beginning to develop,
more than half the land owned in common by the peasants. Now the question is: can the Russian
obshchina, though greatly undermined, yet a form of the primeval common ownership of land,
pass directly to the higher form of communist common ownership? Or on the contrary, must it first
pass through the same process of dissolution as constitutes the historical evolution of the West?
"The only answer to that possible today is this: If the Russian Revolution becomes the signal for
a proletarian revolution in the West, so that both complement each other, the present Russian
common ownership of land may serve as the starting point for a communist development.
"Karl Marx Frederick Engels
"London, January 21,1882"
At about the same date, a new Polish version appeared in Geneva: Manifest Komunistyczny.
Furthermore, a new Danish translation has appeared in the Socialdemokratisk Bibliothek,
Kj&oumlbenhavn, 1885. Unfortunately it is not quite complete; certain essential passages, which
seem to have presented difficulties to the translator, have been omitted, and in addition there are
signs of carelessness here and there, which are all the more unpleasantly conspicuous since the
translation indicates that had the translator taken a little more pains he would have done an
excellent piece of work.
A new French version appeared in 1885 in Le Socialiste of Paris; it is the best published to date.
page 19

From this latter a Spanish version was published the same year, first in El Socialista of Madrid,
and then re-issued in pamphlet form: Manifiesto del Partido Comunista por Carlos Marx y F.
Engels, Madrid, Administraci&oacuten de El Socialista, Hernan Cort&eacutes 8.
As a matter of curiosity I may also mention that in 1887 the manuscript of an Armenian
translation was offered to a publisher in Constantinople. But the good man did not have the
courage to publish something bearing the name of Marx and suggested that the translator set down
his own name as author, which the latter, however, declined.
After one and then another of the more or less inaccurate American translations had been
repeatedly reprinted in England, an authentic version at last appeared in 1888. This was by my
friend Samuel Moore, and we went through it together once more before it was sent to press. It is
entitled: Manifesto of the Communist Party, by Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Authorized
English translation, edited and annotated by Frederick Engels, 1888, London, William Reeves, 185
Fleet St., E. C. I have added some of the notes of that edition to the present one.
The Manifesto has had a history of its own. Greeted with enthusiasm, at the time of its
appearance, by the then still not at all numerous vanguard of scientific Socialism (as is proved by
the translations mentioned in the first preface), it was soon forced into the background by the
reaction that began with the defeat of the Paris workers in June 1848, and was finally
excommunicated "according to law" by the conviction of the Cologne Communists in November
1852. With the disappearance from the public scene of the workers' movement that had begun with

the February Revolution, the Manifesto too passed into the background.
page 20

When the working class of Europe had again gathered sufficient strength for a new onslaught
upon the power of the ruling classes, the International Working Men's Association came into
being. Its aim was to weld together into one huge army the whole militant working class of Europe
and America. Therefore it could not set out from the principles laid down in the Manifesto. It was
bound to have a program which would not shut the door on the English trades' unions, the French,
Belgian, Italian and Spanish Proudhonists and the German Lassalleans.[*] This program -- the
preamble to the Rules of the International -- was drawn up by Marx with a master hand
acknowledged even by Bakunin and the Anarchists. For the ultimate triumph of the ideas set forth
in the Manifesto Marx relied solely and exclusively upon the intellectual development of the
working class, as it necessarily had to ensue from united action and discussion. The events and
vicissitudes in the struggle against capital, the defeats even more than the successes, could not but
demonstrate to the fighters the inadequacy hitherto of their universal panaceas and make their
minds more receptive to a thorough understanding of the true conditions for the emancipation of
the workers. And Marx was right. The working class of 1874, at the dissolution of the
International, was altogether different from that of 1864, at its foundation. Proudhonism in the
Latin countries and the specific
* Lassalle personally, to us, always acknowledged himself to be a "disciple" of Marx, and, as such, stood, of
course, on the ground of the Manifesto. Matters were quite different with regard to those of his followers who did
not go beyond his demand for producers' co-operstives supported by state credits and who divided the whole
working class into supporters of state assistance and supporters of self-assistance. [Note by Engels.]
page 21

Lassalleanism in Germany were dying out, and even the then arch-conservative English trades'
unions were gradually ap proaching the point where in 1887 the chairman of their Swansea
Congress could say in their name: "Continental Socialism has lost its terrors for us." Yet by 1887
Continental Socialism was almost exclusively the theory heralded in the Manifesto. Thus, to a
certain extent, the history of the Manifesto reflects the history of the modern working-class
movement since 1848. At present it is doubtless the most widely circulated, the most international
product of all Socialist literature, the common program of many millions of workers of all
countries, from Siberia to California.
Nevertheless, when it appeared we could not have called it a Socialist Manifesto. In 1847 two
kinds of people were considered Socialists. On the one hand were the adherents of the various
utopian systems, notably the Owenites in England and the Fourierists in France, both of whom at
that date had already dwindled to mere sects gradually dying out. On the other, the manifold types
of social quacks who wanted to eliminate social abuses through their various universal panaceas
and all kinds of patchwork, without hurting capital and profit in the least. In both cases, people
who stood outside the labour movement and who looked for support rather to the "educated"
classes. The section of the working class, however, which demanded a radical reconstruction of
society, convinced that mere political revolutions were not enough, then called itself Communist. It
was still a rough-hewn, only instinctive, and frequently somewhat crude Communism. Yet it was
powerful enough to bring into being two systems of utopian Communism -- in France the "Icarian"
Communism of Cabet, and in Germany that of Weitling. Socialism in 1847 signified a bourgeois

movement, Communism a workingpage 22

class movement. Socialism was, on the Continent at least, quite respectable, whereas Communism
was the very opposite. And since we were very decidedly of the opinion as early as then that "the
emancipation of the workers must be the act of the working class itself," we could have no
hesitation as to which of the two names we should choose. Nor has it ever occurred to us since to
repudiate it.
"Working men of all countries, unite!" But few voices responded when we proclaimed these
words to the world forty-two years ago, on the eve of the first Paris Revolution in which the
proletariat came out with demands of its own. On September 28, 1864, however, the proletarians
of most of the Western European countries joined hands in the International Working Men's
Association of glorious memory. True, the International itself lived only nine years. But that the
eternal union of the proletarians of all countries created by it is still alive and lives stronger than
ever, there is no better witness than this day. Because today, as I write these lines, the European
and American proletariat is reviewing its fighting forces, mobilized for the first time, mobilized as
one army, under one flag, for one immediate aim: the standard eight-hour working day, to be
established by legal enactment, as proclaimed by the Geneva Congress of the International in
1866, and again by the Paris Workers' Congress in 1889.[24] And today's spectacle will open the
eyes of the capitalists and landlords of all countries to the fact that today the working men of all
countries are united indeed.
If only Marx were still by my side to see this with his own eyes!
F. Engels
London, May 1, 1890

page 23

PREFACE TO THE POLISH
EDITION OF 1892[25]

The fact that a new Polish edition of the Communist Manifesto has become necessary gives rise
to various thoughts.
First of all, it is noteworthy that of late the Manifesto has become an index, as it were, of the

development of large-scale industry on the European continent. In proportion as large-scale
industry expands in a given country, the demand grows among the workers of that country for
enlightenment regarding their position as the working class in relation to the possessing classes,
the socialist movement spreads among them and the demand for the Manifesto increases. Thus, not
only the state of the labour movement but also the degree of development of large-scale industry
can be measured with fair accuracy in every country by the number of copies of the Manifesto
circulated in the language of that country.
Accordingly, the new Polish edition indicates a decided progress of Polish industry. And there
can be no doubt whatever that this progress since the previous edition published ten years ago has
actually taken place. Russian Poland, Congress Poland,[26] has become the big industrial region of
the Russian Empire. Whereas Russian large-scale industry
page 24

is scattered sporadically -- a part round the Gulf of Finland, another in the centre (Moscow and
Vladimir), a third along the coasts of the Black and Azov seas, and still others else where -- Polish
industry has been packed into a relatively small area and enjoys both the advantages and the
disadvantages arising from such concentration. The competing Russian manufacturers
acknowledged the advantages when they demanded protective tariffs against Poland, in spite of
their ardent desire to transform the Poles into Russians. The disadvantages -- for the Polish
manufacturers and the Russian government -- are manifest in the rapid spread of socialist ideas
among the Polish workers and in the growing demand for the Manifesto.
But the rapid development of Polish industry, outstripping that of Russia, is in its turn a new
proof of the inexhaustible vitality of the Polish people and a new guarantee of its impending
national restoration. And the restoration of an independent strong Poland is a matter which
concerns not only the Poles but all of us. A sincere international collaboration of the European
nations is possible only if each of these nations is fully autonomous in its own house. The
Revolution of 1848, which under the banner of the proletariat, after all, merely let the proletarian
fighters do the work of the bourgeoisie, also secured the independence of Italy, Germany and
Hungary through its testamentary executors, Louis Bonaparte and Bismarck; but Poland, which
since 1792 had done more for the Revolution than all these three together, was left to its own
resources when it succumbed in 1863 to a tenfold greater Russian force. The nobility could neither
maintain nor regain Polish independence; today, to the bourgeoisie, this independence is, to say the
least, immaterial. Nevertheless, it is a necessity for the harmonious collaboration of the Eupage 25

ropean nations. It can be gained only by the young Polish proletariat, and in its hands it is secure.
For the workers of all the rest of Europe need the independence of Poland just as much as the
Polish workers themselves.
F. Engels
London, February 10, 1892

page 26

PREFACE TO THE ITALIAN
EDITION OF 1893[27]
TO THE ITALIAN READER
Publication of the Manifesto of the Communist Party coincided, one may say, with March 18,
1848, the day of the revolutions in Milan and Berlin, which were armed uprisings of the two
nations situated in the centre, the one, of the continent of Europe, the other, of the Mediterranean;
two nations until then enfeebled by division and internal strife, and thus fallen under foreign
domination. While Italy was subject to the Emperor of Austria, Germany underwent the yoke, not
less effective though more indirect, of the Tsar of all the Russias. The consequences of March 18,
1848, freed both Italy and Germany from this disgrace; if from 1848 to 1871 these two great
nations were reconstituted and somehow again put on their own, it was, as Karl Marx used to say,
because the men who suppressed the Revolution of 1848 were, nevertheless, its testamentary
executors in spite of themselves.[28]
page 27

Everywhere that revolution was the work of the working class; it was the latter that built the
barricades and paid with its lifeblood. Only the Paris workers, in overthrowing the government,
had the very definite intention of overthrowing the bourgeois regime. But conscious though they
were of the fatal antagonism existing between their own class and the bourgeoisie, still, neither the
economic progress of the country nor the intellectual development of the mass of French workers
had as yet reached the stage which would have made a social reconstruction possible. In the final
analysis, therefore, the fruits of the revolution were reaped by the capitalist class. In the other
countries, in Italy, in Germany, in Austria, the workers, from the very outset, did nothing but raise
the bourgeoisie to power. But in any country the rule of the bourgeoisie is impossible without
national independence. Therefore, the Revolution of 1848 had to bring in its train the unity and
autonomy of the nations that had lacked them up to then: Italy, Germany, Hungary. Poland will
follow in turn.
Thus, if the Revolution of 1848 was not a socialist revolution, it paved the way, prepared the
ground for the latter. Through the impetus given to large-scale industry in all countries, the
bourgeois regime during the last forty-five years has everywhere created a numerous, concentrated
and powerful proletariat. It has thus raised, to use the language of the Manifesto, its own
gravediggers. Without restoring autonomy and unity to each nation, it will be impossible to
achieve the international union of the proletariat, or the peaceful and intelligent cooperation of
these nations toward common aims. Just imagine joint international action by the Italian,
Hungarian, German, Polish and Russian workers under the political conditions preceding 1848!
page 28

The battles fought in 1848 were thus not fought in vain. Nor have the forty-five years separating
us from that revolutionary epoch passed to no purpose. The fruits are ripening, and all I wish is
that the publication of this Italian translation may augur as well for the victory of the Italian
proletariat as the publication of the originai did for the international revolution.
The Manifesto does full justice to the revolutionary part played by capitalism in the past. The
first capitalist nation was Italy. The close of the feudal Middle Ages, and the opening of the
modern capitalist era are marked by a colossal figure: an Italian, Dante, both the last poet of the
Middle Ages and the first poet of modern times. Today, as in 1300, a new historical era is
approaching. Will Italy give us the new Dante, who will mark the hour of birth of this new,
proletarian era?
Frederick Engels
London, February 1, 1893

page 29

A spectre is haunting Europe -- the spectre of Communism. All the Powers of old Europe have
entered into a holy alliance to exorcise this spectre: Pope and Czar, Metternich and Guizot, French
Radicals and German police-spies.
Where is the party in opposition that has not been decried as Communistic by its opponents in
power? Where the Opposition that has not hurled back the branding reproach of Communism,
against the more advanced opposition parties, as well as against its reactionary adversaries?
Two things result from this fact.
I. Communism is already acknowledged by all European Powers to be itself a Power.
II. It is high time that Communists should openly, in the face of the whole world, publish their
views, their aims, their tendencies, and meet this nursery tale of the Spectre of Communism with a
Manifesto of the party itself.
To this end, Communists of various nationalities have assembled in London, and sketched the
following Manifesto, to be published in the English, French, German, Italian, Flemish and Danish
languages.
page 30

I
BOURGEOIS AND PROLETARIANS*

The history of all hitherto existing society** is the history of class struggles.
* By bourgeoisie is meant the class of modern Capitalists, owners of the means of social production and
employers of wage-labour. By proletariat, the class of modern wage-labourers who, having no means of production
of their own, are reduced to selling their labour-power in order to live. [Note by Engels to the English edition of
1888.]
** That is, all written history. In 1847, the pre-history of society, the social organization existing previous to
recorded history, was all but unknown. Since then, Haxthausen discovered common ownership of land in Russia,
Maurer proved it to be the social foundation from which all Teutonic races started in history, and by and by village
communities were found to be, or to have been the primitive form of society everywhere from India to Ireland. The
inner organization of this primitive Communistic society was laid bare, in its typical form, by Morgan's crowning
discovery of the true nature of the gens and its relation to the tribe. With the dissolution of these primaeval
communities society begins to be differentiated into separate and finally antagonistic classes. I have attempted to
retrace this process of dissolution in Der Ursprung der Familie des Privateigentbums und des Staats [The Origin of
the Family, Private Property and the State ] 2nd edition, Stuttgart, 1886 [Note by Engels to the English edition of
1888.]
page 31

Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord and serf, guild-master[*] and journeyman, in a
word, oppressor and oppressed, stood in constant opposition to one another, carried on an
uninterrupted, now hidden, now open fight, a fight that each time ended, either in a revolutionary
re-constitution of society at large, or in the common ruin of the contending classes.
In the earlier epochs of history, we find almost everywhere a complicated arrangement of
society into various orders, a manifold gradation of social rank. In ancient Rome we have
patricians, knights, plebeians, slaves; in the Middle Ages, feudal lords, vassals, guild-masters,
journeymen, apprentices, serfs; in almost all of these classes, again, subordinate gradations.
The modern bourgeois society that has sprouted from the ruins of feudal society has not done
away with class antagonisms. It has but established new classes, new conditions of oppression,
new forms of struggle in place of the old ones.
Our epoch, the epoch of the bourgeoisie, possesses, however, this distinctive feature: it has
simplified the class antagonisms. Society as a whole is more and more splitting up into two great
hostile camps, into two great classes directly facing each other: Bourgeoisie and Proletariat.
From the serfs of the Middle Ages sprang the chartered burghers of the earliest towns. From
these burgesses the first elements of the bourgeoisie were developed.
The discovery of America, the rounding of the Cape, opened up fresh ground for the rising
bourgeoisie. The East-Indian and Chinese markets, the colonisation of America, trade with
* Guild-master, that is, a full member of a guild, a master within, not a head of, a guild. [Note by Engels to the
English edition of 1888.]
page 32

the colonies, the increase in the means of exchange and in commodities generally, gave to
commerce, to navigation, to industry, an impulse never before known, and thereby, to the
revolutionary element in the tottering feudal society, a rapid development.
The feudal system of industry, under which industrial production was monopolised by closed
guilds, now no longer sufficed for the growing wants of the new markets. The manufacturing
system took its place. The guild-masters were pushed on one side by the manufacturing middle
class; division of labour between the different corporate guilds vanished in the face of division of
labour in each single workshop.
Meantime the markets kept ever growing, the demand ever rising. Even manufacture no longer
sufficed. Thereupon, steam and machinery revolutionized indystrial production. The place of
manufacture was taken by the giant, Modern Industry, the place of the industrial middle class, by
industrial millionaires, the leaders of whole industrial armies, the modern bourgeois.
Modern industry has established the world market, for which the discovery of America paved
the way. This market has given an immense development to commerce, to navigation, to
communication by land. This development has, in its turn, reacted on the extension of industry;
and in proportion as industry, commerce, navigation, railways extended, in the same proportion the
bourgeoisie developed, increased its capital, and pushed into the background every class handed
down from the Middle Ages.
We see, therefore, how the modern bourgeoisie is itself the product of a long course of
development, of a series of revolutions in the modes of production and of exchange.
page 33

Each step in the development of the bourgeoisie was accompanied by a corresponding political
advance of that class.[29] An oppressed class under the sway of the feudal nobility, an armed and
self-governing association in the mediaeval commune;[*] here independent urban republic (as in
Italy and Germany),[30] there taxable "third estate" of the monarchy (as in France),[31] afterwards, in
the period of manufacture proper, serving either the semi-feudal or the absolute monarchy as a
counterpoise against the nobility, and, in fact, cornerstone of the great monarchies in general, the
bourgeoisie has at last, since the establishment of Modern Industry and of the world market,
conquered for itself, in the modern representative State, exclusive political sway. The executive of
the modern State is but a committee for managing the common affairs of the whole bourgeoisie.
The bourgeoisie, historically, has played a most revolutionary part.
The bourgeoisie, wherever it has got the upper hand, has put an end to all feudal, patriarchal,
idyllic relations. It has pitilessly torn asunder the motley feudal ties that bound man to his "natural
superiors," and has left remaining no other nexus between man and man than naked self-interest,
than
* "Commune" was the name taken, in France, by the nascent towns even before they had conquered from their
feudal lords and masters local self-government and political rights as the "Third Estate." Generally speaking, for
the economical development of the bourgeoisie, England is here taken as the typical country; for its political
development, France. [Note by Engels to the English edition of 1888.]
This was the name given their urban communities by the townsmen of Italy and France, after they had purchased
or wrested their initial rights of self-government from their feudal lords. [Note by Engels to the German edition of

1890.]
page 34

callous "cash payment." It has drowned the most heavenly ecstasies of religious fervour, of
chivalrous enthusiasm, of philistine sentimentalism, in the icy water of egotistical calculation. It
has resolved personal worth into exchange value, and in place of the numberless indefeasible
chartered freedoms, has set up that single, unconscionable freedom -- Free Trade. In one word, for
exploitation, veiled by religious and political illusions, it has substituted naked, shameless, direct,
brutal exploitation.
The bourgeoisie has stripped of its halo every occupation hitherto honoured and looked up to
with reverent awe. It has converted the physician, the lawyer, the priest, the poet, the man of
science, into its paid wage-labourers.
The bourgeoisie has torn away from the family its sentimental veil, and has reduced the family
relation to a mere money relation.
The bourgeoisie has disclosed how it came to pass that the brutal display of vigour in the Middle
Ages, which Reactionists so much admire, found its fitting complement in the most slothful
indolence. It has been the first to show what man's activity can bring about. It has accomplished
wonders far surpassing Egyptian pyramids, Roman aqueducts, and Gothic cathedrals; it has
conducted expeditions that put in the shade all former Exoduses of nations and crusades.
The bourgeoisie cannot exist without constantly revolutionising the instruments of production,
and thereby the relations of production, an with them the whole relations of society. Conservation
of the old modes of production in unaltered form, was, on the contrary, the first condition of
existence for all earlier industrial classes. Constant revolutionising of production, uninterrupted
disturbance of all social conditions, everlasting uncertainty and agitation dispage 35

tinguish the bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones.[32] All freed, fast-frozen relations, with their
train of ancient and venerable prejudices and opinions, are swept away, all new-formed ones
become antiquated before they can ossify. All that is solid melts into air, all that is holy is
profaned, and man is at last compelled to face with sober senses, his real conditions of life, and his
relations with his kind.
The need of a constantly expanding market for its products chases the bourgeoisie over the
whole surface of the globe. It must nestle everywhere, settle everywhere, establish connexions
everywhere.
The bourgeoisie has through its exploitation of the world market given a cosmopolitan character
to production and consumption in every country. To the great chagrin of Reactionists, it has drawn
from under the feet of industry the national ground on which it stood. All old-established national
industries have been destroyed or are daily being destroyed. They are dislodged by new industries,
whose introduction becomes a life and death question for all civilised nations, by industries that no
longer work up indigenous raw material, but raw material drawn from the remotest zones;
industries whose products are consumed, not only at home, but in every quarter of the globe. In
place of the old wants, satisfied by the productions of the country, we find new wants, requiring

for their satisfaction the products of distant lands and climes. In place of the old local and national
seclusion and self-sufficiency, we have intercourse in every direction, universal inter-dependence
of nations. And as in material, so also in intellectual production. The intellectual creations of
individual nations become common property. National one-sidedness and narrow-mindedness
become more and more
page 36

impossible, and from the numerous national and local literatures there arises a world-literature.
The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement of all instruments of production, by the immensely
facilitated means of communication, draws all, even the most barbarian, nations into civilisation.
The cheap prices of its commodities are the heavy artillery with which it batters down all Chinese
walls, with which it forces the barbarians' intensely obstinate hatred of foreigners to capitulate. It
compels all nations, on pain of extinction, to adopt the bourgeois mode of production; it compels
them to introduce what it calls civilisation into their midst, i. e., to become bourgeois themselves.
In one word, it creates a world after its own image.
The bourgeoisie has subjected the country to the rule of the towns. It has created enormous
cities, has greatly increased the urban population as compared with the rural, and has thus rescued
a considerable part of the population from the idiocy of rural life. Just as it has made the country
dependent on the towns, so it has made barbarian and semi-barbarian countries dependent on the
civilised ones, nations of peasants on nations of bourgeois, the East on the West.
The bourgeoisie keeps more and more doing away with the scattered state of the population, of
the means of production, and of property. It has agglomerated population, centralised means of
production, and has concentrated property in a few hands. The necessary consequence of this was
political centralisation. Independent, or but loosely connected provinces, with separate interests,
laws, governments and systems of taxation, became lumped together into one nation, with one
government, one code of laws, one national class-interest, one frontier and one customs-tariff.
page 37

The bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce one hundred years, has created more massive and more
colossal productive forces than have all preceding generations together. Subjection of Nature's
forces to man, machinery, application of chemistry to industry and agriculture, steam-navigation,
railways, electric telegraphs, clearing of whole continents for cultivation, canalisation of rivers,
whole populations conjured out of the ground -- what earlier century had even a presentiment that
such productive forces slumbered in the lap of social labour?
We see then: the means of production and of exchange, on whose foundation the bourgeoisie
built itself up, were generated in feudal society. At a certain stage in the development of these
means of production and of exchange, the conditions under which feudal society produced and
exchanged, the feudal organisation of agriculture and manufacturing industry, in one word, the
feudal relations of property became no longer compatible with the already developed productive
forces;[33] they became so many fetters. They had to be burst asunder; they were burst asunder.
Into their place stepped free competition, accompanied by a social and political constitution
adapted to it, and by the economical and political sway of the bourgeois class.

A similar movement is going on before our own eyes. Modern bourgeois society with its
relations of production, of exchange and of property, a society that has conjured up such gigantic
means of production and of exchange, is like the sorcerer, who is no longer able to control the
powers of the nether world whom he has called up by his spells. For many a decade past the
history of industry and commerce is but the history of the revolt of modern productive forces
against modern conditions of production, against the property relapage 38

tions that are the conditions for the existence of the bourgeoisie and of its rule. It is enough to
mention the commercial aises that by their periodical return put on its trial, each time more
threateningly, the existence of the entire bourgeois society. In these crises a great part not only of
the existing products, but also of the previously created productive forces, are periodically
destroyed. In these crises there breaks out an epidemic that, in all earlier epochs, would have
seemed an absurdity -- the epidemic of over-production. Society suddenly finds itself put back into
a state of momentary barbarism; it appears as if a famine, a universal war of devastation had cut
off the supply of every means of subsistence; industry and commerce seem to be destroyed; and
why? Because there is too much civilisation, too much means of subsistence, too much industry,
too much commerce. The productive forces at the disposal of society no longer tend to further the
development of the conditions of bourgeois property;[34] on the contrary, they have become too
powerful for these conditions, by which they are fettered, and so soon as they overcome these
fetters, they bring disorder into the whole of bourgeois society, endanger the existence of
bourgeois property. The conditions of bourgeois sosiety are too narrow to comprise the wealth
created by them. And how does the bourgeoisie get over these crises? On the one hand by enforced
destruction of a mass of productive forces; on the other, by the conquest of new markets, and by
the more thorough exploitation of the old ones. That is to say, by paving the way for more
extensive and more destructive crises, and by diminishing the means whereby crises are prevented.
The weapons with which the bourgeoisie felled feudalism to the ground are now turned against
the bourgeoisie itself.
page 39

But not only has the bourgeoisie forged the weapons that bring death to itself; it has also called
into existence the men who are to wield those weapons -- the modern working class -- the
proletarians.
In proportion as the bourgeoisie, i. e., capital, is developed, in the same proportion is the
proletariat, the modern working class, developed -- a class of labourers, who live only so long as
they find work, and who find work only so long as their labour increases caital. These labourers,
who must sell themselves piecemeal, are a commodity like every other article of commerce, and
are consequentiy exposed to all the vicissitudes of competition, to all the fluctuations of the
market.
Owing to the extensive use of machinery and to division of labour, the work of the proletarians
has lost all individual character, and, consequently, all charm for the workman. He becomes an
appendage of the machine, and it is only the most simple, most monotonous, and most easily
acquired knack, that is required of him. Hence, the cost of production of a workman is restricted,
almost entirely, to the means of subsistence that he requires for his maintenance, and for the

propagation of his race. But the price of a commodity, and therefore also of labour,[35] is equal to
its cost of production. In proportion, therefore, as the repulsiveness of the work increases, the wage
decreases. Nay more, in proportion as the use of machinery and division of labour increases, in the
same proportion the burden of toil also increases, whether by prolongation of the working hours,
by increase of the work exacted in a given time or by increased speed of the machinery, etc.
Modern industry has converted the little workshop of the patriarchal master into the great
factory of the industrial
page 40

capitalist. Masses of labourers, crowded into the factory, are organised like soldiers. As privates of
the industrial army they are placed under the command of a perfect hierarchy of officers and
sergeants. Not only are they slaves of the bourgeois class, and of the bourgeois State; they are
daily and hourly enslaved by the machine, by the over-looker, and, above all, by the individual
bourgeois manufacturer himself. The more openly this despotism proclaims gain to be its end and
aim, the more petty, the more hateful and the more embittering it is.
The less the skill and exertion of strength implied in manual labour, in other words, the more
modern industry becomes developed, the more is the labour of men superseded by that of
women.[36] Differences of age and sex have no longer any distinctive social validity for the
working class. All are instruments of labour, more or less expensive to use, according to their age
and sex.
No sooner is the exploitation of the labourer by the manufacturer, so far, at an end, that he
receives his wages in cash, than he is set upon by the other portions of the bourgeoisie, the
landlord, the shopkeeper, the pawnbroker, etc.
The lower strata of the middle class -- the small trades people, shopkeepers, and retired
tradesmen generally, the handicraftsmen and peasants -- all these sink gradually into the
proletariat, partly because their diminutive capital does not suffice for the scale on which Modern
Industry is carried on, and is swamped in the competition with the large capitalists, partly because
their specialised skill is rendered worthless by new methods of production. Thus the proletariat is
recruited from all classes of the population.
page 41

The proletariat goes through various stages of development. With its birth begins its struggle
with the bourgeoisie. At first the contest is carried on by individual labourers, then by the
workpeople of a factory, then by the operatives of one trade, in one locality, against the individual
bourgeois who directly exploits them. They direct their attacks not against the bourgeois
conditions of production, but, against the instruments of production themselves;[37] they destroy
imported wares that compete with their labour, they smash to pieces machinery, they set factories
ablaze, they seek to restore by force the vanished status of the workman of the Middle Ages.
At this stage the labourers still form an incoherent mass scattered over the whole country, and
broken up by their mutual competition. If anywhere they unite to form more compact bodies, this
is not yet the consequence of their own active union, but of the union of the bourgeoisie, which
class, in order to attain its own political ends, is compelled to set the whole proletariat in motion,

and is moreover yet, for a time, able to do so. At this stage, therefore, the proletarians do not fight
their enemies, but the enemies of their enemies, the remnants of absolute monarchy, the
landowners, the non-industrial bourgeois, the petty bourgeoisie. Thus the whole historical
movement is concentrated in the hands of the bourgeoisie; every victory so obtained is a victory
for the bourgeoisie.
But with the development of industry the proletariat not only increases in number; it becomes
concentrated in greater masses, its strength grows, and it feels that strength more. The various
interests and conditions of life within the ranks of the proletariat are more and more equalised, in
proportion as machinery obliterates all distinctions of labour, and
page 42

nearly everywhere reduces wages to the same low level. The growing competition among the
bourgeois, and the resulting commercial crises, make the wages of the workers ever more
fluctuating. The unceasing improvement of machinery, ever more rapidly developing, makes their
livelihood more and more precarious; the collisions between individual workmen and individual
bourgeois take more and more the character of collisions between two classes. There upon the
workers begin to form combinations (Trades' Unions)[38] against the bourgeois; they club together
in order to keep up the rate of wages; they found permanent associations in order to make
provision beforehand for these occasional revolts. Here and there the contest breaks out into riots.
Now and then the workers are victorious, but only for a time. The real fruit of their battles lies,
not in the immediate result, but in the ever-expanding union of the workers. This union is helped
on by the improved means of communication that are created by modern industry, and that place
the workers of different localities in contact with one another. It was just this contact that was
needed to centralise the numerous local struggles, all of the same character, into one national
struggle between classes. But every class struggle is a political struggle. And that union, to attain
which the burghers of the Middle Ages, with their miserable highways, required centuries, the
modern proletarians, thanks to railways, achieve in a few years.
This organisation of the proletarians into a class, and consequently into a political party, is
continually being upset again by the competition between the workers themselves. But it ever rises
up again, stronger, firmer, mightier. It compels legislative recognition of particular interests of the
page 43

workers, by taking advantage of the divisions among the bourgeoisie itself. Thus the ten-hours' bill
in England was carried.
Altogether collisions between the classes of the old society further, in many ways, the course of
development of the proletariat. The bourgeoisie finds itself involved in a constant battle. At first
with the aristocracy; later on, with those portions of the bourgeoisie itself, whose interests have
become antagonistic to the progress of industry; at all times, with the bourgeoisie of foreign
countries. In all these battles it sees itself compelled to appeal to the proletariat, to ask for its help,
and thus, to drag it into the political arena. The bourgeoisie itself, therefore, supplies the proletariat
with its own elements of political and general education, [39] in other words, it furnishes the
proletariat with weapons for fighting the bourgeoisie.

Further, as we have already seen, entire sections of the ruling classes are, by the advance of
industry, precipitated into the proletariat, or are at least threatened in their conditions of existence.
These also supply the proletariat with fresh elements of enlightenment and progress.[40]
Finally, in times whcn the class struggle nears the decisive hour, the process of dissolution
going on within the ruling class, in fact within the whole range of old society, assumes such a
violent, glaring character, that a small section of the ruling class cuts itself adrift, and joins the
revolutionary class, the class that holds the future in its hands. Just as, therefore, at an earlier
period, a section of the nobility went over to the bourgeoisie, so now a portion of the bourgeoisie
goes over to the proletariat, and in particular, a portion of the bourgeois ideologists, who have
raised themselves to
page 44

the level of comprehending theoretically the historical movement as a whole.
Of all the classes that stand face to face with the bourgeoisie to-day, the proletariat alone is a
really revolutionary class. The other classes decay and finally disappear in the face of modern
industry; the proletariat is its special and essential product.
The lower middle class, the small manufacturer, the shopkeeper, the artisan, the peasant, all
these fight against the bourgeoisie, to save from extinction their existence as fractions of the
middle class. They are therefore not revolutionary, but conservative. Nay more, they are
reactionary, for they try to roll back the wheel of history. If by chance they are revolutionary, they
are so only in view of their impending transfer into the proletariat, they thus defend not their
present, but their future interests, they desert their own standpoint to place themselves at that of the
proletariat.
The "dangerous class," the social scum,[41] that passively rotting mass thrown off by the lowest
layers of old society, may, here and there, be swept into the movement by a proletarian revolution;
its conditions of life, however, prepare it far more for the part of a bribed tool of reactionary
intrigue.
In the conditions of the proletariat, those of old society at large are already virtually swamped.
The proletarian is without property; his relation to his wife and children has no longer anything in
common with the bourgeois family relations, modern industrial labour, modern subjection to
capital, the same in England as in France, in America as in Germany, has stripped him of every
trace of national character. Law, morality, religion, are to him so many
page 45

bourgeois prejudices, behind which lurk in ambush just as many bourgeois interests.
All the preceding classes that got the upper hand, sought to fortify their already acquired status
by subjecting society at large to their conditions of appropriation. The proletarians cannot become
masters of the productive forces of society, except by abolishing their own previous mode of
appropriation, and thereby also every other previous mode of appropriation. They have nothing of
their own to secure and to fortify; their mission is to destroy all previous securities for, and
insurances of, individual property.

All previous historical movements were movements of minorities, or in the interest of
minorities. The proletarian movement is the self-conscious,[42] independent movement of the
immense majority, in the interest of the immense majority. The proletariat, the lowest stratum of
our present society, cannot stir, cannot raise itself up, without the whole superincumbent strata of
official society being sprung into the air.
Though not in substance, yet in form, the struggle of the proletariat with the bourgeoisie is at
first a national struggle. The proletariat of each country must, of course, first of all settle matters
with its own bourgeoisie.
In depicting the most general phases of the development of the proletariat, we traced the more or
less veiled civil war, raging within existing society, up to the point where that war breaks out into
open revolution, and where the violent overthrow of the bourgeoisie lays the foundation for the
sway of the proletariat.
Hitherto, every form of society has been based, as we have already seen, on the antagonism of
oppressing and oppressed classes. But in order to oppress a class, certain
page 46

conditions must be assured to it under which it can, at least, continue its slavish existence. The
serf, in the period of serfdom, raised himself to membership in the commune, just as the petq
bourgeois, under the yoke of feudal abso lutism, managed to develop into a bourgeois. The modern
labourer, on the contrary, instead of rising with the progress of industry, sinks deeper and deeper
below the conditions of existence of his own class. He becomes a pauper, and pauperism develops
more rapidly than population and wealth. And here it becomes evident, that the bourgeoisie is unfit
any longer to be the ruling class in society, and to impose its conditions of existence upon society
as an over-riding law. It is unfit to rule because it is incompetent to assure an existence to its slave
within his slavery, because it cannot help letting him sink into such a state, that it has to feed him,
instead of being fed by him. Society can no longer live under this bourgeoisie, in other words, its
existence is no longer compatible with society.
The essential condition for the existence, and for the sway of the bourgeois class, is the
formation and augmentation of capital;[43] the condition for capital is wage-labour. Wage-labour
rests exclusively on competition between the labourers. The advance of industry, whose
involuntary promoter is the bourgeoisie, replaces the isolation of the labourers, due to competition,
by their revolutionary combination, due to association. The development of Modern Industry,
therefore, cuts from under its feet the very foundation on which the bourgeoisie produces and
appropriates products. What the bourgeoisie, therefore, produces, above all, are its own
grave-diggers. Its fall and the victory of the proletariat are equally inevitable.
page 47

II
PROLETARIANS AND COMMUNISTS

In what relation do the Communists stand to the proletarians as a whole? The Communists do
not form a separate party opposed to other working-class parties.
They have no interests separate and apart from those of the proletariat as a whole.
They do not set up any sectarian[44] principles of their own, by which to shape and mould the
proletarian movement.
The Communists are distinguished from the other working class parties by this only: 1. In the
national struggles of the proletarians of the different countries, they point out and bring to the front
the common interests of the entire proletariat, independently of all nationality. 2. In the various
stages of development which the struggle of the working class against the bourgeoisie has to pass
through, they always and everywhere represent the interests of the movement as a whole.
The Communists, therefore, are on the one hand, practically, the most advanced and resolute
section of the working-class parties of every country, that section which
page 48

pushes forward all others; on the other hand, theoretically, they have over the great mass of the
proletariat the ad vantage of clearly understanding the line of march, the conditions, and the
ultimate general results of the proletarian movement.
The immediate aim of the Communists is the same as that of all the other proletarian parties:
formation of the proletariat into a class, overthrow of the bourgeois supremacy, conquest of
political power by the proletariat.
The theoretical conclusions of the Communists are in no way based on ideas or principles that
have been invented, or discovered, by this or that would-be universal reformer.
They merely express, in general terms, actual relations springing from an existing class struggle,
from a historical movement going on under our very eyes. The abolition of existing property
relations is not at all a distinctive feature of Communism.
All property relations in the past have continually been subject to historical change consequent
upon the change in historical conditions.
The French Revolution, for example, abolished feudal property in favour of bourgeois property.
The distinguishing feature of Communism is not the abolition of property generally, but the
abolition of bourgeois property. But modern bourgeois private property is the final and most
complete expression of the system of producing and appropriating products, that is based on class
antagonisms, on the exploitation of the many by the few.[45]
In this sense, the theory of the Communists may be summed up in the single sentence: Abolition
of private property.
We Communists have been reproached with the desire of abolishing the right of personally

acquiring property as
page 49

the fruit of a man's own labour, which property is alleged to be the ground work of all personal
freedom, activity and independence.
Hard-won, self-acquired, self-earned property! Do you mean the property of the petty artisan
and of the small peasant, a form of property that preceded the bourgeois form? There is no need to
abolish that; the development of industry has to a great extent already destroyed it, and is still
destroying it daily.
Or do you mean modern bourgeois private property?
But does wage-labour create any property for the labourer? Not a bit. It creates capital, i.e., that
kind of property which exploits wage-labour, and which cannot increase except upon condition of
begetting a new supply of wage-labour for fresh exploitation. Property, in its present form, is
based on the antagonism of capital and wage-labour. Let us examine both sides of this antagonism.
To be a capitalist, is to have not only a purely personal, but a social status in production. Capital
is a collective product, and only by the united action of many members, nay, in the last resort, only
by the united action of all members of society, can it be set in motion.
Capital is, therefore, not a personal, it is a social power.
When, therefore, capital is converted into common property, into the property of all members of
society, personal property is not thereby transformed into social property. It is only the social
character of the property that is changed. It loses its class character.
Let us now take wage-labour.
The average price of wage-labour is the minimum wage, i. e., that quantum of the means of
subsistence, which is absolutely requisite to keep the labourer in bare existence
page 50

as a labourer. What, therefore, the wage-labourer appropriates by means of his labour, merely
suffices to prolong and reproduce a bare existence. We by no means intend to abolish this personal
appropriation of the products of labour, an appropriation that is made for the maintenance and
reproduction of human life, and that leaves no surplus wherewith to command the labour of others.
All that we want to do away with is the miserable character of this appropriation, under which the
labourer lives merely to increase capital, and is allowed to live only in so far as the interest of the
ruling class requires it.
In bourgeois society, living labour is but a means to increase accumulated labour. In Communist
society, accumulated labour is but a means to widen, to enrich, to promote the existence of the
labourer.
In bourgeois society, therefore, the past dominates the present; in Communist society, the
present dominates the past. In bourgeois society capital is independent and has individuality, while
the living person is dependent and has no individuality.

And the abolition of this state of things is called by the bourgeois, abolition of individuality and
freedom! And rightly so. The abolition of bourgeois individuality, bourgeois independence, and
bourgeois freedom is undoubtedly aimed at.
By freedom is meant, under the present bourgeois conditions of production, free trade, free
selling and buying.
But if selling and buying disappears, free selling and buying disappears also. This talk about
free selling and buying, and all the other "brave words" of our bourgeoisie about freedom in
general, have a meaning, if any, only in contrast with restricted selling and buying, with the
fettered
page 51

traders of the Middle Ages, but have no meaning when opposed to the Communistic abolition of
buying and selling, of the bourgeois conditions of production, and of the bourgeoisie itself.
You are horrified at our intending to do away with private property. But in your existing society,
private property is already done away with for nine-tenths of the population; its existence for the
few is solely due to its non-existence in the hands of those nine-tenths. You reproach us, therefore,
with intending to do away with a form of property, the necessary condition for whose existence is,
the non-existence of any property for the immense majority of society.
In one word, you reproach us with intending to do away with your property. Precisely so; that is
just what we intend.
From the moment when labour can no longer be converted into capital, money, or rent, into a
social power capable of being monopolised, i.e., from the moment when individual property can
no longer be transformed into bourgeois property, into capital,[46] from that moment, you say,
individuality vanishes.
You must, therefore, confess that by "individual" you mean no other person than the bourgeois,
than the middle-class owner of property. This person must, indeed, be swept out of the way, and
made impossible.
Communism deprives no man of the power to appropriate the products of society; all that it does
is to deprive him of the power to subjugate the labour of others by means of such appropriation.
It has been objected that upon the abolition of private property all work will cease, and universal
laziness will overtake us.
page 52

According to this, bourgeois society ought long ago to have gone to the dogs through sheer
idleness; for those of its members who work, acquire nothing, and those who acquire anything, do
not work. The whole of this objection is but another expression of the tautology: that there can no
lorger be any wage-labour when there is no longer any capital.
All objections urged against the Communistic mode of producing and appropriating material
products, have, in the same way, been urged against the Communistic modes of producing and
appropriating intellectual products. Just as, to the bourgeois, the disappearance of class property is

the disappearance of production itself, so the disappearance of class culture is to him identical with
the disappearance of all culture.
That culture, the loss of which he laments, is, for the enormous majority, a mere training to act
as a machine.
But don't wrangle with us so long as you apply, to our intended abolition of bourgeois property,
the standard of your bourgeois notions of freedom, culture, law, etc. Your very ideas are but the
outgrowth of the conditions of your bourgeois production and bourgeois property, just as your
jurisprudence is but the will of your class made into a law for all, a will, whose essential character
and direction are determined by the economical conditions of existence of your class.
The selfish misconception that induces you to transform into eternal laws of nature and of
reason, the social forms springing from your present mode of production and form of property -historical relations that rise and disappear in the progress of production -- this misconception you
share with every ruling class that has preceded you. What you
page 53

see clearly in the case of ancient property, what you admit in the case of feudal property, you are
of course forbidden to admit in the case of your own bourgois form of property.
Abolition of the family! Even the most radical flare up at this infamous proposal of the
Communists.
On what foundation is the present family, the bourgeois family, based? On capital, on private
gain. In its completely developed form this family exists only among the bourgeoisie. But this state
of things finds its complement in the practical absence of the family among the proletarians, and in
public prostitution.
The bourgeois family will vanish as a matter of course when its complement vanishes, and both
will vanish with the vanishing of capital.
Do you charge us with wanting to stop the exploitation of children by their parents? To this
crime we plead guilty.
But, you will say, we destroy the most hallowed of relations, when we replace home education
by social.
And your education! Is not that also social, and determined by the social conditions under which
you educate, by the intervention, direct or indirect, of society, by means of schools, etc.? The
Communists have not invented the intervention of society in education; they do but seek to alter
the character of that intervention, and to rescue education from the influence of the ruling class.
The bourgeois clap-trap about the family and education, about the hallowed co-relation of parent
and child, becomes all the more disgusting, the more, by the action of Modern Industry, all family
ties among the proletarians are torn asunder, and their children transformed into simple articles of
commerce and instruments of labour.
page 54

But you Communists would introduce community of women, screams the whole bourgeoisie in
chorus.
The bourgeois sees in his wife a mere instrument of production. He hears that the instruments of
production are to be exploited in common, and, naturally, can come to no other conclusion than
that the lot of being common to all will likewise fall to the women.
He has not even a suspicion that the real point aimed at is to do away with the status of women
as mere instruments of production.
For the rest, nothing is more ridiculous than the virtuous indignation of our bourgeois at the
community of women which, they pretend, is to be openly and officially established by the
Communists. The Communists have no need to introduce community of women; it has existed
almost from time immemorial.
Our bourgeois, not content with having the wives and daughters of their proletarians at their
disposal, not to speak of common prostitutes, take the greatest pleasure in seducing each others'
wives.
Bourgeois marriage is in reality a system of wives in common and thus, at the most, what the
Communists might possibly be reproached with, is that they desire to introduce, in substitution for
a hypocritically concealed, an openly legalised community of women. For the rest, it is
self-evident that the abolition of the present system of production must bring with it the abolition
of the community of women springing from that system, i.e., of prostitution both public and
private.
The Communists are further reproached with desiring to abolish countries and nationality.
page 55

The working men have no country. We cannot take from them what they have not got. Since the
proletariat must first of all acquire political supremacy, must rise to be the leading class of the
nation,[47] must constitute itself the nation, it is, so far, itself national, though not in the bourgeois
sense of the word.
National differences and antagonisms between peoples are daily more and more vanishing,
owing to the development of the bourgeoisie, to freedom of commerce, to the world market, to
uniformity in the mode of production and in the conditions of life corresponding thereto.
The supremacy of the proletariat will cause them to vanish still faster. United action, of the
leading civilised countries at least, is one of the first conditions for the emancipation of the
proletariat.
In proportion as the exploitation of one individual by another is put an end to, the exploitation of
one nation by another will also be put an end to. In proportion as the antagonism between classes
within the nation vanishes, the hostility of one nation to another will come to an end.
The charges against Communism made from a religious, a philosophical, and, generally, from
an ideological standpoint, are not deserving of serious examination.
Does it require deep intuition to comprehend that man's ideas, views and conceptions, in one

word, man's consciousness, changes with every change in the conditions of his material existence,
in his social relations and in his social life?
What else does the history of ideas prove, than that intellectual production changes its character
in proportion as material production is changed? The ruling ideas of each age have ever been the
ideas of its ruling class.
page 56

When people speak of ideas that revolutionise society, they do but express the fact, that within
the old society, the elements of a new one have been created, and that the dissolution of the old
ideas keeps even pace with the dissolution of the old conditions of existence.
When the ancient world was in its last throes, the ancient religions were overcome by
Christianity. When Christian ideas succumbed in the 18th century to rationalist ideas, feudal
society fought its death-battle with the then revolutionary bourgeoisie. The ideas of religious
liberty and freedom of conscience, merely gave expression to the sway of free competition within
the domain of knowledge.[48]
"Undoubtedly," it will be said, "religious, moral, philosophical and juridical ideas have been
modified in the course of historical development. But religion, morality, philosophy, political
science, and law, constantly survived this change."
"There are, besides, eternal truths, such as Freedom, Justice, etc., that are common to all states
of society. But Communism abolishes eternal truths, it abolishes all religion, and all morality,
instead of constituting them on a new basis; it therefore acts in contradiction to all past historical
experience."
What does this accusation reduce itself to? The history of all past society has consisted in the
development of class antagonisms, antagonisms that assumed different forms at different epochs.
But whatever form they may have taken, one fact is common to all past ages, viz., the
exploitation of one part of society by the other. No wonder, then, that the social consciousness of
past ages, despite all the multiplicity and variety it displays, moves within certain common forms,
or general
page 57

ideas, which cannot completely vanish except with the total disappearance of class antagonisms.
The Communist revolution is the most radical rupture with traditional property relations; no
wonder that its development involves the most radical rupture with traditional ideas.
But let us have done with the bourgeois objections to Communism.
We have seen above, that the first step in the revolution by the working class, is to raise the
proletariat to the position of ruling class, to win the battle of democracy.
The proletariat will use its political supremacy to wrest, by degrees, all capital from the
bourgeoisie, to centralise all instruments of production in the hands of the State, i. e., of the
proletariat organised as the ruling class; and to increase the total of productive forces as rapidly as

possible.
Of course, in the beginning, this cannot be effected except by means of despotic inroads on the
rights of property, and on the conditions of bourgeois production; by means of measures, therefore,
which appear economically insufficient and untenable, but which, in the course of the movement,
outstrip themselves, necessitate further inroads upon the old social order,[49] and are unavoidable as
a means of entirely revolutionising the mode of production.
These measures will of course be different in different countries.
Nevertheless in the most advanced countries, the following will be pretty generally applicable.
1. Abolition of property in land and application of all rents of land to public purposes.
2. A heavy progressive or graduated income tax.
3. Abolition of all right of inheritance.
4. Confiscation of the property of all emigrants and rebels.
page 58

5. Centralisation of credit in the hands of the State, by means of a national bank with State
capital and an exclusive monopoly.
6. Centralisation of the means of communication and transport in the hands of the State.
7. Extension of factories and instruments of production owned by the State; the bringing into
cultivation of waste lands, and the improvement of the soil generally in accordance with a
common p!an.
8. Equal liability of all to labour. Establishment of industrial armies, especially for agriculture.
9. Combination of agriculture with manufacturing in dustries; gradual abolition of the
distinction[50] between town and country, by a more equable distribution of the population over the
country.[51]
10. Free education for all children in public schools. Abolition of children's factory labour in its
present form. Combination of education with industrial production, etc., etc.
When, in the course of development, class distinctions have disappeared, and all production has
been concentrated in the hands of a vast association of the whole nation, the public power will lose
its political character. Political power, properly so called, is merely the organised power of one
class for oppressing another. If the proletariat during its contest with the bourgeoisie is compelled,
by the force of circumstances, to organise itself as a class, if, by means of a revolution, it makes
itself the ruling class, and, as such, sweeps away by force the old conditions of production, then it
will, along with these conditions, have swept away the conditions for the existence of class
antagonisms and of classes generally,[52] and will thereby have abolished its own supremacy as a
class.
page 59

In place of the old bourgeois society, with its classes and class antagonisms, we shall have an
association, in which the free development of each is the condition for the free development of all.

page 60

III
SOCIALIST AND COMMUNIST LITERATURE
1. REACTIONARY SOCIALISM
a. Feudal Socialism
Owing to their historical position, it became the vocation of the aristocracies of France and
England to write pamphlets against modern bourgeois society. In the French revolution of July,
1830, and in the English reform agitation, these aristocracies again succumbed to the hateful
upstart. Thenceforth, a serious political contest was altogether out of the question. A literary battle
alone remained possible. But even in the domain of literature the old cries of the restoration
period* had become impossible.
In order to arouse sympathy, the aristocracy were obliged to lose sight, apparently, of their own
interests, and to formulate their indictment against the bourgeoisie in the interest of the exploited
working class alone. Thus the aristocracy
* Not the English Restoration 1660 to 1689, but the French Restoration 1814 to 1830. [Note by Engels to the
English edition of 1888.]
page 61

took their revenge by singing lampoons on their new master, and whispering in his ears sinister
prophecies of coming catastrophe.
In this way arose feudal Socialism: half lamentation, half lampoon; half echo of the past, half
menace of the future; at times, by its bitter, witty and incisive criticism, striking the bourgeoisie to
the very heart's core; but always ludicrous in its effect, through total incapacity to comprehend the
march of modern history.
The aristocracy, in order to rally the people to them, waved the proletarian alms-bag in front for
a banner. But the people, so often as it joined them, saw on their hindquarters the old feudal coats
of arms, and deserted with loud and irreverent laughter.
One section of the French Legitimists and "Young England"[53] exhibited this spectacle.

In pointing out that their mode of exploitation was different to that of the bourgeoisie, the
feudalists forget that they exploited under circumstances and conditions that were quite different,
and that are now antiquated. In showing that, under their rule, the modern proletariat never existed,
they forget that the modern bourgeoisie is the necessary offspring of their own form of society.
For the rest, so little do they conceal the reactionary character of their criticism that their chief
accusation against the bourgeoisie amounts to this, that under the bourgeois regime a class is being
developed, which is destined to cut up root and branch the old order of society.
What they upbraid the bourgeoisie with is not so much that it creates a proletariat, as that it
creates a revolutionary proletariat.
page 62

In political practice, therefore, they join in all coercive measures against the working class; and
in ordinary life, despite their high-falutin phrases, they stoop to pick up the golden apples dropped
from the tree of industry,[54] and to barter truth, love, and honour for traffic in wool, beetroot-sugar,
and potato spirits.[*]
As the parson has ever gone hand in hand with the landlord, so has Clerical Socialism with
Feudal Socialism.
Nothing is easier than to give Christian asceticism a Socialist tinge. Has not Christianity
declaimed against private property, against marriage, against the State? Has it not preached in the
place of these, charity and poverty, celibacy and mortification of the flesh, monastic life and
Mother Church? Christians[55] Socialism is but the holy water with which the priest consecrates the
heart-burnings of the aristocrat.

b. Petty-Bourgeois Socialism
The feudal aristocracy was not the only class that was ruined by the bourgeoisie, not the only
class whose conditions of existence pined and perished in the atmosphere of modern bourgeois
society. The mediaeval burgesses and the small peasant proprietors were the precursors of the
modern bourgeoisie. In those countries which are but little developed,
* This applies chiefly to Germany where the landed aristocracy and squirearchy have large portions of their
estates cultivated for their own account by stewards, and are, moreover, extensive beetroot-sugar manufacturers
and distillers of potato spirits. The wealthier British aristocracy are, as yet, rather above that; but they, too, know
how to make up for declining rents by lending their names to floaters of more or less shady joint-stock companies.
[Note by E.ngels to the English edition of 1888.]
page 63

industrially and commercially, these two classes still vegetate side by side with the rising
bourgeoisie.
In countries where modern civilisation has become fully developed, a new class of petty
bourgeois has been formed, fluctuating between proletariat and bourgeoisie, and ever renewing
itself as a supplementary part of bourgeois society. The individual members of this class, however,
are being constantly hurled down into the proletariat by the action of competition, and, as modern

industry develops, they even see the moment approaching when they will completely disappear as
an independent section of modern society, to be replaced, in manufactures, agriculture and
commerce, by over-lookers, bailiffs and shopmen.
In countries like France, where the peasants constitute far more than half of the population, it
was natural that writers who sided with the proletariat against the bourgeoisie, should use, in their
criticism of the bourgeois r&eacutegime, the standard of the peasant and petty bourgeois, and from
the standpoint of these intermediate classes should take up the cudgels for the working class. Thus
arose petty-bourgeois Socialism. Sismondi was the head of this school, not only in France but also
in England.
This school of Socialism dissected with great acuteness the contradictions in the conditions of
modern production. It laid bare the hypocritical apologies of economists. It proved,
incontrovertibly, the disastrous effects of machinery and division of labour; the concentration of
capital and land in a few hands; overproduction and crises; it pointed out the inevitable ruin of the
petty bourgeois and peasant, the misery of the proletariat, the anarchy in production, the crying
inequalities in the distribution of wealth, the industrial war of
page 64

extermination between nations, the dissolution of old moral bonds, of the old family relations, of
the old nationalities.
In its positive aims, however, this form of Socialism aspires either to restoring the old means of
production and of exchange, and with them the old property relations, and the old society, or to
cramping the modern means of production and of exchange, within the framework of the old
property relations that have been, and were bound to be, exploded by those means. In either case, it
is both reactionary and Utopian.
Its last words are: corporate guilds for manufacture; patriarchal relations in agriculture.
Ultimately, when stubborn historical facts had dispersed all intoxicating effects of
self-deception, this form of Socialism ended in a miserable fit of the blues.[56]

c. German, or "True," Socialism
The Socialist and Communist literature of France, a literature that originated under the pressure
of a bourgeoisie in power, and that was the expression of the struggle against this power, was
introduced into Germany at a time when the bourgeoisie, in that country, had just begun its contest
with feudal absolutism.
German philosophers, would-be philosophers, and beaux esprits, eagerly seized on this
literature, only forgetting, that when these writings immigrated from France into Germany, French
social conditions had not immigrated along with them. In contact with German social conditions,
this French literature lost all its immediate practical significance, and assumed a purely literary
aspect.[57] Thus, to the German philosophers of the Eighteenth Century, the demands of the first
French
page 65

Revolution were nothing more than the demands of "Practical Reason" in general, and the
utterance of the will of the revolutionary French bourgeoisie signified in their eyes the laws of
pure Will, of Will as it was bound to be, of true human Will generally.
The work of the German literati consisted solely in bringing the new French ideas into harmony
with their ancient philosophical conscience, or rather, in annexing the French ideas without
deserting their own philosophic point of view.
This annexation took place in the same way in which a foreign language is appropriated,
namely, by translation.
It is well known how the monks wrote silly lives of Catholic Saints over the manuscripts on
which the classical works of ancient heathendom had been written. The German literati reversed
this process with the profane French literature. They wrote their philosophical nonsense beneath
the French original. For instance, beneath the French criticism of the economic functions of
money, they wrote "Alienation of Humanity," and beneath the French criticism of the bourgeois
State they wrote, "Dethronement of the Category of the General," and so forth.
The introduction of these philosophical phrases at the back of the French historical criticisms
they dubbed "Philosophy of Action," "True Socialism," "German Science of Socialism,"
"Philosophical Foundation of Socialism," and so on.
The French Socialist and Communist literature was thus completely emasculated. And, since it
ceased in the hands of the German to express the struggle of one class with the other, he felt
conscious of having overcome "French one-sidedness" and of representing, not true requirements,
but the requirements of Truth; not the interests of the proletariat, but the interests of Human
Nature, of Man in general, who
page 66

belongs to no class, has no reality, who exists only in the misty realm of philosophical fantasy.
This German Socialism, which took its school-boy task so seriously and solemnly, and extolled
its poor stock-in-trade in such mountebank fashion, meanwhile gradually lost its pedantic
innocence.
The fight of the German, and, especially, of the Prussian bourgeoisie, against feudal aristocracy
and absolute monarchy, in other words, the liberal movement, became more earnest.
By this, the long-wished-for opportunity was offered to "True" Socialism of confronting the
political movement with the Socialist demands, of hurling the traditional anathemas against
liberalism, against representative government, against bourgeois competition, bourgeois freedom
of the press, bourgeois legislation, bourgeois liberty and equality, and of preaching to the masses
that they had nothing to gain, and everything to lose, by this bourgeois movement. German
Socialism forgot, in the nick of time, that the French criticism, whose silly echo it was,
presupposed the existence of modern bourgeois society, with its corresponding economic
conditions of existence, and the political constitution adapted thereto, the very things whose
attainment was the object of the pending struggle in Germany.

To the absolute governments, with their following of parsons, professors, country squires and
officials, it served as a welcome scarecrow against the threatening bourgeoisie.
It was a sweet finish after the bitter pills of floggings and bullets with which these same
governments, just at that time, dosed the German working-class risings.
While this "True" Socialism thus served the governments as a weapon for fighting the German
bourgeoisie, it, at the
page 67

same time, directly represented a reactionary interest, the interest of the German Philistines. In
Germany the petty-bourgeois class, a relic of the 16th century, and since then constantly cropping
up again under various forms, is the real social basis of the existing state of things.
To preserve this class is to preserve the existing state of things in Germany. The industrial and
political supremacy of the bourgeoisie threatens it with certain destruction; on the one hand, from
the concentration of capital; on the other, from the rise of a revolutionary proletariat. "True"
Socialism appeared to kill these two birds with one stone. It spread like an epidemic.
The robe of speculative cobwebs, embroidered with flowers of rhetoric, steeped in the dew of
sickly sentiment, this transcendental robe in which the German Socialists wrapped their sorry
"eternal truths," all skin and bone, served to wonderfully increase the sale of their goods amongst
such a public.
And on its part, German Socialism recognised, more and more, its own calling as the bombastic
representative of the petty-bourgeois Philistine.
It proclaimed the German nation to be the model nation, and the German petty Philistine to be
the typical man. To every villainous meanness of this model man it gave a hidden, higher,
Socialistic interpretation, the exact contrary of its real character. It went to the extreme length of
directly opposing the "brutally destructive" tendency of Communism, and of proclaiming its
supreme and impartial contempt of all class struggles. With very few exceptions, all the so-called
Socialist and Communist publications that now (1847) circulate
page 68

in Germany belong to the domain of this foul and enervating literature.[*]

2. CONSERVATIVE, OR BOURGEOIS, SOCIALISM
A part of the bourgeoisie is desirous of redressing social grievances, in order to secure the
continued existence of bourgeois society.
To this section belong economists, philanthropists, humanitarians, improvers of the condition of
the working class, organisers of charity, members of societies for the prevention of cruelty to
animals, temperance fanatics, hole-and-corner reformers of every imaginable kind. This form of
Socialism has, moreover, been worked out into complete systems.
We may cite Proudhon's Philosophie de la Mis&egravere as an example of this form.

The Socialistic bourgeois want all the advantages of modern social conditions without the
struggles and dangers necessarily resulting therefrom. They desire the existing state of society
minus its revolutionary and disintegrating elements. They wish for a bourgeoisie without a
proletariat. The bourgeoisie naturally conceives the world in which it is supreme to be the best;
and bourgeois Socialism develops this comfortable conception into various more or less complete
systems. In requiring the proletariat to carry out such a system, and thereby to march straightway
into the social New Jerusalem, it but requires in reality, that the proletariat should remain
* The revolutionary storm of 1848 swept away this whole shabby tendency and cured its protagonists of the
desire to dabble further in Socialism. The chief representative and classical type of this tendency is Herr Karl Grün.
[Note by Engels to the German edition of 1890.]
page 69

within the bounds of existing society, but should cast away all its hateful ideas concerning the
bourgeoisie.
A second and more practical, but less systematic, form of this Socialism sought to depreciate
every revolutionary movement in the eyes of the working class, by showing that no mere political
reform, but only a change in the material conditions of existence, in economical relations, could be
of any advantage to them. By changes in the material conditions of existence, this form of
Socialism, however, by no means understands abolition of the bourgeois relations of production,
an abolition that can be effected only by a revolution, but administrative reforms, based on the
continued existence of these relations; reforms, therefore, that in no respect affect the relations
between capital and labour, but, at the best, lessen the cost, and simplify the administrative work,
of bourgeois government.
Bourgeois Socialism attains adequate expression, when, and only when, it becomes a mere
figure of speech.
Free trade: for the benefit of the working class. Protective duties: for the benefit of the working
class. Prison Reform: for the benefit of the working class. This is the last word and the only
seriously meant word of bourgeois Socialism.
It is summed up in the phrase: the bourgeois is a bourgeois -- for the benefit of the working
class.

3. CRITICAL-UTOPIAN SOCIALISM
AND COMMUNISM
We do not here refer to that literature which, in every great modern revolution, has always given
voice to the depage 70

mands of the proletariat, such as the writings of Babeuf and others.
The first direct attempts of the proletariat to attain its own ends, made in times of universal
excitement, when feudal society was being overthrown, these attempts necessarily failed, owing to

the then undeveloped state of the proletariat, as well as to the absence of the economic conditions
for its emancipation, conditions that had yet to be produced, and could be produced by the
impending bourgeois epoch alone. The revolutionary literature that accompanied these first
movements of the proletariat had necessarily a reactionary character. It inculcated universal
asceticism and social levelling in its crudest form.
The Socialist and Communist systems properly so called, those of St. Simon, Fourier, Owen and
others, spring into existence in the early undeveloped period, described above, of the struggle
between proletariat and bourgeoisie (see Section I. Bourgeois and Proletarians).
The founders of these systems see, indeed, the class antagonisms, as well as the action of the
decomposing elements in the prevailing form of society. But the proletariat, as yet in its infancy,
offers to them the spectacle of a class without any historical initiative or any independent political
movement.
Since the development of class antagonism keeps even pace with the development of industry,
the economic situation, as they find it, does not as yet offer to them the material conditions for the
emancipation of the proletariat. They therefore search after a new social science, after new social
laws, that are to create these conditions.
page 71

Historical action is to yield to their personal inventive action, historically created conditions of
emancipation to fantastic ones, and the gradual, spontaneous class-organisation of the proletariat to
an organisation of society specially contrived by these inventors. Future history resolves itself, in
their eyes, into the propaganda and the practical carrying out of their social plans.
In the formation of their plans they are conscious of caring chiefly for the interests of the
working class, as being the most suffering class. Only from the point of view of being the most
suffering class does the proletariat exist for them.
The undeveloped state of the class struggle, as well as their own surroundings, causes Socialists
of this kind to consider themselves far superior to all class antagonisms. They want to improve the
condition of every member of society, even that of the most favoured. Hence, they habitually
appeal to society at large, without distinction of class; nay, by preference, to the ruling class. For
how can people, when once they understand their system, fail to see in it the best possible plan of
the best possible state of society?
Hence, they reject all political, and especially all revolutionary, action; they wish to attain their
ends by peaceful means, and endeavour, by small experiments, necessarily doomed to failure, and
by the force of example, to pave the way for the new social Gospel.
Such fantastic pictures of future society, painted at a time when the proletariat is still in a very
undeveloped state and has but a fantastic conception of its own position, correspond with[58] the
first instinctive yearnings of that class for a general reconstruction of society.
page 72

But these Socialist and Communist publications contain also a critical element. They attack
every principle of existing society. Hence they are full of the most valuable materials for the

enlightenment of the working class. The practical measures proposed in them[59] -- such as the
abolition of the distinction[60] between town and country, of the family, of the carrying on of
industries for the account of private in dividuals, and of the wage system, the proclamation of
social harmony, the conversion of the functions of the State into a mere superintendence of
production, all these proposals point solely to the disappearance of class antagonisms which were,
at that time, only just cropping up, and which, in these publications, are recognised in their earliest,
indistinct and undefined forms only. These proposals, therefore, are of a purely Utopian character.
The significance of Critical-Utopian Socialism and Communism bears an inverse relation to
historical development. In proportion as the modern class struggle develops and takes definite
shape, this fantastic standing apart from the contest, these fantastic attacks on it, lose all practical
value and all theoretical justification. Therefore, although the originators of these systems were, in
many respects, revolutionary, their disciples have, in every case, formed mere reactionary sects.
They hold fast by the original views of their masters, in opposition to the progressive historical
development of the proletariat. They, therefore, endeavour, and that consistently, to deaden the
class struggle and to reconcile the class antagonisms. They still dream of experimental realisation
of their social Utopias, of founding isolated "phalansteres," of establishing "Home Colonies," of
setting up a "Little
page 73

Icaria"[*] -- duodecimo editions of the New Jerusalem -- and to realise all these castles in the air,
they are compelled to appeal to the feelings and purses of the bourgeois. By degrees they sink into
the category of the reactionary conservative Socialists depicted above, differing from these only by
more systematic pedantry, and by their fanatical and superstitious belief in the miraculous effects
of their social science.
They, therefore, violently oppose all political action on the part of the working class; such
action, according to them, can only result from blind unbelief in the new Gospel.
The Owenites in England, and the Fourierists in France, respectively oppose the Chartists and
the R&eacuteformistes.[61]

* Phalanst&egraveres were Socialist colonies on the plan of Charles Fourier; Icaria was the name given by
Cabet to his Utopia and, later on, to his American Communist colony. [Note by Engels to the English edition of
1888.]
"Home Colonies" were what Owen called his Communist model societies. Phalanst&egraveres was the name of
the public palaces planned by Fourier. Icaria was the name given to the Utopian land of fancy, whose Communist
institutions Cabet portrayed. [Note by Engels to the German edition of 1890.]
page 74

IV

POSITION OF THE COMMUNISTS
IN RELATION
TO THE VARIOUS EXISTING
OPPOSITION PARTIES

Section II has made clear the relations of the Communists to the existing working-class parties,
such as the Chartists in England and the Agrarian Reformers in America.
The Communists fight for the attainment of the immediate aims, for the enforcement of the
momentary interests of the working class; but in the movement of the present, they also represent
and take care of the future of that movement. In France the Communists ally themselves with the
Social-Democrats,* against the conservative and radical bourgeoisie,
* The party then represented in Parliament by Ledru-Rollin, in literature by Louis Blanc, in the daily press by the
R&eacuteforme. The name of Social-Democracy signified, with these its inventors, a section of the Democratic or
Republican party more or less tinged with Socialism. [Note by Engels to the English edtion of 1888.]
The party in France which at that time called itself Socialist-Democratic was represented in political life by
Ledru-Rollin and in [cont. onto p. 75. -- DJR] literature by Louis Blanc; thus it differed immeasurably from present-day
German Social-Democracy. [Note by Engels to the German edition of 1890.]
page 75

reserving, however, the right to take up a critical position in regard to phrases and illusions
traditionally handed down from the great Revolution. In Switzerland they support the Radicals,
without losing sight of the fact that this party consists of antagonistic elements, partly of
Democratic Socialists, in the French sense, partly of radical bourgeois.
In Poland they support the party that insists on an agrarian revolution as the prime condition for
national emancipation, that party which fomented the insurrection of Cracow in 1846.
In Germany they fight with the bourgeoisie whenever it acts in a revolutionary way, against the
absolute monarchy, the feudal squirearchy, and the petty bourgeoisie.[62]
But they never cease, for a single instant, to instil into the working class the clearest possible
recognition of the hostile antagonism between bourgeoisie and proletariat, in order that the
German workers may straightway use, as so many weapons against the bourgeoisie, the social and
political conditions that the bourgeoisie must necessarily introduce along with its supremacy, and
in order that, after the fall of the reactionary classes in Germany, the fight against the bourgeoisie
itself may immediately begin.
The Communists turn their attention chiefly to Germany, because that country is on the eve of a
bourgeois revolution that is bound to be carried out under more advanced conditions of European
civilisation, and with a much more developed proletariat, than that of England was in the sevenpage 76

teenth, and of France in the eighteenth century, and because the bourgeois revolution in Germany
will be but the prelude to an immediately following proletarian revolution.

In short, the Communists everywhere support every revolutionary movement against the
existing social and political order of things.
In all these movements they bring to the front, as the leading question in each, the property
question, no matter what its degree of development at the time.
Finally, they labour everywhere for the union and agreement of the democratic parties of all
countries.
The Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims. They openly declare that their ends
can be attained only by the forcible overthrow of all existing social conditions. Let the ruling
classes tremble at a Communistic revolution. The proletarians have nothing to lose but their
chains. They have a world to win.
WORKING MEN OF ALL COUNTRIES, UNITE!

From Marx
to Mao

Marx and Engels
Collection

Reading
Guide

Notes on
the Text
Below

page 77

NOTES

[1]

The Manifesto of the Communist Party is the greatest programmatic document of scientific communism. "This
little booklet is worth whole volumes: to this day its spirit inspires and guides the entire organised and fighting
proletariat of the civilised world." (V. I. Lenin, "Frederick Engels," Collected Works, Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow,
1960, Vol. II, p. 24.) As a platform drawn up by Marx and Engels for the Communist League from December 1847
to January 1848, the Manifesto first appeared in February 1848 in London as a pamphlet of 23 pages. From March
to July 1848, it was reprinted serially in Deutsche Londoner Zeitung, the democratic organ of the German
emigrants. In the same year the German edition of the Manifesto was reprinted in London as a pamphlet of 30
pages. This edition served as the basis of the subsequent editions authorised by Marx and Engels. In 1848 the
Manifesto was also translated into several other European languages -- French, Polish, Italian, Danish, Flemish and
Swedish. The authors' names were not mentioned in the editions of 1848. They were first given in the editor's
preface written by George Harney for the first English translation of the Manifesto which was printed in the
Chartist paper the Red Republican in 1850. [title-page]
[2]

On the initiative of the editorial board of Der Volksstaat, a new German edition of the Manifesto was published
in 1872, with a preface by Marx and Engels and some minor changes in the text. It bore the title The Communist

Manifesto, as did the later German editions of 1883 and 1890.
[3]

The February Revolution in France, 1848.

[p.1]

[p.1]

page 78
[4]

The Red Republican was a Chartist weekly published from June to November 1850 by George Harney. In its
Nos. 21-24, November 1850, the first English translation of the Manifesto of the Communist Party appeared under
the title, Manifesto of the German Communist Party. [p.1]
[5]

Le Socialiste, organ of the French Section of the International, was a weekly in French published in New York
from October 1871 to May 1873. It supported the bourgeois and petty-bourgeois elements in the North American
Federation of the International. After the Hague Congress (September 1872) it severed connections with the
International. The Manifesto of the Communist Party was published in the weekly in January and February 1872.
[p.1]
[6]

This refers to the second Russian edition of the Manifesto which appeared in 1882 in Geneva. In the postscript
to the article "On Social Relations in Russia," Engels named G. V. Plekhanov as the translator. In the Russian
edition of 1900 Plekhanov also indicated that he had done the translation. For the Russian edition of 1882 Marx
and Engels wrote a preface which appeared in Russian in Narodnaya Volya (The Will of the People ) on February
5, 1882. This preface appeared in German on April 13, 1882, in No. 16 of Der Sozialdemokrat, organ of the
German Social-Demoaatic Party. Engels included this preface in the German edition of the Manifesto of 1890.
[p.4]
[7]

This edition appeared in 1869. In Engels's preface to the English edition of 1888, the publication date of this
Russian translation of the Manifesto was also incorrectly given (see p. 11). [p.4]
[8]

Kolokol (The Bell ), Russian revolutionary democratic journal, published by A. I. Herzen and N. P. Ogaryov in
London from 1857 to 1865 and afterwards in Geneva. It was published in Russian from 1857 to 1867 and in French
with a Russian supplement from 1868 to 1869. [p.4]
[9]

This is a reference to the situation following the assassination of Tsar Alexander II by members of the
Narodnaya Volya on March 13, 1881, when Alexander III, fearful of fresh acts of terrorism by the secret executive
committee of the Narodnaya Volya, hid himself in Gatchina, a place to the southwest of present-day Leningrad.
[p.5]
[10]

Obshchina : Village community.

[p.5]

[11]

This refers to the third German edition of the Manifesto, the first edition collated by Engels after Marx's
death. [p.7]
[12]

The Cologne Communist Trial (October 4 to November 12, 1852) was a case fabricated by the Prussian
government. It arrested 11 members
page 79

of the Communist League (1847-52) -- the first international communist organisation of the proletariat, led by
Marx and Engels with the Manifesto of tbe Communist Party as its programme -- and handed them over to the court
for trial on the charge of "high treason." Evidence produced by Prussian police-spies consisted of a forged "original
minute-book" of the sittings of the Communist League's Central Board and other falsified documents, as well as
papers stolen by the police from the adventurist Willich-Schapper faction, which had already been expelled from
the League. Based on the faked documents and false testimonies, the court sentenced seven of the defendants from
three to six years of imprisonment. Marx and Engels thoroughly exposed the provocation of the organisers of this
trial and the despicable tricks the Prussian police state employed against the international workers' movement. (See
Marx, "Revelations About the Cologne Communist Trial," and Engels, "The Late Trial at Cologne.") [p.10]

[13]

A quotation from a speech by W. Bevan, President of the Trades Union Congress, delivered at a meeting of
the Congress held at Swansea in 1887. Bevan's speech was reported in the journal Commonweal on September 17,
1887. [p.11]
[14]

Woodbull and Claflin's Weeky, an American journal published by the bourgeois feminists, Victoria Woodhull
and Tennessee Claflin, in New York from 1870 to 1876. The weekly carried an abridged version of the Manifesto
of the Communist Party in its issue of December 30, 1871. [p.11]
[15]

The translator of the second Russian edition of the Manifesto was actually G. V. Plekhanov. See Note 6.

[p.11]
[16]

The Danish translation referred to here -- K. Marx og F. Engels: Det Kommunistiske Manifest,
K&oumlbenhavn, 1885 -- contains some omissions and inaccuracies, which Engels pointed out in his preface to the
German edition of 1890 of the Manifesto. [p.11]
[17]

In fact, the French translation, made by Laura Lafargue, was published in Le Socialiste from August 29 to
November 7, 1885. It was also printed as an appendix to G. T. Mermeix's La France Socialiste, Paris, 1886.
Le Socialiste, a weekly founded in Paris by Jules Guesde in 1885. Before 1902 it was the organ of the French
Labour Party. It became that of the Socialist Party of France from 1902 to 1905, and of the French Socialist Party
from 1905. Engels contributed to the journal during the 1880s and 1890s. [p.12]
page 80
[18]

The Spanish translation appeared in El Socialista from July to August 1886 and was also published as a
pamphlet in the same year.
El Socialista, organ of the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party, was a weekly first published in Madrid in 1885.
[p.12]
[19]

This axiom had been set out by Marx and Engels in a number of their works since the 1840s. For the
formulation referred to here, see the "General Rules of the International Working Men's Association." [p.13]
[20]

In the preface to the German edition of 1872 this phrase is worded somewhat differently. See p. 2 of this
book. [p.14]
[21]

Engels wrote this preface for the fourth German edition of the Manifesto which appeared in London, May
1890, as one of the "Sozialdemokratische Bibliothek" series. This was the last edition collated by one of its authors.
It also included the prefaces to the German editions of 1872 and 1883. A part of Engels's preface to this new
edition was reprinted in an editorial entitled "A New Edition of the Communist Manifesto " in No. 33, August 16,
1890, of Der Sozialdemokrat, organ of the German Social-Democratic Party, as well as in an editorial of
Arbeiter-Zeitung, No. 48, November 28, 1890, celebrating Engels's seventieth birthday. [p.16]
[22]

Engels is referring to his preface to the German edition of 1883.

[p.16]

[23]

The lost German original manuscript of the preface by Marx and Engels to the Russian edition of the
Manifesto has been finally found. When retranslating this preface from Russian to German, Engels made some
slight changes in it. [p.16]
[24]

The Geneva Congress of the First International was held September 3-8, 1866. Attending the Congress were
sixty delegates representing the General Council and the different sections of the International, as well as workers'
societies of England, France, Germany and Switzerland. Hermann Jung was in the chair. Marx's "Instructions for
the Delegates of the Provisional General Council, the Different Questions" was read at the Congress as the General
Council's official report. The Proudhonists who commanded one third of the votes at the Congress counterposed
Marx's "Instructions" with a comprehensive programme covering all items on the agenda. However, supporters of
the General Council won on most of the questions under discussion. The Congress adopted six of the nine points in

the "Instructions" as resolutions. These covered questions involving the united action of the international forces,
the legislative introduction of the eight-hour working
page 81

day, child and woman labour, co-operative labour, trade unions, and the standing armies. The Geneva Congress
also approved the Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association.
The Paris Workers' Congress -- the International Socialist Workers' Congress -- was held in Paris, July 14-20,
1889, and was actually the founding congress of the Second International. The French opportunists, the
Possibilists, and their followers in the British Social Democratic Federation attempted to take the preparation for
the Congress into their hands, seize its leadership and obstruct the building of a new international unity of the
socialist and workers' organisations on the basis of Marxism. But the Marxists led directly by Engels waged a
persistent struggle against them. And by the time the Congress opened on July 14, 1889 -- the 100th anniversary of
the storming of the Bastille -- the Marxist parties had become dominant. Present at the Congress were 393
delegates from 20 European and American countries. Their attempt having failed, the Possibilists called a rival
congress in Paris on the same day to counterpose the Marxist Congress. Only a few of the foreign delegates
attended the Possibilists' congress, and most of them were fake representatives.
The International Socialist Workers' Congress listened to reports made by delegates of the socialist parties on the
working-class movement in their respective countries, worked out the basic principles of international labour
legislation, endorsed the demand for the legislative introduction of the eight-hour working day and pointed out the
ways workers could attain their objectives. The Congress stressed the necessity of the political organisation of the
proletariat and of struggling for the realisation of the workers' political demands. It advocated the abolition of
standing armies and proposed the universal arming of the people. The most notable decision made by the Congress
was to call on the workers of all lands to celebrate May First each year as the international festival of the working
class. [p.22]
[25]

Engels wrote this preface in German for the new Polish edition of the Manifesto, which was published in 1892
in London by the Przedswit Press run by Polish socialists. After sending the preface to the Przedswit Press, Engels
wrote, in a letter to Stanislaw Mendelson, dated February 11, 1892, that he would like to learn Polish and
thoroughly study the development of the workers' movement in Poland, so that he could write a more detailed
preface for the next Polish edition of the Manifesto. [p.23]
page 82
[26]

Congress Poland, a part of Poland which under the official name of Polish Kingdom was ceded to Russia by
the decisions of the Vienna Congress of 1814-15. [p.23]
[27]

This preface, originally entitled "To the Italian Reader," was written by Engels in French for the Italian
edition of the Manifesto on the request of the Italian socialist leader Filippo Turati. The Italian edition was
published as a pamphlet in Milan by the press of Critica Sociale, a socialist theoretical periodical. The Manifesto
was translated into Italian by Pompeo Bettini, and Engels's preface by Turati. [p.26]
[28]

In many of his works, particularly in his article "Die Erfurterei im Jahr 1859," Marx set out the idea that
reaction after 1848 acted as a peculiar testamentary executor of the revolution, inevitably fulfilling the demands of
the revolution, although in a tragi-comic manner, almost as a satire on the revolution. [p.26]
[29]

In the German original (the 1848 edition), the words "political advance of that class" read "political advance."

[p.33]
[30]

The words "(as in Italy and Germany)" are not in the German original.

[31]

The words "(as in France)" are not in the German original.

[32]

In the German edition of 1890, the word "earlier" reads "other."

[33]

In the German original, the sentence ends here. Then follows: "They hindered production, instead of

[p.33]

[p.33]
[p.35]

promoting it. They became so many fetters. . . ."

[p.37]

[34]

In the German edition of 1848, the words "development of the conditions of bourgeois property" read
"development of bourgeois civilisation and the conditions of bourgeois property." But in the German editions of
1872, 1883 and 1890, the words "bourgeois civilisation and" were omitted. [p.38]
[35]

In their works written in later periods, Marx and Engels substituted the more accurate concepts of "value of
labour power" and "price of labour power" (first introduced by Marx) for "value of labour" and "price of labour."
[p.39]
[36]

In the first German edition of February 1848, the words "superseded by that of women" read "superseded by
that of women and children." [p.40]
[37]

In the German original, this sentence reads: "They direct their attacks not only against the bourgeois
conditions of production, but. . . ." [p.41]
page 83
[38]

The words "(Trades' Unions)" are not in the German original.

[39]

In the German original, the words "elements of political and general education" read "elements of education."

[p.42]

[p.43]
[40]

In the German original, the words "fresh elements of enlightenment and progress" read "mass educational
elements." [p.43]
[41]

In the German original, "The 'dangerous class,' the social scum," read "The lumpen proletariat."

[42]

The word "self-conscious" is not in the German original.

[p.44]

[p.45]

[43]

In the German original this sentence reads: "The essential condition for the existence, and for the sway of the
bourgeois class, is the accumulation of wealth in the hands of private individuals, the formation and augmentation
of capital. . . ." [p.46]
[44]

In the German original, the word "sectarian" reads "special."

[p.47]

[45]

In the German original, the words "the exploitation of the many by the few" read "the exploitation of the ones
by the others." [p.48]
[46]

The words "into capital," are not in the German original.

[47]

In the German original, the words "the leading class of the nation" read "the national class."

[p.51]
[p.55]

[48]

In the German edition of 1848, the word "knowledge" reads "conscience." In the German editions of 1872,
1883 and 1890, the word "knowledge" was used as in the English translation. [p.56]
[49]

The words "necessitate further inroads upon the old social order," are not in the German original.

[p.57]

[50]

In the German edition of 1848, the word "distinction" reads "antithesis." In the German editions of 1872, 1883
and 1890, the word "distinction" was used as in the English translation. [p.58]
[51]

The words "by a more equable distribution of the population over the country" are not in the German original.

[p.58]

[52]

In the German editions of 1872, 1883 and 1890, the words "swept away the conditions for the existence of
class antagonisms and of classes generally" read "swept away the conditions for the existence of class antagonisms,
and classes generally." In the German edition of 1848, the wording is the same as in the English translation. [p.58]
[53]

The Legitimists supported the Bourbon Dynasty which was overthrown in 1830 and which represented the
interest of the hereditary
page 84

big landowners. In the struggle against the Orleans Dynasty, which was propped up by the finance aristocracy and
big bourgeoisie, a section of the Legitimists often resorted to social demagogy and pretended to be the protectors of
the working people against the exploitation by the bourgeoisie.
Young England, a group of politicians and men of letters who belonged to the Tory Party. It was organised in the
early 1840s. Representatives of Young England reflected the discontent of the landed aristocracy against the
increasing economical and political strength of the bourgeoisie. They resorted to demagogic methods in order to
place the working class under their influence and use them to combat the bourgeoisie. [p.61]
[54]

The words "dropped from the tree of industry" are not in the German original.

[p.62]

[55]

In the German edition of 1848, the word "Christian" reads "holy and present-day." In the German editions of
1872, 1883 and 1890, the word "Christian" was used as in the English translation. [p.62]
[56]

In the German original, this sentence reads: "In its subsequent development this tendency sank into a
cowardly fit of dejection." [p.64]
[57]

In the German original there is another sentence after this which reads: "It was bound to appear as idle
speculation about real society and about the realisation of the essence of man." In the German editions of 1872,
1883 and 1890, the sentence reads: "It was bound to appear as idle speculation about the realisation of the essence
of man." [p.64]
[58]

In the German editions of 1872, 1883 and 1890, the words "correspond with" read "arise from."

[p.71]

[59]

In the German original, the words "The practical measures proposed in them" read "Their positive proposals
concerning the future society." [p.72]
60]

In the German original, the word "distinction" reads "antithesis."

[p.72]

[61]

The R&eacuteformistes were adherents of the newspaper La Reforme, which was published in Paris from
1843 to 1850. They advocated the establishment of a republic and the carrying out of democratic and social
reforms. [p.73]
[62]

Kleinbürgerei in the German original. Marx and Engels used this term to describe the reactionary elements of
the urban petty bourgeoisie. [p.75]

From Marx
to Mao

Marx and Engels
Collection

Reading
Guide

